Advertisement

Prince Andrew arrived in Balmoral for a holiday with the Queen last night – just 24 hours after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse.

The beleaguered royal and his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, drove into the monarch's private Scottish estate for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Virginia Roberts Giuffre.

She alleged she was sexually abused by Andrew when she was 17 and that he knew she was the teenage victim of sex trafficking.

Miss Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Yesterday a lawyer described the legal action as a 'grenade waiting to go off'.

Astonishingly Andrew, 61, has yet to make any public comment about the lawsuit and instead travelled to Scotland with his ex-wife.

His dog arrived at Balmoral in a separate car an hour earlier, suggesting the prince could be planning a lengthy stay. The Duke of York has previously denied claims he abused Miss Roberts and forced her into sex during a visit to London more than two decades ago.

The Queen's second son stepped back from royal duties over his relationship with late financier Epstein and insiders said the lawsuit effectively ended any ambition he held of a return to public life.

Andrew, who normally flies to Aberdeen by private jet for his visits to Balmoral, appeared to have taken steps to avoid photographers this time after apparently flying to a different airport, or even driving the whole way.

Legal experts said the civil case could drag on for years and threatened to be a millstone around his – and the Royal Family's – neck for years to come.

A US lawyer warned the lawsuit would be devastating for the prince's reputation and could force him to answer questions about his own sexual history, as well as his relationship with Epstein.

Miss Roberts' legal team could interrogate Andrew over whether he had faced any allegation of sexual misconduct or impropriety in the past, a US lawyer told the Daily Mail.

Prince Andrew has been spotted arriving at Balmoral Castle accompanied by his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson - as he prepares to face the Queen a day after being sued in New York for allegedly sexually abusing Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts

Andrew, who was driving a Range Rover, held a stern expression while the Duchess of York appeared to be holding conversation while sat in the back seat

Andrew's arrival at Balmoral comes as the lawyer for Epstein victim Virginia Roberts accused the Prince of 'ignoring' him after a civil suit was filed against him yesterday. The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Virginia Roberts

The Duke today travelled to Scotland to join other members of the royal family for the tradition summer stay at Balmoral. The Queen, on her first trip to the castle after the death of her husband Prince Philip, arrived yesterday to a guard of honour in a small ceremony outside the castle gates

Her Majesty The Queen, 95, arrived for her traditional summer holiday at Balmoral yesterday. She is seen here during an inspection of the Balaklava Company, 5 Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland at the gate

They would also be entitled to demand access to any communications between him, Epstein and the convicted sex offender's alleged 'madam', socialite Ghislaine Maxwell. The lawyer, who asked not to be named, said: 'It will be a train wreck for him. This case is a grenade waiting to go off.'

Andrew has 21 days to respond to Miss Roberts' claim and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without the need for a trial, which would be potentially disastrous for his reputation.

It would raise the prospect of the ninth in line to the throne being branded a sex offender, and facing a demand for damages which could run into millions of pounds.

Such an outcome would cause enormous personal distress to the 95-year-old Queen but would also leave an indelible 'stain' on the reputation of the Royal Family, according to one royal expert.

Last night Buckingham Palace declined to comment and referred all inquiries to the Duke of York's legal team.

In the legal claim, lawyers said Epstein, Maxwell and the prince had all forced Miss Roberts to have sex with Andrew against her will after she was trafficked to London.

They alleged Andrew also sexually abused the teenager at Epstein's mansion in New York and at his private island in the US Virgin Islands, Little Saint James.

The legal document, filed to a court in New York, said Miss Roberts, now 38 and a married mother-of-three known by her married name Virginia Giuffre, had suffered 'severe and lasting' damage.

The lawsuit went on: 'In this country no person, whether president or prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'

Miss Roberts' lawyer David Boies told Channel 4 News he had made repeated attempts to contact Andrew about the case, but claimed the prince and his lawyers had 'stonewalled' and ignored him.

Mr Boies said: 'We've made every effort to reach out to him to hear his side of the story to understand whether he has anything that he can say that would put his actions in context.

'And he has simply ignored us, and he can do that, but he can't ignore judicial process.

'This is now a matter for the courts to decide. And it would be very ill advised I think for anyone to sort of thumb their nose at a federal court. If he did, obviously there would be a default judgment entered against him, which I think no one really wants to have happen.'

He added: 'They just have totally stonewalled, they have refused to provide any explanation, they refuse to engage in any discussions, they refuse to provide any facts. They've even refused to respond to any of the allegations that been made in any reasonable way.'

Referring to the now-infamous photograph of the prince with his arm around Miss Roberts, he said a jury would have to consider if Andrew had been truthful about whether they had met. Her case is a civil lawsuit seeking unspecified damages – not a criminal case.

But experts warned evidence uncovered during civil proceedings could potentially be used by criminal authorities.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing.

Virginia Roberts' lawyer David Boies today claimed Andrew and his lawyers had 'stonewalled' against the claims for five years but warned: 'He can ignore me and he can ignore Virginia, but he can't ignore judicial process'

Prince Andrew is seen driving his car in Windsor earlier this year. He is yet to respond to her suit, filed in New York City on Monday

Prince Andrew is pictured with his mother, the Queen, his brother Prince Charles and, behind them, Princess Anne in June 2019. The Queen has diplomatic immunity; her children do not

The Duke of York and the Queen attending St Mary the Virgin church in Hillington, Sandringham, Norfolk, last year

A spokesperson for Prince Andrew told MailOnline this evening there would be 'no comment' on the civil suit.

Prince Andrew arrived to Balmoral a day after Her Majesty, 95, who was welcomed back with a guard of honour in a small ceremony outside the castle gates - her first trip to Balmoral since the death of Prince Philip aged 99 in April.

Andrew may have been comforted to have his ex-wife Fergie by his side for the trip, after she was invited to stay as long as her ex-husband did. It was previously reported the Duchess would have to leave before Prince Philip turned up.

However there may be awkward conversations for Andrew in his first meeting with his mother following the filing of the civil suit by Miss Roberts yesterday.

The accuser, now 38, is seeking 'significant' damages from The Duke of York claiming she was sexually assault by him in New York, the Caribbean and London in 2001 - when she was 17 and he was 41.

Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases.

But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence.

Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'.

If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland.

Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Miss Roberts favour, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'.

After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases.

He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London.

And, in a further blow to the Prince, royal experts today claimed the case could scupper any plans by the Duke to return to frontline royal duties.

It comes as it was today revealed that Prince Andrew does not have diplomatic immunity - a privilege which is reserved for the Queen and her immediate household.

It means that the senior royal may be brought before a court if he sets foot in the US or any of its territories - at which point a court could compel him to give evidence.

But legal experts say that will only happen if Prince Andrew willingly goes to the US. That is because Roberts' claim is a civil case, rather than a criminal one, meaning he cannot be extradited, according to experts.

Mr Anwar told MailOnline: 'The first thing is this is a civil case and under the terms of the extradition treaty, the U.S. Department of Justice can only extradite if there is a criminal prosecution.'

However, Mr Anwar added: 'It's not a matter that will simply go away. As I understand it, there is still an ongoing criminal investigation.'

Princess Anne is seen arriving in court in the British town of Slough in November 2002. She pleaded guilty to her dog attacking children

'If they were to raise a prosecution, they would be well within their rights to seek Prince Andrew,' he said.

Mr Anwar also believes that, should the civil case proceed without Prince Andrew appearing in New York, the Duke could still be found liable in absentia and be required to pay compensation to Roberts.

He added: 'The court would find ways in which to obtain those assets. And the complainant's country can pursue actions against Prince Andrew to chase his assets.'

Asked how much the damages cost could be, he said: 'It would be up to a jury, but I would think it could be in the millions and millions of dollars'.

However, before any of this, Mr Anwar said Prince Andrew's legal team will likely to try and have the case thrown out.

He said: 'I think the first thing he will do is instruct lawyers on the ground in the US to act for him, and to try and have the case thrown out as a 'spurious' case.'

The comments come as royal journalist and author, Robert Jobson today told MailOnline that the lawsuit would make any planned return to public life for the Duke 'impossible'.

He said: 'I cannot envisage the Duke, no matter how much he might want to returning to being a senior royal to supper the Queen while a suit is pending, or with the possibility of a verdict against him passed in his absence.

Prince Andrew has ex-wife Fergie at his side after Duchess is brought back into royal fold As Prince Andrew is again hit by accusations of sexual abuse from Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts, he appears to have an unlikely companion at his side. In one of the most dramatic cases of royal redemption, the Prince's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson is accompanying him to Balmoral where he will face his mother for the first time since a civil suit was filed against him in New York. Fergie was exiled from the firm following her divorce from Andrew in 1996. The Duchess of York has however become a lodger at her ex-husband's Royal Lodge home in Windsor, and has slowly but surely been welcomed back into the fold. And last week, the Mail revealed that Fergie had been invited to stay at the Queen's Scottish retreat this summer. There will also be a major difference because, unlike previous visits, when she had to make a quick getaway before Prince Philip arrived, the Duchess can stay at Balmoral for as long as her ex-husband. It is believed the Queen has appreciated the loyalty that Sarah has demonstrated to the Royal Family since her divorce and has been impressed by the close relationship she has maintained with Andrew, 61. The Duchess has also said she is '100 per cent' certain that Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.' The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1996, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms. 'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added. Advertisement

'Obviously there is a question over legal jurisdictions and I am sure the Duke's team will be looking at every angle. I cannot see them volunteering him to give evidence, or going to the US as it will leave him exposed legally.

'I suspect he will remain silent and continue to follow his lawyers advice. This of course was her only options and she only had until Saturday to lodge this civil case.'

Miss Robert's case is the first time that Prince Andrew has been the subject of a suit. Previously his name was mentioned in connection with pedophile Epstein, but until now he had not been directly targeted.

In June 2020, the then-US Attorney General Bill Barr said that he was not seeking extradition as part of the investigation into Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell.

'I don't think it's a question of handing him over,' Barr said. 'I think it's just a question of having him provide some evidence'

Meanwhile, royal commenter Richard Fitzwilliams told MailOnline that he sees 'no conceivable chance' of case leading to a court appearance for Prince Andrew.

He said: 'As I understand it the real reason for this court case is to do with issue of statute of limitation (the time in which a person must submit a civil claim).

'But I don't think that there's a conceivable chance (that he will appear in court), given the way things have been handled so far.

'Prince Andrew said in his BBC interview that he was willing to co-operate with the FBI (in their investigation into Epstein), but he doesn't appear, from reports, to have co-operated so far. So I see absolutely nil chance.

'But this case will bring more embarrassment for him and for the royal family – as is anything to do with Andrew and Epstein,' Fitzwilliams added.

One thing Prince Andrew won't be able to do is rely on diplomatic immunity to protect him. That privilege in the case of royals is only for the Queen and members of her immediate household.

Bob Morris, a constitutional law professor at UCL said in 2019: '[Sovereign immunity] is a concept devised to protect the position of heads of state, but heads of state only, not the members of their family in their function as head of state. And you can't have more than one head of the state.

'So it doesn't apply to the members of people's families, there is no logic in doing so. Andrew is in the same position as any other UK citizen.'

In 1978 Andrew's older brother Prince Charles was sued after a visit to Ohio the year before following a bizarre confrontation with a student.

Before his address to the University of Cleveland, third-year law student Jack Kilroy, stood up and asked the Prince: 'I would like to know when England is going to stop torturing political prisoners?'

He was escorted out of the building, and then filed a civil complaint against Prince Charles for alleged deprivation of 'various rights guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the United States.'

The US Attorney General, upon the recommendation of the State Department, filed a suggestion of immunity with the court, on the view that the acts he allegedly committed were performed in his official capacity.

The court did not get as far as arguing whether Charles could be extradited for the civil case.

Andrew's visit to the US to see Epstein was entirely in a personal capacity, and so he would not be granted the same leeway.

Andrew could certainly be charged with an offence in the UK, if there were grounds to do so, although there is no indication of any such allegations being made there.

His sister Princess Anne in 2002 became the first senior Royal to be convicted of a criminal offence after pleading guilty to a charge that one of her dogs attacked two children.

The court also ordered her to keep the English bull terrier - known as Dotty - on a lead in public, to organise training for the animal and to pay £148 ($205) court costs.

She was fined £500 ($693) and ordered to pay £500 compensation. No other senior royal has attended court for 100 years, the BBC said at the time.

In late 2019, Andrew vowed to assist with any investigation. 'Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required,' he said in a statement.

At the time Buckingham Palace announced in a statement that Andrew would be suspended from public duties for the 'foreseeable future,' with the consent of the Queen.

Soon after, he gave up his role as chancellor of the University of Huddersfield and stepped down from all of his 230 patronages.

In January 2020, the Home Office recommended that the prince's security detail be downgraded. All activities carried out by the Prince Andrew Charitable Trust have also been stopped.

He is now a permanently nonactive member of the royal family, with no public-facing duties required of him.

Yet in January 2020 the United States attorney in Manhattan publicly called out the prince for breaking his commitment.

Prince Andrew is seen in Windsor on July 23 - what would have been his 35th wedding anniversary. He and Sarah Ferguson separated in 1992, and divorced in 1996

'To date, Prince Andrew has provided zero cooperation,' said the prosecutor, Geoffrey S. Berman.

Typically, if American prosecutors wanted to speak with a witness in Britain, the F.B.I. would go through its legal attaché in London, based in the United States embassy there.

Andrew is considered highly unlikely to risk traveling to the United States, even though he has not been charged with any crime.

He could be hauled before the FBI for questioning, and prosecutors could decide to request a subpoena from a judge if there is suspicion of criminal behaviour.

He could 'take the 5th' and invoke his right against self-incrimination, and refuse to answer questions.

Daniel Sternberg, a barrister specialising in extradition law at Temple Garden Chambers in London, told the BBC: 'It is important to remember that Prince Andrew has not been charged with any offence in the US.

'The FBI is investigating whether he has material evidence that could assist in its criminal investigation of alleged sex trafficking.

'While there is no way to compel Prince Andrew to give evidence in the UK or the US in either the civil or criminal case, his failure to do so does not sit well with his previous public statements that he would help any appropriate law enforcement agency with its inquiries.'

Andrew's lawyers insist they have been open and willing to cooperate. They have yet to comment on Monday's civil case.

In her court filings on Monday, Miss Roberts accused the Duke of York of battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress in the lawsuit filed in federal court.

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein.

It was filed under a law in New York that relates to child abuse as Miss Roberts was considered a minor at the time under state law.

The filing of a civil action against the Duke in America is certain to cause huge embarrassment for the Royal family. Virginia Roberts is pictured in Australia in February 2011

It lists Miss Roberts as the plaintiff and the defendant as 'Prince Andrew, Duke of York a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward' as the defendant.

The lawsuit claims that 'Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor.

'On multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched (Roberts) in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent'.

Under the section of the lawsuit that deals with the formal allegation of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the lawsuit is withering about the Duke.

It says: 'Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience.

'Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilised community'.

The lawsuit claims that Andrew was one of the 'powerful men' who Epstein loaned Roberts out to for sex.

The document accuses the Duke of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' then refusing to cooperate with the FBI.

The lawsuit notes that 'defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled'.

During each of the alleged incidents with Miss Roberts, Andrew was acting in a 'personal capacity' and not in any role for the Royal family or the UK government, the lawsuit notes.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed he has never even met Roberts, now a mother-of-three living in Australia who goes by her married name, Virginia Giuffre.

In a statement to ABC News, Miss Roberts said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.

'The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice.

'I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates.

'But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

Miss Roberts has made similar allegations before in US court documents but this is the first time she has sued the Duke directly.

She claims that the first time she was forced to have sex with Andrew was at the London townhouse of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's alleged madam.

The second time, in early 2001 was at Epstein's New York mansion, it is alleged.

The lawsuit states: 'During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her.

'During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will'.

The third alleged incident is said to have taken place on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean.

During each incident, Miss Roberts claims she was was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke.

Miss Roberts 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority', it is claimed.

Andrew allegedly had sex with Roberts knowing she was a victims of sex trafficking, it is claimed.

The Duke also knew her age from 'communications with Epstein and Maxwell', she says.

The lawsuit claims: 'Prince Andrew sexually abused (Roberts) for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires'.

The two formal allegations are battery and infliction of emotional distress.

Under the claim for battery, the lawsuit states Andrew's actions 'constitute sexual offenses as defined in (New York law) including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined (as) rape in the third degree, rape in the first degree'.

It also claims the Duke's conduct amounted to 'forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, and sexual abuse in the first degree'.

The 'sexual assault' Roberts caused her 'significant emotional and psychological distress and harm', it is claimed.

The lawsuit states: 'As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy'.

The filing mentions that Andrew has failed to cooperate with the criminal investigation by the FBI into Epstein and Maxwell, despite promising to do so in his disastrous Newsnight interview.

The lawsuit states: 'In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her.

'It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'

The lawsuit was filed under the New York Child Victims Act, which was signed into law in 2019. Previously victims had up to five years after they turned 18 to file a claim

The one-off window gave all victims the opportunity to make a legal claim, regardless of how old their claim was.

A defamation suit, filed by Roberts in 2015 against Ghislaine Maxwell, ended in a settlement – but deeply embarrassing depositions in which Maxwell discussed her sex life were made public last year.

A source said: 'This could be devastating for Andrew. If he chooses to fight it and is deposed [forced to give evidence], then those depositions could end up being made public.

'If he ignores it, he could be found guilty in absentia which would be a public relations disaster.'

Epstein hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges.

Maxwell, 59, was arrested last July and is due to go on trial in November for allegedly recruiting underage girls for Epstein. She has pleaded not guilty to all the charges.

Duchess Sarah Ferguson stands by her ex-husband Prince Andrew saying she is '100% certain' he's telling the truth Sarah Ferguson has said she is convinced that her former husband Prince Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted pedophile Jeffrey Epstein. The Duchess of York said she was '100 percent' certain that her ex-husband was being honest when he denied seeing anything untoward during the time he spent with the financier. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.' The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1997, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms. 'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added. Advertisement

RICHARD KAY: Prince Andrew's silence will only make things worse

How Prince Andrew must wish he could turn back the clock. But to where and when?

Might it be that November night in 2019 when his singular lack of remorse over his friendship with the monstrous Jeffrey Epstein was shredded in the unforgiving glare of the Newsnight cameras?

Or might he, perhaps, go back further to December 2010 and that chilly walk with Epstein in New York's Central Park after the billionaire's conviction – and jailing – for sex offences, as an unseen paparazzo clicked away?

Certainly they are both episodes over which he must harbour regret, if not shame. But one incident above all, surely, stands out. It is the evening of March 2001 when a smiling Andrew was photographed with his arm around the bare midriff of 17-year-old Virginia Roberts.

Yesterday, as the enormity of Miss Roberts's lawsuit in which she accuses the prince of battery, sexually assault and emotional distress when she was a teenager emerged, that infamous picture returned to haunt him again.

Yet even as details of the bombshell allegations were making headline news, the Duke of York's silence was deafening.

Astonishingly, in view of his previous vehement denials that he'd ever had sex with Miss Roberts, the prince and his legal team had no comment at all.

Last night that strategy of saying nothing was being questioned.

'The duke has previously expressed his innocence and not to do so again looks like a misstep,' said one figure who has advised him. 'Saying nothing allows the other side's version of events to go unchallenged.'

How Prince Andrew must wish he could turn back the clock. But to where and when? Might it be that November night in 2019 when his singular lack of remorse over his friendship with the monstrous Jeffrey Epstein was shredded in the unforgiving glare of the Newsnight cameras?

There is no doubt that there was a deliberately theatrical element to the way the news was masterminded from New York, but the danger for Andrew, 61, in not offering any response is that he is in danger of losing in the court of public opinion.

This is not the first time Miss Roberts has made these claims, but it's the first time she has sued Andrew directly.

She has ratcheted up the pressure on a man who has repeatedly insisted her claims are untrue, but who has also repeatedly declined to be interviewed under oath by the FBI.

These are the most serious allegations ever to be made about a member of the Royal Family in modern times. Refusing to cooperate also damages the integrity of the Crown.

One reason for choosing to stay silent may, of course, be because of past experience – that disastrous BBC interview with Emily Maitlis.

Andrew believed he could set the record straight over Epstein. But, as Maitlis probed his answers, the prince made a series of stunning – even risible – comments that left viewers shocked.

He claimed he could not have had sex with Miss Roberts because on the night in question he was with his daughter Beatrice at Pizza Express in Woking.

He also said a medical condition brought on by being shot at during the Falklands War left him 'unable to sweat', challenging Miss Roberts's assertion that as they danced together at London nightclub Tramp he had been 'sweating profusely'.

There is no doubt that there was a deliberately theatrical element to the way the news was masterminded from New York, but the danger for Andrew, 61, in not offering any response is that he is in danger of losing in the court of public opinion

But most controversially he offered no regret for his friendship with Epstein because of 'the opportunities I was given to learn either by him or because of him'. Crucially, he showed no sympathy for his victims.

Andrew is hardly the first royal to bury his head in the sand in the face of public uproar.

'Over the years the first instinct is often to adopt the ostrich syndrome,' says a courtier. 'The hope is if they say nothing things will blow over.'

But the Epstein affair has cruelly exposed that tactic. Time after time Andrew has been caught on the back foot as smart American lawyers and slick PRs have crafted a narrative in which the prince is painted in the worst possible light.

Yesterday, the saga was threatening to overshadow the Queen's summer holiday at Balmoral, where Andrew and ex-wife Sarah Ferguson arrived yesterday in the same car.

While other family members have been angered by how Andrew has tarnished the monarchy, the Queen has remained steadfast in her support for her favourite child.

She admires his resolutely positive outlook. She was the first person he spoke to after recording the Maitlis interview and believed him when he said it had been a great success. It was Prince Charles who coordinated the royals' response after he saw how catastrophically it had backfired.

The Queen then had to approve his recommendation that Andrew should step back from public duties.

As of May, 47 charities had retreated from their association with the duke or removed him as patron, while his Pitch@Palace mentoring network has erased his name from its website saying it will 'reassess its future direction'.

And yet no one should underestimate the strength of the relationship that exists between mother and son.

The Queen was always impressed with how Andrew handled his divorce, putting aside public humiliation to ensure the best possible home life for Beatrice and Eugenie. As for his unrelenting support for ex-wife Sarah Ferguson, the Queen saw it as the embodiment of loyalty.

After Philip's death, when he spoke warmly of his father on camera, it seemed Andrew might be harbouring some hope of rehabilitating himself with the public.

The latest developments suggest that is a long way from reality. And the longer he chooses to remain silent, the more the suspicion grows that he has something to hide.

'Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old': The bombshell Giuffre v Duke of York court documents in full

Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit against Prince Andrew, formally accusing him of sexually abusing her while she was being trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Over 15 pages of court documents filed at New York's southern district court, the 38-year-old makes claims that the Duke of York 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

VIRGINIA L. GIUFFRE, Plaintiff

vs.

PRINCE ANDREW, DUKE OF YORK, a/k/a ANDREW ALBERT CHRISTIAN EDWARD, in his personal capacity, Defendant.

COMPLAINT

Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre, by her attorneys Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, for her Complaint against Defendant Prince Andrew, Duke of York, a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward ('Prince Andrew'), avers upon personal knowledge as to her own acts and status and upon information and belief and to all other matters as follows:

NATURE OF THE ACTION

Virginia Giuffre filed the complaint against Prince Andrew at the Southern District Court of New York

1. This suit arises out of Defendant's sexual abuse of Plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.

2. During 2000–2002, beginning when Plaintiff was 16, Plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

3. Epstein's trafficking scheme involved recruiting young girls, often by claiming they would be paid $200 for simply providing a massage to a wealthy billionaire. This same pattern was repeated numerous times with countless children and young women.

4. As United States District Judge Kenneth Marra found, 'From between about 1999 and 2007, Jeffrey Epstein sexually abused more than 30 minor girls... at his mansion in Palm Beach, Florida, and elsewhere in the United States and overseas...

'In addition to his own sexual abuse of the victims, Epstein directed other persons to abuse the girls sexually. Epstein used paid employees to find and bring minor girls to him.

'Epstein worked in concert with others to obtain minors not only for his own sexual gratification, but also for the sexual gratification of others.'

Opinion and Order, Doc. No. 435 at 1–2, Jane Doe 1 and Jane Doe 2 v. United States, Case No. 9:08-cv-80736 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2019).

5. Like other minor children who came before and after her, Plaintiff was initially recruited to provide massages, and thereafter to engage in a variety of sexual acts, for Epstein.

Plaintiff was required to be on call for Epstein for sexual purposes and frequently traveled with him both nationally and internationally. Plaintiff was regularly abused by Epstein and was lent out by Epstein to other powerful men for sexual purposes.

6. One such powerful man to whom Plaintiff was lent out for sexual purposes was the Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.

7. Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein's sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including Plaintiff.

8. According to Prince Andrew, he met Epstein through Maxwell in 1999. Prince Andrew thereafter became a frequent guest in Epstein's various homes around the world, including New York City where he sexually abused Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation when she was a minor.

9. After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

10. Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to Plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

11. This action has been timely filed pursuant to the Child Victims Act, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g. The actions described herein constitute sexual offenses by Defendant under New York Penal Law Article 130, and were committed against Plaintiff when she was a child less than eighteen years of age, for which she suffered physical, psychological, and other injuries as a result.

PARTIES

12. Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre is an individual who is a citizen of the State of Colorado.

13. Defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

14. This Court has diversity jurisdiction over this dispute pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(2). Plaintiff is a citizen of a State and Defendant is a citizen of a foreign state, and the amount in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00 excluding interests and costs.

15. Venue is proper in this Court as a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this District. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2).

16. This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant as Defendant sexually abused Plaintiff in this state, and has thus committed a tortious action within this State pursuant to New York's long-arm statute, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2).

Defendant also visited Jeffrey Epstein in this State on numerous occasions. Defendant could reasonably anticipate that a suit based upon his acts and omissions with respect to Plaintiff could result in him being subject to suit in this State, and this suit arises directly out of the Defendant's acts or omissions with respect to Plaintiff in this state.

FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A. Epstein's Sex Trafficking Enterprise

17. Jeffrey Epstein was widely renowned as a billionaire who used his vast connections to powerful individuals, and seemingly unlimited wealth and resources, to create a web of transcontinental sex trafficking that served himself, his coconspirators, and some of the most powerful people in the world.

18. Ghislaine Maxwell is a British socialite and the daughter of disgraced publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell. Maxwell was the highest-ranking recruiter in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is currently facing criminal charges in the Southern District of New York stemming from her role in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise, and is set to face trial in the fall.

19. Epstein had perfected a scheme for manipulation and abuse of young females. As part of the scheme, Maxwell or another female recruiter would approach a young girl and strike up a conversation in an effort to quickly learn about the girl's background and any vulnerabilities they could expose. Epstein's recruiters found their targets everywhere and anywhere, including schools, spas, trailer parks, and the street.

20. The recruiter would then manipulate the young female into coming back to one of Epstein's residences by offering the young girl something she needed, depending on her situation. In many cases, the recruiter sought out girls who wanted to be professional masseuses and invited them to one of Epstein's homes by offering them what appeared to be legitimate masseuse positions.

21. Once in the residence, Epstein and his co-conspirators would work in concert to impress and intimidate the young female with displays of vast wealth and power. They would brag about their connections to very powerful political and social figures, and display photographs of themselves with those figures around Epstein's homes. They would normalize the sexual abuse by displaying photographs and art displaying nude females, and a massage table and spa related products in an effort to legitimize the area where the abuse was set to occur.

22. Once abused, Epstein and Maxwell continued to manipulate their victims, using their financial power, promises, and threats to ensure that the victim returned as directed and remained compliant with their demands. Epstein and his lawyers would even gather information about the victims to use against them if they ever disobeyed him, and his homes were under constant surveillance.

23. Message pads recovered during trash pulls at Epstein's Palm Beach mansion reflect messages that his staff took to relay to Epstein. They show the constant flow of girls to Epstein, sometimes three per day. Epstein's employees have also described young girls constantly being present at Epstein's different homes.

Epstein's constant access to young girls is also evidenced in his 'Black Book,' a book of phone numbers and contact information listing girls to call for 'massages' in various cities, flight logs documenting his frequent travel with young girls and powerful individuals on his private plane, and troves of lewd photographs of young girls recovered from his homes. In his Black Book, Epstein had at least 12 different contact numbers listed for Prince Andrew.

24. Plaintiff became a victim of sex trafficking and repeated sexual abuse after Maxwell recruited her into Epstein's sex-trafficking operation when Plaintiff was working at the Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida.

25. Between 2000 and 2002, Epstein sexually abused Plaintiff at numerous locations including his mansion in this District, at 9 East 71st Street, New York, New York 10021.

26. Epstein also flew Plaintiff on his plane nationally and internationally numerous times when she was under the age of 18.

Only portions of the flight logs of Epstein's private planes have yet been recovered, and Epstein also flew Plaintiff frequently on commercial airlines to meet him and others.

However, the chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking.

27. In addition to being abused by Epstein himself, Plaintiff was also forced to have sex with Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, at Epstein and Maxwell's direction.

28. As part of their sex trafficking efforts, Epstein and Maxwell intimidated Plaintiff into remaining silent about what had happened to her.

29. After years of abuse, Epstein sent Plaintiff to Thailand in September 2002. One of Plaintiff's assignments from Epstein was to bring a young girl back to Epstein in the United States. Fearing for her life, and not wanting to subject another young girl to the abuse she was forced to endure, Plaintiff fled from Thailand to Australia to escape from Epstein.

'The chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking,' reads the document

B. Defendant's Relationship with Epstein and Maxwell

30. According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew's close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.

31. According to available flight logs, Prince Andrew began flying with Epstein on his private plane as early as 1999, when he flew with Epstein and Maxwell to Epstein's private island, Little St. James. Prince Andrew's name also appears in other available flight log entries from around the same time, showing travel with Epstein and Maxwell to and from other locations, including West Palm Beach, Florida, and Teterboro, New Jersey.

32. In 2000, Epstein and Maxwell attended Prince Andrew's 40th birthday party. That same year, Prince Andrew threw Maxwell a birthday party in Sandringham, United Kingdom, and Epstein was among the guests.

33. In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter's 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.

34. Prince Andrew has himself confirmed that he has been on Epstein's private plane, stayed at Epstein's private island, and stayed at Epstein's homes in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York, New York. See Prince Andrew's links to Jeffrey Epstein, BBC News (Nov. 16, 2019), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-49411215.

35. Members of Epstein's house staff have confirmed witnessing Prince Andrew visit Epstein's numerous homes, both to the media and in sworn testimony.

C. Defendant's Sexual Abuse of Plaintiff

'The photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff,' the document claims

36. Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old.

37. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell's home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.

38. The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff.

39. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in Epstein's New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.

40. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein's private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.

41. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

42. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew acted with intent to compel Plaintiff's submission.

43. Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

44. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew.

45. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew knew Plaintiff's age based on communications from Epstein and Maxwell.

46. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.

47. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew was acting in his individual, personal capacity, and was not performing any duty relating to his former role as a trade envoy, any duty relating to his role as a member of the Royal Family of the United Kingdom, or any other official or diplomatic duty or function.

48. Defendant's sexual assault and battery of Plaintiff have caused her, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.

D. The Arrest, Prosecution, and Death of Epstein, and Prince Andrew's Refusal to Cooperate with the Authorities

49. In 2008, Epstein pled guilty in Florida to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution.

50. In 2010, after Epstein had served his sentence and registered as a sex offender, Prince Andrew was photographed with Epstein in Central Park and stayed at Epstein's New York City mansion.

51. Epstein flippantly referred to his sexual abuse of multiple minors, and the slap on the wrist he had received for it, in a 2011 interview with the New York Post: 'Billionaire pervert Jeffrey Epstein is back in New York City—and making wisecracks about his just-ended jail stint for having sex with an underage girl. 'I am not a sexual predator, I'm an 'offender,' the financier told The Post yesterday. 'It's the difference between a murderer and a person who steals a bagel,' said Epstein.' See Amber Sutherland, Billionaire Jeffrey Epstein: I'm a Sex Offender, Not A Predator, New York Post (Feb. 25, 2011), available at https://bit.ly/2s3ebwk.

52. Around the same time, Prince Andrew began to face criticism over his well- publicized friendship with Epstein.

53. In early 2015, after Plaintiff had publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexually abusing her, Prince Andrew emailed Maxwell stating, 'Let me know when we can talk. Got some specific questions to ask you about Virginia Roberts.'

54. On July 2, 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York ('SDNY') charged Epstein with sex trafficking conspiracy and sex trafficking in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1591.

55. Epstein was arrested on July 8, 2019, pursuant to a Sealed Two Count Indictment.

56. Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center on August 10, 2019.

57. Just one year before his death, Epstein told a New York Times reporter 'that criminalizing sex with teenage girls was a cultural aberration and that at times in history it was perfectly acceptable.' James B. Stewart, The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People, N.Y. Times (Aug. 12, 2019), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/12/business/jeffrey-epstein-interview.html.

58. After Epstein's second arrest and death, numerous of his co-conspirators and the wealthy individuals to whom he trafficked girls—including Prince Andrew—began to face increased public scrutiny for having close ties to a convicted sex offender.

59. In November 2019, in response to this renewed scrutiny, Prince Andrew sat for an interview with BBC Newsnight. Prince Andrew stated that he did not regret his friendship with Epstein and that he had no recollection of meeting Plaintiff, despite photographic evidence to the contrary.

60. Prince Andrew publicly pledged, including in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview, to assist the U.S. authorities with their criminal investigation of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

A statement by His Royal Highness The Duke of York (Nov. 20 2019), available at https://www.royal.uk/statement-his-royal-highness-duke-york ('Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.').

61. Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities. Former SDNY U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman stated that Prince Andrew had provided 'zero co-operation' despite U.S. prosecutors and the FBI contacting Prince Andrew's counsel. Prince Andrew gives 'zero co-operation' over Epstein inquiry, US prosecutor says, BBC News (Jan. 27, 2020), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51271871.

62. Prince Andrew and his counsel have also refused to cooperate with counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking. Counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking, including counsel for Plaintiff, have repeatedly asked for a meeting or telephone call with Prince Andrew and/or his representatives to enable Prince Andrew to provide whatever facts, context, or explanation he might have, and to explore alternative dispute resolution approaches. Prince Andrew and his representatives have rejected all such requests, and responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on Plaintiff and others.

63. On July 19, 2021, counsel for Plaintiff proposed a tolling agreement that would have enabled Plaintiff not to sue Prince Andrew at this time, while avoiding any argument that her failure to do so caused her claims to be time-barred. Again Prince Andrew stonewalled—ignoring Plaintiff's letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now. A copy of the July 19, 2021, letter proposing a tolling agreement is attached as Exhibit A to this Complaint.

64. In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION (Battery)

65. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

66. Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor. As described above, on multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched Plaintiff in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent.

67. Prince Andrew's actions constitute sexual offenses as defined in New York Penal Law Article 130, including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined in Article 130.20, rape in the third degree as defined in Article 130.25, rape in the first degree as defined in Article 130.35, forcible touching as defined in Article 130.52, sexual abuse in the third degree as defined in Article 130.55, and sexual abuse in the first degree as defined in Article 130.65. See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g.

68. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION (Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress)

69. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

70. As a direct result of these allegations as stated, Prince Andrew committed intentional infliction of emotional distress against Plaintiff.

71. Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.

72. Prince Andrew knew or disregarded the substantial likelihood that these actions would cause Plaintiff severe emotional distress.

73. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.





PRAYER FOR RELIEF

WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests judgment against Defendant, awarding compensatory, consequential, exemplary, and punitive damages in an amount to be determined at trial; costs of suit; attorneys' fees; and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper.

JURY DEMAND

Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury on all causes of action asserted within this pleading.

Dated: August 9, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@GCSE exams should be abolished and pupils should not be assessed by 'do or die' tests which are 'unfair' and 'stressful', education experts have said.

In their report, which is due for publication later this year, the commission of experts called for GCSE exams to be scrapped and argued they 'did not measure what is important for young people's future'.

The panel, who will recommend a radical overhaul of the exam system, also said A Levels should instead be based on a mixture of marks given by teachers for classwork along with exams.

It comes after the former prime minister Sir John Major called for reform of the exam system and said he disliked GCSEs due to the 'stress and strain they impose on students'.

The commission of experts will call for GCSE exams to be abolished in their report which is due to be published later this year

Louise Hayward (pictured), professor of education at the University of Glasgow, said 'do or die' exams are 'stressful' and 'unfair'

Professor of education at the University of Glasgow, Louise Hayward, told The Times: 'Do or die exams are stressful, unfair and they don't measure what is important for young people's future.

'We ask youngsters to sit too many exams, and they switch them off learning.

'The case for radical change is overwhelming if we want to give young people a better future.'

Last month Sir John Major called for an overhaul to GCSEs Major and told The Times Education Commission there should be a 'dramatic restructuring of the curriculum'.

However Schools minister Nick Gibb said it would be a 'huge mistake' to scrap the formal assessments at the age of 16.

In a virtual speech to the Social Market Foundation (SMF) think tank, Mr Gibb criticised the 'reheated so-called progressive' movement to abolish GCSEs that had emerged amid the pandemic.

When asked for his response to Conservatives calling for reform, Mr Gibb said: 'Well I respectfully disagree. Every curriculum, every exam, of course can always be improved, but the concept of having an exam across a range of subjects at the age of 16 I think is an important part of our school system.'

He added that many students moved to a different institution at 16, and for a 'large minority' of young people their GCSE exams were the last academic qualifications they took.

Students across the country recorded record GCSE grades, with some 30 per cent of entries achieving grades 7 and above

Schools minister Nick Gibb said it would be a 'huge mistake' to scrap the formal assessments at the age of 16

Figures show how the proportion of students getting an A or an A* has gone from 17.8 per cent in 2000 to 44.8 per cent this year

Mr Gibb said: 'They may go on to a very high quality vocational qualification.

Girls extend lead over boys in top grades: Key statistics in GCSE results Here are the main figures in this year's GCSE results: The proportion of entries receiving the top grades is the highest on record. A total of 28.9% of entries were awarded 7/A or above, up from 26.2% in 2020.

Some 77.1% of entries received a 4/C grade or above - another record high, and up from 76.3% in 2020.

The overall rate for grades 1/G or above is 99.0%, down slightly from 99.6% in 2020.

Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades. The proportion of female entries awarded 7/A or above was 33.4%, 9.0 percentage points higher than male entries (24.4%). Last year, girls led boys by 8.0 percentage points (30.2% girls, 22.2% boys). This year's figures are the highest on record for both girls and boys.

The gap at grade 4/C has narrowed for the fourth year in a row. A total of 80.6% of female entries were awarded 4/C or higher, compared with 73.6% for boys, a lead of 7.0 points. Last year the gap was 7.9 points.

The most popular subject this year in terms of entries was science double award, with a total of 896,138 entries, up 2.0% on 2020.

Maths remains the second most popular subject, with 811,135 entries, up 0.3% on 2020.

English was the third most popular choice, but also saw the biggest percentage fall in entries of any major subject, down by 2.4% from 799,473 to 780,231.

Spanish saw the biggest percentage rise in entries of any major subject, jumping by 4.7% from 109,594 to 114,795.

Overall there were 5,745,945 GCSE entries, up slightly (0.9%) on last year's figure of 5,692,464.

A total of 3,606 16-year-olds in England taking at least seven GCSEs achieved a grade 9 in all their 9-to-1 graded subjects. This is up from 2,645 in 2020. Advertisement

'But in five to 10 years time, they may decide to change that vocation to something else and then they will need to be able to demonstrate to a future employer or future college that they have academic achievements when they were at school.'

He added: 'I think it would be a huge mistake to abolish the tried and tested GCSEs.'

The schools minister also said the growing attainment gap between privileged and poorer children is 'not acceptable' and admitted the pandemic had 'amplified those inequalities'.

This week students across the country hit record grades, with some 30 per cent of entries achieving grades 7 and above – equivalent to A and A* – compared with 27.5 per cent in 2020 and 22 per cent in 2019.

Traditional A*-G grades were replaced with a 9-1 system amid reforms which happened in three stages between 2017 and 2019, with 9 now the highest. A 4 is roughly a C grade, and a 7 broadly equivalent to an A.

According to figures from Ofqual, the number of 16-year-old students in England who entered seven or more GCSEs and received a 9 - the highest grade under the numerical grading system - in all subjects has risen.

Some 3,606 students in England received straight 9s, compared with 2,645 in 2020 and 837 in 2019.

Education secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had 'value' despite the grade inflation.

He said: 'Students and their teachers should feel immensely proud of what they have achieved. I want to be clear – this is a moment to celebrate our young people and their futures.'

Following the record-breaking results, a government source said a new grade 10 was 'possible' and had not been 'ruled out'.

They added: 'It's a discussion that's yet to be formally framed, but there will be conversations about changing the grading this autumn.'

Meanwhile nearly half of A Level entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades.

Ofqual said 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019 - the last time they sat exams - as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

The total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses also rose by five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, according to initial Ucas figures.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There were fears last night that Andrew Neil might never return to GB News – amid suggestions he is considering quitting the channel just months after it launched.

In a move which raised eyebrows, the former BBC political interviewer had already revealed he was taking a break less than two weeks after the service went live in June.

But there is speculation he may quit the Right-leaning channel altogether, with reports he has fallen out with its chief executive Angelos Frangopoulos.

Neil, who is chairman and one of the leading presenters on the channel, originally said he was ‘taking a break’ to ‘replenish my batteries after the rigours of the launch’.

There were fears last night that Andrew Neil might never return to GB News – amid suggestions he is considering quitting the channel just months after it launched

Neil, who is chairman and one of the leading presenters on the channel, originally said he was ‘taking a break’ to ‘replenish my batteries after the rigours of the launch

However, employees at GB News – launched as an alternative to Left-leaning broadcasters like the BBC – admit there is growing uncertainty at the channel over whether he will return.

A source at GB News said staff ‘genuinely have no idea’ if Neil will quit or not but said there had been a ‘massive personality clash’ between him and the chief executive. They believed this was driven significantly by Neil’s concerns about the ‘premature’ launch and early technical issues.

But a GB News spokesman said: ‘We look forward to Andrew Neil’s return from holiday in September to host his 8pm show.’

He added: ‘We are enormously proud of our progress in only eight weeks. As a start-up, we continue to move at lightning speed, learning, refining and growing constantly.’

GB News has gone through a tumultuous period since it launched, with serious technical issues in the early weeks, along with companies pulling advertising as a result of pressure from Left-wing activists and plummeting viewing figures after an impressive start.

Nigel Farage was recently introduced to the schedules for four nights a week, which has proved to be a ratings success – getting just over 100,000 viewers on Tuesday

Another of those who are said to have had serious concerns about the decision to launch when it did, on June 13, was its director of news and programmes, John McAndrew, who recently quit.

His departure emerged after viewers responded angrily when presenter Guto Harri took the knee live on air in solidarity with British footballers who had been targeted by racists.

There are claims that Mr Frangopoulos is keen to reposition the channel as more of a British Fox News-type service, with more stridently opinionated content.

Nigel Farage was recently introduced to the schedules for four nights a week, which has proved to be a ratings success – getting just over 100,000 viewers on Tuesday.

This was said to be far ahead of Sky News’ ratings at the same time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When is the Love Island Finale 2021? How can I watch it? Which contestants are left? Who decides the winners? Here's EVERYTHING you need to know
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sicily recorded Europe's highest ever temperature today as it sweltered in a 119F 'heat dome' as hot air from the Sahara continued to engulf large parts of the Mediterranean region.

The region's agriculture-meteorological information service (SIAS) said a record-breaking 119.8F was recorded in the city of Syracuse, which lies on the southeast coast of the island, after an anticyclone, dubbed 'Lucifer', swept across the country.

The previous highest temperature ever recorded on the European continent was 118F in Athens in 1977.

The temperature in Sicily is yet to be independently confirmed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

The blistering mercury levels came an anticyclone - nicknamed Lucifer - moved up from Africa and continued to head north across mainland Italy - increasing fears of more life-threatening wildfires across the country.

As Lucifer continued to sweep across the nation, Syracuse's mayor, Francesco Italia, told the Italian newspaper La Repubblica that Sicily's heatwave 'worries us'.

He said: 'We are devastated by the fires and our ecosystem - one of the richest and most precious in Europe - is at risk. We are in full emergency.'

Meanwhile Italy's health ministry issued 'red' alerts for extreme heat for several regions as large parts of the Mediterranean region continue to battle the extreme weather.

It comes after a damning UN report on Monday warned the world is already experiencing the effects of climate changes and that they are set to get rapidly worse.

Europe is set to swelter in a 114F 'heat dome' as the scorching weather, which has contributed to huge wildfires in Italy, Turkey, Algeria and Greece in recent days, continues to sweep across the region. Pictured: Sun-seekers on a beach in Palermo, Sicily, today

Sicily's agriculture-meteorological information service reported a temperature of 119.8F was reached at the island's Syracuse station today while Spain's weather service said temperatures could surpass 111F in some areas. It comes as hot air from the Sahara engulfs large parts of the Mediterranean region

It comes after firefighters in Italy said they had been involved in more than 3,000 fire-fighting operations in Sicily and Calabria in the last 12 hours as mercury levels continued to rise and bring severe changes in atmospheric pressure.

Last week Italy's fire service was also battling blazes in the southern town of Gravina in Puglia and San Giacomo degli Schiavoni, further to the north, after infernos in Sicily and Pescara at the weekend.

Warnings were also issued in southern France, where forecasters warned of a 'very severe risk' of fires due to the combination of dry and windy weather.

Today, Spain's weather service recorded a temperature of 116F in the Costa Del Sol and said mercury levels could also surpass 111F in other areas.

And Greek authorities warned the public to avoid unnecessary journeys as temperatures rose to 113F in some parts.

As the temperatures across Europe continue to rise, lead forecaster at Severe Weather EU, Marko Korosec, said a 'more intense heatwave is expected to develop for Spain and Portugal' later this week.

He said: 'Towards the weekend, the heat dome and the upper ridge is expected to expand also across the Iberian peninsula.'

He added: 'Coming into Friday, the heatwave significantly ramps up as much warmer air mass advects farther north and west across the Iberian peninsula.'

Today, Portugal's prime minister António Costa warned that the hot weather would increase the threat of wildfires, which in 2017 killed more than 100 people in the country.

Mr Costa urged people to take special care amid the scorching weather and wildfire danger, adding that many wildfires start with 'careless behaviour'.

He also said said 'the terrible images' from Greece and Turkey in recent days had brought back memories of the disaster in 2017.

'We don't want to see that scenario here again,' Mr Costa said in a videotaped message at his official residence.

Meanwhile Spain weather service, AEMET, said 'the maximum and minimum temperatures will reach levels far above the normal for this time of the year'.

Issuing a heat warning, a spokesperson for Spain's weather service AEMET said: 'Mainland Spain and the Balearic Islands are facing a probable heatwave.

'This could lead to adverse effects on people's health and to a significant risk of forest fires.'

While peaks in temperature are not unheard of in Spain and Portugal during the summer months, climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms.

People enjoy the sea during a hot summer day in Messina, Sicily, as the continent braces a heatwave

A man and his dog refresh in a fountain of Catania, Sicily, Southern Italy, today as mercury levels continue to rise

A woman fans herself in Madrid, Spain, Tuesday, as temperatures begin to rise at the start of an oncoming heatwave

Workers on a construction site stop to have a drink in Madrid, Spain, as Europe roasts in a hear dome

A woman sits near a fountain in a street of Catania, Sicily, Southern Italy, as the country faces a heatwave

Hundreds of tourists flood a beach in Barcelona as the country braces itself for a severe heatwave

Researchers can directly link a single event to climate change only through intensive data analysis, but they say such calamities are expected to happen more frequently on our warming planet.

WHAT IS A METEOTSUNAMI? Meteotsunamis are similar to tsunamis but are not triggered by seismic activity on the ocean floor. Instead, meteotsunamis are driven by air-pressure disturbances linked with fast-moving weather events, like severe thunderstorms. The storm front generates the wave, which moves towards the coast, where it is amplified by a shallow continental shelf, inlet or bay. Scientists are only just starting to understand meteotsunamis but waves of 6ft (1.8m) or more have already been observed. Meteotsunamis occur in a number of places around the world, including the Great Lakes, Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Coast, Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas. Identifying a meteotsunami presents a unique set of challenges to scientists, since the characteristics of these waves are so similar to other meteorological phenomenon, including tsunamis. It can also easily be confused with wind-driven storm surges or a seiche, which is a standing wave in an enclosed or partially enclosed body of water. These uncertainties make it difficult to predict a meteotsunami and warn the public of a potential event. Scientists are working to pinpoint the exact conditions which are most likely to generate a meteotsunami in an effort to improve advance warnings. Advertisement

The surge in heat comes after the holiday resort of Alicante was hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after the severe changes in atmospheric pressure.

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish.

These are large, tsunami-like waves are triggered by severe changes in atmospheric pressure caused by fast-moving weather events, such as a heatwave.

Pictures showed the beach covered with white wash and water lapping over the promenade and around cars on nearby streets.

Santa Pola police said the rare weather damaged the town's fishing fleet and left several boats adrift on Wednesday morning.

The Department of Climatology of the University of Alicante said the rare phenomenon was more common around the Balearic Islands, but had happened in Alicante before - though this was much stronger than usual.

Guardamar del Segura, south of Santa Pola, was also hit by the meteotsunami and saw water levels rise at least 80cm by Wednesday morning.

The UN report, which as been dubbed a 'code red for humanity', said the Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected — and heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040.

Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'

However, some experts say there is still hope that cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases could stabilise rising temperatures.

Scientists involved in the report said the 1.5C or 2C thresholds are not cliff edges the world will fall off, but that every bit of warming makes a difference, so it is important to curb temperature rises as much as possible.

Professor Richard Betts, from the Met Office Hadley Centre and a contributing author to the report, said: 'Like the speed limit on a motorway, staying below it is not perfectly safe and exceeding it does not immediately lead to calamity, but the risks do increase if the limit is passed.

'Limiting warming to 1.5C clearly needs much more urgent emissions cuts than is currently happening, but if the target is still breached we should not assume all is lost and give up – it will still be worth continuing action on emissions reductions to avoid even more warming.'

Alicante resort Santa Pola was hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after severe changes in atmospheric pressure

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish

Italian firefighters race to a wildfire near Petralia Soprana, near Palermo, Sicily, as mercury levels rise

The report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was produced by 200 scientists from 60 countries.

Drawing on more than 14,000 scientific papers, the review included the latest knowledge on past and potential future warming, how humans are changing the climate and how that is increasing extreme weather events and driving sea-level rises.

The authors said it was 'virtually certain' that heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions'.

They also said a rise in sea levels approaching two metres by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out', while the Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050.

Following the report, Prime Minister Boris Johnson called it 'sobering reading' and said it was clear the next decade was going to be pivotal to securing the future of the planet.

'We know what must be done to limit global warming – consign coal to history and shift to clean energy sources, protect nature and provide climate finance for countries on the frontline,' he added.

And US President Joe Biden urged the country and world nations to swiftly limit greenhouses gasses.

He said in a statement: 'We can't wait to tackle the climate crisis. The signs are unmistakable. The science is undeniable. And the cost of inaction keeps mounting.'

Meanwhile UN Secretary-General António Guterres called the new report a 'code red for humanity'.

If temperatures continue to rise, there could be devastating effects here on Earth, including a dramatic loss of sea-life, an ice-free Arctic and more regular 'extreme' weather

He warned: 'The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.'

And Anthony Blinken, US Secretary of State, said in a statement: 'Today, the United States joined nearly 200 IPCC member governments in approving the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report.

'The report finds we are already edging closer to a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] warmer world, and every day emissions rise the prospects for averting the worst impacts of climate change become dimmer.

'This is why it is essential that all countries – in particular the major economies –do their part during this critical decade of the 2020s to put the world on a trajectory to keep a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] limit on warming within reach.

'This is why the United States has committed to a 50-52 percent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels in 2030 and is marshaling the entire federal government to tackle the climate crisis. We cannot delay ambitious climate action any longer.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ever looked at yourself in the mirror and thought you were going down in the world? Well no, your eyes are not deceiving you.

Researchers at the University of Gothenburg, in Sweden, monitored the heights, and health, of thousands of people for decades, and found women are more likely to shrink than men — shedding around half an inch per decade from age 30 — with serious repercussions for their health.

Those who suffered major height loss as they aged were twice as likely to die from heart disease, the study warned this week.

So how can you avoid the mid-life shrink — and what's the science behind it?

THE SPINAL TRAP

The biggest hit our height takes is through our spine, made up of 24 vertebral bones stacked on top of each other and separated by fluid-filled cartilage discs.

Over time, these intervertebral discs harden and wear away. 'This happens because the nucleus — the "jelly-like" inner part of the disc — gets squashed and dehydrates,' says physiotherapist Nell Mead.

'The vertebrae then rest more on the tougher annulus — the outer part of the disc — which isn't designed to carry weight. This compresses and shortens the spine.'

Nell says that changes to the spinal structure can happen as early as age 30 — 'the age at which our ancestors would typically have died' — and that women are often affected worse than men: 'Women don't generally move as much. We tend to have more static jobs.'

The layers of cartilage that cushion the joints in our legs can also wear away, leading to shrinkage.

Unfortunately, rectifying the dehydration isn't as simple as drinking more water — the liquid we take in tends to be prioritised for our major organs.

Instead, exercise is key.

'Squashing and stretching the discs with big movements, such as downward dogs in yoga and touching your toes and reaching to the sky, will encourage the discs to absorb water, in much the same way that squeezing a dry sponge when it's in a glass of water will help it take in more,' says Nell.

Researchers at the University of Gothenburg, in Sweden, monitored the heights, and health, of thousands of people for decades, and found women are more likely to shrink than men — shedding around half an inch per decade from age 30 [Stock image]

BONE OF CONTENTION

The vertebrae bones also weaken with age, causing shrinkage and fractures that can affect posture.

This process is exacerbated by osteoporosis, a condition in which bones lose density and weaken. This is more common in women than men because of declining levels of the female hormone oestrogen during the menopause.

'Osteoporosis leaves you more prone to fractures,' says Nell. These include a 'wedge fracture', which happens when the front of the vertebrae collapses, creating wedge-shaped bone and a humped upper back, known as thoracic kyphosis. It is often associated with menopausal women, says Nell, as well as sufferers of anorexia, who don't get enough calcium for healthy bones.

'Bone becomes less dense and smaller in size for women after the menopause, and for men after their 60s,' adds physiotherapist Chongsu Lee, who says we shrink by about half an inch every ten years from our peak height, aged 30.

I THOUGHT MY HUSBAND GREW - I'D JUST SHRUNK Jenni Kelly, 69, is a retired administrator who lives in Benfleet, Essex, with her husband Bob, 65, a retired software engineer, and their son Tom, 48. Jenni says: Jenni and her husband Bob when Jenni was 5ft6.5 I thought I'd just pulled a muscle when I felt my back 'go' during a coughing fit while I was suffering from a bout of bronchitis. But the pain, in my lower back, was absolutely excruciating. I went to the GP, who prescribed strong painkillers and told me to stretch and keep active. I did as I was told, but I didn't get any better. Seven months later, in September 2015, I was so desperate with the pain that I paid to see a specialist privately, and he ordered an MRI scan. I was totally shocked when he told me that the cause of the pain was five fractured vertebrae in my lower (lumbar) spine. Further tests revealed the cause of my fractures was the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis. Jenni and Bob now Jenni is 5ft3 I was surprised, as I'd always done a lot of exercise and eaten a healthy diet. I was given an infusion of drugs to slow down the bone loss and had an operation called a vertebroplasty, where a special type of cement is injected into the fractured vertebrae to relieve pain and restore mobility. Around Christmas, I joked to my husband Bob that he seemed to be growing taller, and he said that he thought I was getting smaller. I stood against the kitchen door frame, and he measured me and found my height had dropped by 2½ in. I had lost half an inch in height for each spinal fracture. It was quite a shock. Two months later, he measured me again and I'd lost another inch. I used to be 5 ft, 6½ in tall, now I'm 5 ft 3 in. Luckily I haven't lost any more height since. I'm now on medication and I take vitamin D and calcium supplements to improve my bone density. I also do lots of yoga, swimming and walking. I'm doing everything I can and hope it will be enough to protect me.' Interview by Jo Waters Advertisement

Eating foods that are rich in calcium and vitamin D, such as green leafy vegetables, can help prevent osteoporosis, as can regular weightlifting or weight-bearing exercise.

SIT UP STRAIGHT

With years spent staring at a screen, our posture becomes poor, robbing vital millimetres from our height.

'When sitting, your back finds itself effectively sandwiched between your head and your buttocks,' says Chongsu Lee.

'Muscles overcompensate to maintain the natural curvature of your spine in your neck and back. Over time, those overworked muscles become tight, exacerbating your poor posture.'

Nell adds: 'The muscles on your chest and neck get weaker as your body adapts to a habitually slouched sitting posture, and the muscles on your back get longer, so you gradually collapse further forward.'

To correct a stoop, Nell recommends practising a 'starfish pose' daily. 'Lie on your back with your arms and legs spread out and a foam roller or rolled towel lengthways under your back for your head and bottom to rest on, to reverse the effects of gravity.'

Chongsu, who has developed a robotic massage device to ease joints, mybackhug.com, recommends regular exercise that promotes balance, such as swimming, jogging and yoga.

MIGHTY MUSCLE

While muscles aren't the main factor in height shrinkage, strong muscles can help stop stooping.

After age 30, we lose 3 per cent to 8 per cent of our muscle mass per decade. Even the muscles in our legs are integral to good posture.

'Muscles around the shoulders and hips are exquisitely balanced to maintain natural curvatures,' says Chongsu. In order to keep this balance, muscles in the lower limbs, such as hamstrings and quads, must also be strong, or they will 'compromise your lower back and hip joints' curvatures'.

HARD TO STOMACH

The main muscle group to impact on posture, however, is the abdominals.

'The deep abdominal muscles provide stability for the lower back,' says Nell.

'If they're weak, the pelvis can tilt forward, making you slouch. This affects women a lot more than men, mainly because pregnancy is the biggest cause and many women's abdominal muscles don't recover from it.'

She recommends taking Pilates classes a 'minimum' of three times a week.

THE FOOT FACTOR

Even our feet can affect our height, as with age, their muscle tissue loses elasticity, causing sagging of the arches.

This has been exacerbated during lockdown, says Nell. 'As people have stopped storming around as much, the muscles and bones in their feet have got weaker. If the arch isn't strong enough to hold the foot up, it will drop down and make you appear shorter.'

WHAT ABOUT MEN?

Frustratingly, both nature — the average man has twice the upper body strength of the average woman — and outdated societal roles mean men fare better.

Nell says: 'They're still more likely to have physical jobs and more chance to play sport during middle-age, while women are more likely to be at home looking after children. This keeps [men's] cartilage fed, encouraging nutrients to flow in and waste products to flow out, maintaining mobility for longer.'

And with none of the rigours of pregnancy or risks of osteoporosis linked to the menopause, they are less susceptible to shrinkage.

However, men still stand to lose two inches of height by the age of 80.

How I lost 2 inches... then grew them back!

by Tanith Carey

If you'd asked me in my 30s how tall I was, I'd have confidently declared I was almost 5ft 5in — a medium height for a woman which I was quite happy with.

But then a couple years off my 50th birthday, I was at a routine check-up with my GP and when she measured me, declared I was now 5ft 3in.

'Don't worry, it's quite normal,' she reassured me. 'You're 48. Most women begin to lose height by their late 40s.'

It may have been 'normal' but I was horrified. Where had my precious inches gone?

It was a wake-up call that reminded me that as much as we women try to fend off grey hair and wrinkles, we ignore the biggest give-away of all — shrinking height and stooped posture.

And, as the study in the British Medical Journal tells us, height loss is more than cosmetic. It's life-threatening and women are particularly at risk, losing twice as much in height as men in old age as we're more prone to the bone-crumbling disease osteoporosis.

The study found that those who suffered major height loss — defined as more than 2cm — were twice as likely to die from cardiovascular disease, such as stroke or heart attack.

Determined to regain my lost 2in — which was making me looking dumpier and middle-aged — I sought the help of UK posture expert, Noel Kingsley, author of Perfect Poise, Perfect Life.

The reason I'd lost the height, he explained, was down to the way I'd forgotten how to use my spine in a healthy way.

Over the years, this meant instead of being an S shape, it was now more of a hunched over C-shape, making me shorter, too.

At our first session, Noel illustrated this by asking me to stand straight against a wall.

I immediately noticed that the simple act of trying to stand up straight now felt uncomfortable.

The good news, however, was that it was not too late to do something about it.

Learning about the importance of good posture helped Tanith Carey (pictured) regain a lost two inches of height

Over eight weeks, Noel helped me to undo some of the habits I'd built up over the years, with the principles of the Alexander Technique, which teaches awareness of how you use your body.

These were a series of exercises to teach me more control and decompress my spine. Some were basic movements such as learning how to sit and stand correctly, to lengthen my spine and improve my muscle co-ordination.

Others involved standing up against a wall on tiptoes.

While keeping my head high, I was taught how to let my heels drop, allowing the vertebrae to gently pull apart again like an expanding accordion.

After two months of intensive focus, I was amazed to find I had regained 2.5 cm — a whole inch — and had almost gone back to the height of my youth, rising from 161.5 back to 164cm (5ft 4in). That was six years ago.

But the good news is that I have managed to cling to some, if not all, of my progress — and the last time I was measured by the doctor I was 163cm (5ft 3.5in).

Looking back, though, I'd say what has helped me most is the awareness of how I use my body.

As I am always glued to my computer for work, I have bought a platform to raise the height of it to eye level to prevent me from stooping over it.

A few times a week, I also lie on the floor for ten minutes after I have exercised, with my knees bent, to straighten out my spine. As I do so, I have to imagine my shoulders releasing and melting into the floor.

I also take a calcium supplement to help head off the deterioration of my vertebrae.

While I am never going to be Elle Macpherson, it's good to know that if I keep this up I never need to turn into a hunched-over little old lady. There may be serums for the face — but good posture takes years off you, and will also help you live a longer and healthier life.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A man has been charged with murder after a 23-year-old woman was found dead in a country lane following an online date.

Human resources adviser Megan Newborough was reported missing when she failed to return from the meeting on Friday evening.

Her frantic parents used tracking software to find her mobile phone discarded in a hedgerow on Saturday evening and police were called.

Megan Newborough, pictured, was found dead hours after she failed to return from a date on Friday evening

However, Miss Newborough’s body was discovered in the early hours of Sunday six miles away in a rural lane outside the village of Woodhouse Eaves in Leicestershire

However, Miss Newborough’s body was discovered in the early hours of Sunday six miles away in a rural lane outside the village of Woodhouse Eaves in Leicestershire.

In a statement issued through police, Miss Newborough’s family said they were ‘completely heartbroken and devastated’ at her death, adding: ‘Megan was the most generous, loving and caring person and we have been robbed of our treasured daughter.’

Richard Rees, 37, who lives close to the spot where the phone was found on the outskirts of Whitwick, a large former mining village, said: ‘Her family arrived on Saturday evening and were trying to find the phone in the hedge.

‘They came over and showed me a picture of Megan on her father’s phone and he asked if I’d seen her. They were all obviously very concerned.

‘Mr Newborough said that Megan had met somebody online. Their date had been the night before but she hadn’t been heard from since and they had tracked the phone to the hedge.

‘He described the situation as “every dad’s worst nightmare”.’

Her frantic parents used tracking software to find her mobile phone discarded in a hedgerow on Saturday evening and police were called

Mr Rees said he gave the family a piece of wood to try to help them cut through the hedge and locate the phone, which could be heard ‘pinging’ every few minutes somewhere in the undergrowth.

Police then arrived and a section of the hedge beside a gate leading into farmland was cut out and the phone retrieved.

Mr Rees said that a young woman who had accompanied the family was seen with the handset in a polythene bag, before an officer was overheard later that evening telling colleagues that they were ‘now looking for a body’ as a helicopter hovered overhead.

A neighbour of Mr Rees’s also spoke to the Newboroughs on Saturday and described them as being ‘worried sick’, adding: ‘I think the poor mother was in shock.’

She added: ‘The word locally is that the poor girl had been on a date and didn’t return.’

Miss Newborough, the granddaughter of a vicar, grew up in Nuneaton, Warwickshire, around 25 miles away, and is still thought to have lived at the £800,000 family home with father Anthony, a 53-year-old account manager, and her mother Elaine, 50.

A family friend said Miss Newborough had recently finished a college or university course, adding: ‘Megan was a lovely young woman and they are a lovely family, very close-knit and very caring.

‘They are the kind of family who always go out of their way. Megan was absolutely beautiful – she would do anything for anyone.’ Tributes from workmates and friends online repeatedly described Miss Newborough as ‘beautiful’ and ‘bubbly’.

On Sunday, Leicestershire Police appealed for anybody who may have seen a white Citroen C3 on Friday night to come forward. Officers believe the car travelled between Coalville and Loughborough between 8pm and 10pm.

Prior to officially identifying Miss Newborough, the force said she had been reported missing from outside the county.

Ross Macullam, 29, of Coalville, was yesterday charged with Miss Newborough’s murder and will appear before Leicester magistrates this morning.

Police said Macallum had also been arrested on suspicion of rape, but remains under investigation regarding that matter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Turkish rescuers evacuated a regional hospital on Wednesday and plucked stranded villagers off rooftops as flash floods and mudslides swept across the Black Sea coast.

Officials said one person died of a heart attack in the mayhem and an elderly women was swept away by the rushing water and remained unaccounted for.

The health ministry said eight people were also rushed to hospital when a bridge collapsed.

Emergency services in Turkey have been struggling to cope with flash floods following earlier devastating wild fires

Drone footage shows the scenes around the Bozkurt district of Kastamonu in Turkey which has seen major flash floods

'From a meteorological point of view, we are perhaps facing a disaster that we had not seen in 50 or 100 years,' Agriculture and Forestry Minister Bekir Pakdemirli said of the flooding and heavy rains.

The downpours along Turkey's northern coast came as firefighters had just about got under control wildfires in the south that have killed eight people since late July.

Turkey has been grappling with drought and a rapid succession of natural disasters that world scientists believe are becoming more frequent and violent because of climate change.

Health Minister Fahrettin Koca tweeted that a hospital holding 45 patients - four of them in intensive care - had been evacuated in the northern Sinop region because of flooding.

The local authority tweeted images of rescuers pulling dinghies carrying patients away from the hospital along flooded streets.

Images aired by the DHA news agency showed water covering the hospital's ground floor.

Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu said water levels had reached three to four metres (10 to 13 feet) in some regions along the Black Sea coast.

Images on television and social media showed water level rising to the level of street signs in some towns.

Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu said water levels had reached three to four metres (10 to 13 feet) in some regions along the Black Sea coast

The worst-hit flood area appeared to be in Kastamonu, where the town of Bozkurt was inundated and dozens of cars were swept away by raging waters. The Kastamanu governor's office denied reports the flooding was caused by a burst dam nearby

One showed about a dozens cars and a van being swept along a road that had turned into a rushing river in the northern city of Kastamonu.

The evacuations came less than a month after six people died in floods caused by heavy rains in the northeast Rize province.

Officials said that all but three of the nearly 300 fires that had been ravaging Turkey's Mediterranean and Aegean coasts since July 28 have been brought under control.

The worst-hit flood area appeared to be in Kastamonu, where the town of Bozkurt was inundated and dozens of cars were swept away by raging waters. The Kastamanu governor's office denied reports the flooding was caused by a burst dam nearby.

'Within 10 minutes, everywhere was flooded,' restaurant owner Nuri Ersoz told Halk TV television by telephone. He said he feared for his cousin's life since he believed she may have been trapped in her home.

There were no immediate reports of any casualties in Kastamonu.

Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu who was traveling to Kastamonu said waters have surged 'three or four meters (yards) high' in some of the flood-hit areas and that many people were waiting to be rescued from rooftops

Emergency workers rescued at least 15 people trapped in their homes or vehicles, the state-run Anadolu Agency reported. But they were searching for an 80-year-old woman in the village of Akorensokuler who was swept away by floodwaters after her house collapsed, the Interior Ministry said

Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu who was traveling to Kastamonu said waters have surged 'three or four meters high' in some of the flood-hit areas and that many people were waiting to be rescued from rooftops.

'Evacuations and search-and-rescue efforts are continuing,' he said. 'The gendarmerie, the (army) are trying to deploy all of their helicopters to the region.'

In Bartin, the flash floods demolished several houses and at least two bridges and caused the partial collapse of a road leading to the neighboring province of Karabuk, the private Turkish news agency DHA reported. At least 13 people were injured when part of a bridge caved in, the country's disaster and emergency management agency said.

Emergency workers rescued at least 15 people trapped in their homes or vehicles, the state-run Anadolu Agency reported. But they were searching for an 80-year-old woman in the village of Akorensokuler who was swept away by floodwaters after her house collapsed, the Interior Ministry said.

In the town of Ayancik, in Sinop, where a stream burst its banks and at least one house was demolished by gushing waters, helicopters lifted residents to safety from rooftops. The town's hospital was evacuated as a precaution, Anadolu reported. Landslides caused the closure of a section of a road between Ayancik and the province's main city, which is also called Sinop.

Many of the affected areas were left without power.

Turkey's Black Sea region is frequently struck by deadly torrential rains and flash flooding.

Climate scientists say there is little doubt that climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving more extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms. Such calamities are expected to happen more frequently on our warming planet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 41-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of murder after the body of a young woman, which was set on fire, was found in a layby.

The body of the woman, which is yet to be identified, was found on Bridgnorth Road in Perton, Staffordshire, at around 3am on August 9.

Detectives believe the woman was driven to the site before being set alight and say she was found with significant burn marks all over her body.

Staffordshire Police said the woman was of slim build and aged between her late-teens and late 30s.

A 41-year-old man from Wolverhampton has been arrested after the body of a young woman was found in a layby on Bridgnorth Road in Perton, Staffordshire, at around 3am on August 9. Pictured: Police at the scene in Perton

Staffordshire Police believe the woman was driven to the site before being set alight. Pictured: Officers carry out their investigations on Bridgnorth Road

It comes as a 41-year-old man from Wolverhampton was arrested on suspicion of murder and remains in custody.

Detective Superintendent Tom Chisholm, of Staffordshire Police, said: 'We're at the early stages of a major investigation and we've had a great response from the public so far, but we're keen to get more information.

'We have made an early arrest but I must stress this is not the end of our investigation and we still need the public's help.

'We believe she was driven to the site. Did you witness anything suspicious or see any vehicles in the area between 1am and 3am on Monday morning?

'Do have local dash cam or CCTV footage?'

Det Supt Chisholm added: 'This was a shocking and dreadful incident and we are determined, with your help and support, to bring those responsible to justice.'

West Midlands Ambulance Service said paramedics and a trauma doctor were sent to the scene but there was nothing that could be done to save the victim.

Emergency crews were called to the scene at the junction of Jenny Walkers Lane and Bridgnorth Road at 2.49am on Monday

A cordon remains in place at the scene as members of the force appeal to the public for information

A service spokesman said: 'We were called to an incident at the junction of Jenny Walkers Lane and Bridgnorth Road at 2.49am on Monday.

'One ambulance, a paramedic officer and a MERIT trauma doctor attended the scene.

'On arrival we discovered one patient, who sadly could not be saved and they were confirmed dead at the scene.'

Anyone with further information is asked to contact police online, on social media or by calling 101 quoting incident number 42 of the August 9.

Alternatively Crimestoppers can be called anonymously on 0800 555 111.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marks & Spencer has sent shoppers into a frenzy with a stylish summer frock that has sold out twice online.

The £45 smock dress ticks some of the season's biggest trends with its close-fitting shirred bodice, statement sleeves and a mid-length hemline.

The frock, which looks strikingly similar to a £255 style by celeb-approved brand Sleeper, has proved a hit with influencers across the UK.

M&S must-have! Marks & Spencer has sent shoppers into a frenzy with a stylish summer frock that has sold out twice online. The £45 smock dress ticks off some of the season's biggest trends with its close-fitting shirred bodice, statement sleeves and a mid-length hemline

Dressed up with somewhere to go! British influencer styled the dress with sandals and jewellery from M&S - and changed up the silhouette with a statement Gucci belt

The high street chain announced last week the dress had been brought back by popular demand - but within days it had already sold out for a second time.

Customers were quick to call for it to be restocked for a second time, with one posting: 'If there is (crazy) demand you should get more made. These milk maid dresses are extremely popular because they look good on real people.'

Another added: 'I bought this as soon as it was on sale, you’ve got to be fast.'

A third wrote: 'Only just showcased this dress and the medium to large sizes already sold out?'

Photos showcase the dress's versatility, with influencers and customers wearing it with everything from strappy sandals to trainers.

Stepping into summer! M&S content creator Sophie Hines wore the flowing dress with slide-on shoes and a pair of shades to create the perfect breezy summer ensemble

Relaxed: London-based social media creator Denis wore the sleeves of her smock dress down over her shoulders and added a contrasting white handbag

Strike a pose: Instagram influencer Hayley Johnston leaned into the pared back style

It could also be cinched at the waist with a statement belt or accessorised with a sunhat.

The description on the M&S website, the retailer explains: 'For a modern take on the prairie trend, look to this minimal midaxi dress.

'It has a regular fit, with a close-fitting shirred bodice and overall smock silhouette. Long sleeves with elastic at the cuffs add statement volume.'

The style looks similar to one released by high-end brand Sleeper, which is loved by stars including Emma Roberts and Millie Macintosh.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's move to Paris Saint-Germain has sent shockwaves through the world of sport.

But the Argentine footballer's decision to leave Barcelona for the French capital marks just not a major lifestyle change for him, but for his whole family, too.

His wife Antonela Roccuzzo, 33, and their three sons Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three, were by Messi's side as he arrived in the city yesterday morning to sign the two-year deal.

Now Mr and Mrs Messi, who have been together since childhood, must put down roots, from finding a school for the children to working out where to live.

Settling into the City of Light: Lionel Messi has moved to the French capital with his wife Antonela, pictured, and their sons Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three

On their way! The couple posed for a photo in a private jet on the way from Barcelona to Paris

Making himself at home: With Messi, 34, busy doing media interviews announcing his arrival - he gave a press conference earlier today (pictured) - and starting work at PSG, it is likely the lion's share of the work will fall to former model Antonella

With Messi, 34, busy doing media interviews announcing his arrival - he gave a press conference earlier today - and starting work at PSG, it is likely the lion's share of the work will fall to former model Antonella.

Fortunately money is no object for the mother-of-three, thanks to Messi's take-home salary of 35million euros a year.

So what can Mrs Messi expect from life in Paris?

From the PSG WAG tribe to the city's newest must-visit shopping destination, FEMAIL imagines how she might spend her time...

Infiltrating the PSG WAGs

The PSG glossy posse: Brazilian blogger, singer and reality TV star Carol Cabrino (left, left image) is married to PSG captain Marquinhos, 27. Right, Sergio Ramos' wife Pilar Rubio

As the wife of Barcelona's biggest star, Antonela must have found it easy to make friends at her husband's former club.

The couple were well-established in the city and saw countless players - and their partners - come and go, including Cesc Fabregas and his wife Daniella Semaan, who is part of Antonela's inner circle.

Now Antonela must get to know a new tribe of glamorous wives and girlfriends.

Among them is Brazilian blogger, singer and reality TV star Carol Cabrino, who is married to PSG captain Marquinhos, 27.

Parenting in Paris! Carol shares a three-year-old daughter and an 18-month-old son with Marquinhos (pictured) so will be well-placed to give Antonela tips on parenting in Paris

Newbie: Gianluigi Donnarumma is moving to Paris with his girlfriend Alessia Elefante

She shares a three-year-old daughter and an 18-month-old son with the footballer so will be well-placed to give Antonela tips on parenting in Paris.

The three young Messi boys could have ready-made playmates in Sergio Ramos's four sons: Sergio Jr, seven, Marco, five, Alejandro, three, and one-year-old baby Maximo.

Ramos, 35, shares his sons with Spanish-born Pilar Rubio, 43, who worked as a TV presenter and reporter before meeting her footballer husband.

Like Antonela, Pilar is a fan of keeping fit so the pair might well find themselves popping out to an exercise class together.

Choosing a school for their sons

New school: The Messis will be finding a school for sons Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three, ahead of the start of the school year. Fortunately there are plenty to choose from

With two sons of school age, finding the right fit before the start of term will no doubt be a priority for the Messis. There are no international schools offering the Spanish curriculum in France, so it might mean a change in teaching for the boys.

Among the most popular with Paris's elite is the Ermitage International School of France, which is the country's most expensive school with fees of up to 40,990 euros a year.

As one might expect from such a pricey school, students have the option of a wide range of extracurricular activities including fencing, rowing and tennis.

It has the benefit of taking 1,400 students aged three to 18, meaning Mr and Mrs Messi would only have one stop on the school drop-off.

The bilingual École Jeannine Manuel also takes students from the age of three but is split between three campuses across the city. Known for its 'very high academic standards', according to the Good Schools Guide, older students can choose to take the International Baccalaureate Diploma.

There are also a number of high performing state schools, including the prestigious Lycée Louis-le-Grand.

Five-star staycations and Michelin-starred meals

Date night: There is no shortage of luxury in Paris and the Messis (pictured at New Year's) will be spoiled for choice when it comes to dinner reservations or a city staycation

Luxury: Les Ambassadeurs at the Hôtel de Crillon, which serves up sophisticated cocktails to well-heeled travellers. The five-star hotel is one of the finest in the city

There is no shortage of luxury in Paris and the Messis will be spoiled for choice when it comes to dinner reservations or a city staycation.

Among the top picks is the Hôtel de Crillon, which overlooks the Place de la Concorde.

The most expensive accommodation at the hotel are the three apartments, which cost 7,000 euros a night.

Downstairs there is a heated underground swimming pool and a choice of restaurants and bars, including Les Ambassadeurs which serves up sophisticated cocktails to well-heeled travellers.

There is also Hotel Lutetia, which underwent a 200 million euro revamp in 2019 and which, like the Crillon, carries the prestigious 'palace' rating from the French Government, which distinguishes 11 of Paris's five-star hotels above their rivals.

Fine dining: There is even more choice when it comes to fine-dining - Paris is second only to Tokyo in the cities with the most number of Michelin-starred restaurants. Pictured, L'Ambroisie

If the Messis didn't fancy either of those for a night away from the children then the exquisite Mandarin Oriental, La Réserve Hotel & Spa, Hotel Bristol and Four Seasons George V are also on their doorstep.

There is even more choice when it comes to fine dining - Paris is second only to Tokyo in the cities with the most number of Michelin-starred restaurants.

Ten hold the coveted three-star rating, including Pierre Gagnaire, which offers a 335 euro set menu for two and L'Ambroisie, the city's longest-running three-star establishment.

Where to shop 'til she drops

Style maven: Antonela, pictured on Instagram, will have no shortage of places to shop in Paris

New addition: The Samaritaine department store has reopened after more than 15 years following a 500 million euro renovation by new owners LVMH

As the home of Chanel, Balmain and Givenchy, Paris is still the fashion capital of the world.

The 'golden triangle' of the 8th arrondissement is a must for any affluent shopper, with Balenciaga, Dior and Hermès making it a luxury hub.

On the corner of the Champs-Elysées and the avenue George V is the world's largest Louis Vuitton store, which occupies a five-storey Art Deco building that is visible from both ends of the avenue.

It is a must for any LV super fan and is stocked with everything from the brand's homeware and jewellery to its traditional leather goods.

The most recent big-name addition to the Paris shopping scene is the Samaritaine department store, which has reopened after more than 15 years following a 500 million euro renovation by new owners LVMH.

The Art Deco building, which overlooks the Seine, is now home to everything from high-end labels to emerging designers and will be top of any list for any fashionista in the city.

Finding the perfect home

Home sweet home! Like any self-respecting millionaire, Messi owns several properties around the world, including a six-bedroom apartment in Paris' chic 16th arrondissement. Stock image

Like any self-respecting millionaire, Messi owns several properties around the world, including a six-bedroom apartment in Paris' chic 16th arrondissement.

The family reportedly bought the sprawling city pad for over 8 million euros in 2016 and it might now prove the perfect place to live while getting settled.

The apartment is in the Villa Montmorency, the Daily Telegraph reported, a historic mansion converted into a number of luxury flats with a shared garden.

Celebrities including Lenny Kravitz live nearby, so the footballer wouldn't need to worry about star-struck neighbours stopping him on the street.

Although six bedrooms would seem like more than enough space for any normal five-person family, it is possible Lionel and Antonela will want a little more space for theirs.

One option is to follow the lead of Messi's new teammate and close friend Neymar, who lives in a five-storey, 10,800 sq ft mansion in the upmarket suburb of Bougival, to the west of the city.

The area is just a stone's throw from the PSG training ground, which would cut down on Messi's morning commute. It also has serious star pedigree, with fellow footballer Ronaldinho and actor Gerard Depardieu previously calling Bougival home.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A podiatrist has revealed how changes in your toenails can signal underlying health problems.

Dina Gohil, a podiatrist and MD at UK-based firm DG Podiatrist, has revealed common symptoms, and the biggest potential health issues to look out for.

Among the explanations include pale nails suggesting poor circulation, anaemia or malnutrition, and white spots being associated with zinc deficiency or fungal infection.

Speaking exclusively to FEMAIL, has offered a comprehensive guide to show what your toenail problems may be revealing about your wellbeing...

Dina Gohil, Podiatrist & MD at DG Podiatrist and Ambassador for CCS Foot Care, who is from the UK, has revealed common symptoms, and the biggest potential health issues to look out for. Pictured, stock image

PALE NAILS

Can signal: Poor circulation, anaemia or malnutrition

According to Dina, pale nails (pictured) can sometimes be a sign of poor circulation, anaemia or malnutrition

Dina, who is an ambassador for CCS Foot Care, explains that in the first instance, pale nails are a common sign of ageing - adding if you are over 60 they are unlikely to be cause for concern.

However, she goes on to warn that they can sometimes be indicative of poor circulation, anaemia or malnutrition.

'They can also be caused by malfunctions in the liver or heart, or poor nutrition, so it is important to get this issue checked out,' she says. 'If your nails are mostly white with a narrow pink band at the tip, it could be a condition called Terry’s nails.'

'This can be due to ageing but it could also indicate diabetes and kidney, liver or lung disease.'

YELLOW NAILS

Can signal: Fungal nails, diabetes, psoriasis, or even thyroid disorders

Yellow nails can be a sign of fungal nails, diabetes, psoriasis, or even thyroid disorders, the podiatrist explained

When it comes to yellow nails, sometimes the stain can simply be from eating food with ingredients such as turmeric, smoking, excessive use of nail polish or leaving nail polish on for too long, according to Dina.

'In this scenario, your nails should grow clear again, but you can also use natural treatments such as tea tree oil and vitamin E to tackle any infection,' she explains.

However, the podiatrist says that if it continues to get worse, it could be a sign of fungal nails, diabetes, psoriasis, or even thyroid disorders.

'If left untreated, the nails can continue to deteriorate and become thick and crumble off,' she notes. 'If your nails remain yellow despite repeated treatment, this could be a sign of something more serious such as skin cancer.'

Dina goes on to add there is also a rare condition called ‘Yellow Nail Syndrome,’ which she explains 'manifests in constantly yellow nails and respiratory or lymphatic problems.'

'This can be caused by a variety of factors including rheumatoid arthritis, fluid buildup between the lungs and chest cavity and respiratory illnesses.'

BLUISH NAILS

Can signal: Lack of oxygen, occupational hazard or medication

Dina explained that blue nails (pictured) are often an indicator that there's not enough oxygen getting to them, which is a condition called Cyanosis

Tips to help keep your nails clean, healthy and problem free: - Avoid biting and tearing your nails and avoid pulling off hangnails - Use good nail clippers or sharp nail scissors, and make sure to wash these tools frequently - Try to keep your nails clean and dry at all times - Trim your nails straight, round the tips gently and leave the cuticles visible - Use a nail moisturiser regularly - Avoid long term use of fake nails, nail polish and nail polish removers - Only visiting certified nail technicians for professional manicures and pedicures - Pay attention to any changes or problems in your nails, and always seek professional help if concerned Advertisement

The expert explains how nails can appear blue for several reasons, but notes that many may be unaware that it is actually the nail bed beneath that is blue rather than the nail itself.

She goes on to say how the nail bed does not contain any skin pigment, meaning any bluish appearance is caused by 'something else.'

Dina says blue nails are often an indicator that there's not enough oxygen getting to them, which is a condition called Cyanosis.

'This is a lack of oxygen in the red blood cells causing the skin underneath your nails and other body parts including the feet, lips and mucous membranes to appear blue/purple,' she explains.

'This has several causes including cold temperature exposure, abnormally high hemoglobin levels, an underlying health problem such as asthma or COPD or your body’s inability to deliver enough oxygen to the area.'

She adds that people with pneumonia can demonstrate an extreme example of this.

But that's not all. Dina also tells how blue nails can be a result of occupational hazard.

'Mechanics working with oxalic acid, those using metal cleaners, paint removers, those who manufacture inks and dyes and those who work with silver are at increased risk of developing blue nails,' she says. 'Those with HIV can also develop blue nails – it can be a sign of the infection itself or as a result of certain antiretroviral medications.'

'Other medications which can cause your nails to develop a bluish hue are antimalarial drugs, drugs used to tackle psychosis and amiodarone which is used to regulate the heartbeat.'

WHITE SPOTS

Can signal: Zinc deficiency or fungal infection

White spots on the toenail (pictured) can often be down to injury or micro trauma to the nail such as hitting it against a hard surface or bending but not breaking the nail

According to Dina, white spots on the nails are common and normally harmless.

'They can be down to injury or micro trauma to the nail such as hitting it against a hard surface or bending but not breaking the nail,' she says.

'This is not a cause for alarm in healthy individuals. Simply wait for the spot to grow out and then clip it off.'

The expert notes that white spots can also be a hereditary condition, adding that in more serious cases, white spots on nails are associated with a zinc deficiency or fungal infection, as well as poor health and nutritional deficiencies.

She continues: 'In very rare cases, people’s nails can be entirely white (total leukonychia). This can sometimes indicate an underlying health problem but not always. It is best to seek treatment from a medical professional in this instance.'

BLACK NAILS

Can signal: Anaemia, diabetes, kidney disease or heart disease

Black nails (pictured) could potentially be signs of anaemia, diabetes, kidney disease or heart disease

Dina goes on to say that black nails are also linked to trauma of the nails, with the blood vessels in the nail bed breaking and showing on the nail bed under the nail.

'The bleeding underneath means that the nail appears black,' the podiatrist explains. 'This will normally grow out on its own, but if it does not then it may be a sign of a more serious issue.'

She goes on to note that in other cases, it can be signs of anaemia, diabetes, kidney disease or heart disease.

'Untreated fungal nails can sometimes cause black toenails due to a buildup of debris,' warns Dina. 'Toenails are particularly vulnerable to fungal infections because they thrive on moist, warm environments. So, if you notice you have white or yellow nails, get these checked by a podiatrist before they turn black.'

Dina notes that the most serious cause of black nails is Melanoma - the most severe type of skin cancer.

'This can manifest as a dark brown/black misshapen spot underneath the nail bed,' she explains. 'Seek the help of a medical professional if you encounter this symptom.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A three-year-old girl has died after choking at an Asda supermarket in Liverpool.

Worried shoppers frantically called emergency services including two ambulances and a Hazardous Area Response Team (HART) to the Aintree store on Ormskirk Road at around 8.48pm last night.

The girl was taken to Alder Hey Children's Hospital but tragically medics were unable to save her.

The incident is not being treated as suspicious and enquiries are ongoing.

Worried shoppers frantically called emergency services including two ambulances and a Hazardous Area Response Team (HART) to the Aintree store on Ormskirk Road at around 8.48pm last night

The girl was taken to Alder Hey Children's Hospital but tragically medics were unable to save her

A Merseyside police spokesperson said: 'We can confirm that emergency services were in Aintree following an incident last night, Tuesday 10 August.

'The ambulance service attended reports of a three-year-old girl choking inside Asda on Ormskirk Road.

'The child was taken to hospital but sadly pronounced dead a short time later. The family are being supported by officers at this sad time.

'The incident is not currently being treated as suspicious and enquiries are ongoing.

'A file is in the process of being prepared for the coroner.'

A North West Ambulance Service spokesperson said: 'Two emergency ambulances and a member of our Hazardous Area Response Team (HART) responded to a 999 call that a child was suffering a medical emergency at ASDA on Ormskirk Road, Aintree.

'The call was made at 20.48 yesterday evening. The patient was transported to Alder Hey Children's Hospital.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Owners of alpacas and llamas that were slaughtered after suspected false positive bovine tuberculosis tests called last night for under-threat Geronimo to be spared the same fate.

Two farmers told of their harrowing experiences, in which officials from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) arrived to kill their animals.

They came forward after the Daily Mail published details of a dossier showing nine alpacas and llamas had been killed by Defra only for post-mortem tests to show they were disease-free. Their testimony is the latest development in the stand-off over eight-year-old Geronimo.

Geronimo the Alpaca, pictured with owner Helen Macdonald, is facing a death sentence after Defra officials said he must die

The alpaca was consigned for slaughter last week after a four-year legal battle. His owner Helen Macdonald has steadfastly refused to allow officials to kill him at her farm in Wickwar, south Gloucestershire.

They have been given 30 days to carry out a High Court warrant to kill the animal after Miss Macdonald’s final legal challenge failed. There were the first signs of a Tory backbench revolt last night after an MP pledged to write to Defra.

Dehenna Davison, MP for Bishop Auckland, said she made the decision after visiting Doug and Samantha Steen, who own the Teesdale Alpacas farm near Barnard Castle, County Durham.

She said: ‘We had a detailed discussion about bovine TB testing [bTB], as brought into the news by Geronimo. I am writing to Defra on their behalf to raise concerns about the testing regime.’

Yesterday farmer Ann Price told how her three-year-old alpaca Diva was culled after a positive Enferplex test in February 2018.

Diva, who lived with the rest of Mrs Price’s herd in Bewdley, Worcestershire, had been repeatedly dosed with tuberculin, a substance blamed for false positive tuberculosis results. A post-mortem examination found no evidence of bTB. Officials took samples twice but could not find any presence of the disease.

Ann Price told how her three-year-old alpaca Diva was culled after a positive Enferplex test in February 2018

John Carr-Ellison’s llamas Manabi, eight, Oruru, six, Elvis, four, Flash, 11, and Michael, four, were consigned for slaughter in 2015. Mr Carr-Ellison insisted on a post mortem which showed no evidence of TB

Mrs Price said her experience with Defra after the suspected false positive had been harrowing. She said: ‘Officials said Diva would have to be culled and when I asked for a retest to make sure it was not a false positive they said no. I even offered to pay myself. They had already arranged for her to be slaughtered, we had no knowledge of Geronimo and did not know we could fight.

‘Diva’s carcass came back and a post-mortem with no sign of bTB. They did not acknowledge the fact that they culled our animal.

‘It was cruel – my husband had to hold her as they shot her.

‘She knew what was going to happen. She hurt his arm she moved so much.

‘It has got to stop.’ Defra has insisted tuberculin is used in its Enferplex blood test to increase its sensitivity, but this claim has not been subjected to scientific scrutiny. Campaigners argue injecting it prompts an immune response in camelids, an animal group including llamas and alpacas, causing a positive test.

John and Katie Carr-Ellison, both 68, who live near Alnwick, Northumberland, saw five of their llama herd killed after Enferplex TB tests carried out by Defra. As with Geronimo, Mr Carr-Ellison’s llamas had been repeatedly dosed with tuberculin as a primer in the months prior to their positive test results.

Mr Carr-Ellison’s llamas Manabi, eight, Oruru, six, Elvis, four, Flash, 11, and Michael, four, were consigned for slaughter in 2015.

Mr Carr-Ellison said: ‘I insisted on post-mortems and that they were checked not only for TB but full tissue tests were conducted. They did it twice and they came up with a result where all of them had false positives.

‘I think it is a miscarriage of justice. If llama and alpaca keepers lose confidence in being dealt with fairly by Defra and feel they are being wrongly slaughtered they won’t cooperate with screening.’ A spokesman for Defra said: ‘While nobody wants to cull infected animals, we need to do everything we can to tackle this disease to stop it spreading and to protect the livelihoods of those affected.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Actress Una Stubbs who starred in Sherlock, EastEnders and Till Death Us Do Part has died today at the age of 84.

The star, who was born in Hertfordshire in 1937, had a long career in film, TV and theatre spanning more than 50 years, including a role as Mrs Hudson in the BBC's Sherlock with Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman.

Stubbs, who was also known for her roles in Sir Cliff Richard's classic film Summer Holiday as well as Worzel Gummidge and In Sickness And In Health, 'passed away quietly' at home in Edinburgh surrounded by her family.

Among those paying tribute today was Sherlock creator Steven Moffat, who described Stubbs as 'just about the kindest, nicest, funniest person you could meet', and added: 'The loveliest light on Baker Street has gone out.'

The actress, who was married twice and had three children, had been suffering from an illness for a few months according to her agent, who praised her today as a 'wonderful actress' with an 'extraordinarily varied' career.

Stubbs, who played Aunt Sally in the 1979 version of Worzel Gummidge alongside Jon Pertwee as Worzel, was also in The Worst Witch, Fawlty Towers, Heartbeat, Midsomer Murders, The Catherine Tate Show and Benidorm.

Stubbs was married to The Onedin Line actor Peter Gilmore from 1958 to 1969, with whom she adopted son Jason, and then married Fawlty Towers star Nicky Henson in 1969, before they split in 1975. The couple had two sons, Joe and Christian. Gilmour died in February 2013 aged 81, and Henson died in December 2019 aged 74.

Joe and Christian are now composers, and the latter tweeted today: 'Some of you may have known her as Rita, as Sally as Bat or Hudson but to my two brothers and I she was known as Mum. Thanks for everything Mum. RIP.'

Una Stubbs as Aunt Sally in the 1979-1981 version of Worzel Gummidge, alongside Jon Pertwee as Worzel

Una Stubbs at the London Marriott in Grosvenor Square in July 2019 (left) and The Hospital Club in London in 2018 (right)

Una Stubbs played Mrs Hudson in the BBC's version of Sherlock which ran from 2010 to 2017

Una Stubbs (right) is pictured in West London with a friend in December 2019 in what is believed to be the last picture of her

Una Stubbs as Mrs Hudson in the BBC's Sherlock, in which she starred with Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman

Stubbs (right) with Sir Cliff Richard (centre) and Jackie Daryl (left) filming the 1963 film Summer Holiday on location in Greece

Stubbs married Nicky Henson in 1969, before they split in 1975. The couple had two sons, Joe and Christian, who are now composers. Christian tweeted today: 'Some of you may have known her as Rita, as Sally as Bat or Hudson but to my two brothers and I she was known as Mum. Thanks for everything Mum. RIP'

A family statement said: 'Mum passed away quietly today with her family around her, in Edinburgh. We ask for privacy and understanding at this most difficult and sad of times.'

Her agent Rebecca Blond said: 'We are desperately sad to have lost not only a wonderful actress, whose screen and stage career, spanning over 50 years, was so extraordinarily varied, from Till Death Us Do Part to Sherlock, as well as memorable performances in the West End, at the Old Vic, Donmar Warehouse, Sheffield Crucible and National Theatre, but also a wickedly funny, elegant, stylish, graceful, gracious and kind and constant friend.

'She was also a highly respected and exhibited artist. We will miss her enormously and remember her always.'

Stubbs was born in Welwyn Garden City on May 1, 1937, and made her television debut in 1956 as a dancer on the music programme Cool For Cats.

Summer Holiday helped to make Stubbs's name alongside Sir Cliff in 1963 and she went on to star in BBC sitcom Till Death Us Do Part and its sequel In Sickness And In Health, playing Rita Rawlings.

Other well-known television roles include Miss Bat in The Worst Witch, as well as a role in the Fawlty Towers episode The Anniversary. She first appeared on screen in the 1950s in series such as Benny Hill and Rush Hour.

Stubbs was married to actor Peter Gilmore from 1958 to 1969, with whom she adopted son Jason. They are pictured in 1965

Una Stubbs with her former husband Nicky Henson, pictured together in October 1969. They had two children together

Sir Cliff Richard with Stubbs in Birmingham in 1996. Summer Holiday helped to make her name alongside Sir Cliff in 1963

Stubbs meets Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall at the Royal Academy of Arts to launch the RA250 Friends Membership scheme, at Burlington House in London's Piccadilly in October 2017

Una Stubbs played Aunt Sally in the 1979-1981 version of Worzel Gummidge, alongside Jon Pertwee as Worzel and Barbara Windsor as Saucy Nancy

Sherlock co-stars Una Stubbs, Benedict Cumberbatch and Lara Pulver arrive for the Specsavers Crime Thriller Awards at the Grosvenor House Hotel in London in October 2012

After her turn as Sandy in Summer Holiday, she appeared in Sir Cliff's next film Wonderful Life and later in his BBC TV series It's Cliff Richard!

For several years, she was a team captain in the weekly game show Give Us A Clue in the 1980s and also made appearances in Heartbeat, Benidorm, Victoria Wood's We'd Quite Like To Apologise, The Catherine Tate Show and Agatha Christie's Marple.

She also played Caroline Bishop in the BBC soap EastEnders and more recently appeared in The Durrells, Call The Midwife and Midsomer Murders.

In addition to her work as an actress, Stubbs was also a keen amateur painter who had her work displayed at the Royal Academy in London.

Sherlock's Steven Moffat said of Stubbs: 'The loveliest light on Baker Street has gone out. What a woman, what a talent, what a star - and just about the kindest, nicest, funniest person you could meet.

'I don't know how anyone even starts summing up that career - Till Death Us Do Part, Fawlty Towers, the incomparable Aunt Sally in Worzel Gummidge... and, of course, the irreplaceable heart and soul of Sherlock'.

(From left) Stubbs, Kimberley Nixon and Sheila Reid in September 2017, arriving for the UKTV Live new season launch at Claridge's hotel in London

Anthony Barclay and Una Stubbs at The Gillian Lynne Theatre in London on July 2, 2019

Stubbs, pictured in February 1968, is known for her roles in TV shows such as Worzel Gummidge and Till Death Us Do Part

Actress Una Stubbs, pictured at the Royal Academy of Arts in London in June 2014, has died at the age of 84

Una Stubbs and Stephen Bowman from the band Blake at Variety Club's Tribute to Sir Cliff Richard at the London Marriott Hotel in Grosvenor Square in July 2019

And Sherlock co-creator Mark Gatiss tweeted: 'It was one of the great joys of my life to work so closely with and to adore Una Stubbs. She was a wonderful, wonderful woman and a great and serenely graceful actor. Mischief was in her blood. We were so blessed that she became our imperishable Mrs Hudson. Goodbye, darling.'

A tribute from Sherlock producer Sue Vertue and the BBC programme's team said: 'Oh Una Stubbs, how we will miss you. You famously said to Sherlock that you were 'his landlady, not his housekeeper' but to us, you were so much more than either of those things - you were absolutely our Sherlock mum.

'You knitted us together. Always loving life, always wise, always wickedly funny and always kind. Bye bye you darling lady, you will always be in our hearts. - Sue Vertue & the Sherlock family'.

In 2015, Stubbs said that when playing the part she treated her co-stars Cumberbatch and Freeman, who played Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson respectively, the way she treated her own sons.

In an interview with TV Times, she added that she liked 'the variation of the role... not being jolly and just being really sad was a nice change'.

Happy Valley actress Sarah Lancashire was also among the first to pay tribute to Stubbs, tweeting: 'Rest in peace, Una Stubbs. Shocked at this news. Such a great actress. Sad news. Thoughts go out to her family and friends.'

Actress Bonnie Langford said: 'Such a loss. She made everything look so effortless. A consummate professional, kind, gracious, elegant, versatile and fun. Her Aunt Sally was a masterclass alone. Condolences and love to those loved ones left behind.'

Una Stubbs with Sir Cliff Richard in November 1964. Stubbs was in Sir Cliff's film Summer Holiday which came out in 1963

Stubbs is pictured leaping in the air on the south bank of the River Thames in London in 1963

(From left) Tony Booth, Stubbs, Dandy Nichols, and Warren Mitchell on the set of the BBC comedy Till Death Us Do Part as they rehearse at BBC Television Centre in London for a new series in November 1966

Richard Briers, Warren Mitchell (background) and Una Stubbs sit in the famous car from Chitty Chitty Bang Bang as they pose with the Lord Mayor of London Ian Bowater in October 1970

Stubbs leaps over a bollard at London Heathrow Airport, with the assistance of fellow entertainers Hank Marvin (left) and Sir Cliff Richard (right) in September 1970

And EastEnders actress Lucy Benjamin tweeted: 'Such sad news. Had the honour of being in the stage production of Worzel Gummidge with Una Stubbs in the early 80s and she taught me so much as a child actor and really showed me the way. What a loss.'

Hollyoaks actress Jessica Fox added: 'Very sad to hear the news of Una Stubbs passing. She played Miss Bat in the version of the Worst witch I was part of. I always remember Una as being so kind and caring of the younger cast.

'She was very quick, funny and incredibly professional. to this day I think Una was the most effortlessly chic and stylish woman I've ever met. I feel very lucky to have worked with her. My thoughts are with her family.'

TV presenter Nick Knowles tweeted: 'I had the pleasure of working with Una Stubbs when she appeared in our film Golden Years. She was a lovely, generous, empathic Lady full of mischief and joy. Everyone on the crew loved her. She will be sorely missed. RIP, I will miss your infectious smile x'.

A statement from the Call The Midwife team said: 'We are sad to hear of the death of the wonderful Una Stubbs, who we were fortunate to work with here on Call The Midwife. We send her family our deepest condolences at this time. xxx'

Sherlock creator Steven Moffat has described Una Stubbs as 'the irreplaceable heart and soul' of the show, in a tribute today

Musician Paul Weller remembered her as 'a wonderful & talented lady', while Michael Moran said: 'I remember seeing Una Stubbs in the street in Victoria, and smiled at her out of recognition before I quite realised who she was. She responded with a lovely beaming smile. Good people.'

Broadcaster Gyles Brandreth said: 'Oh, this is so sad. Such a funny, lovely, gifted lady - a marvellous actress with a special style & a great (and impish) sense of humour.

'I first met her when she was in Cowardy Custard in 1972 and last saw her at Nicky Henson's funeral last year. A sad day.'

Meanwhile TV star Baroness Floella Benjamin said: 'Una Stubbs was not only a great actress but a delightful person too.

'I remember appearing on her team in 'Give Us a Clue' and she made my mum, who I took to the recording feel very special. I'll be eternally grateful to her for that. May she rest in peace.'

TV channel Gold also paid tribute as a spokesman said: 'We're all deeply saddened to learn that the magnificent Una Stubbs has passed away at the age of 84. Our thoughts are with her family and friends at this sad time.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@China has lied and covered up key information during virtually every stage of its coronavirus response - from the initial outbreak to the number of cases and deaths, and is still not telling the truth, observers, experts and politicians have warned.

Beijing initially tried to cover up the virus by punishing medics who discovered it, denying it could spread person-to-person and delaying a lockdown of affected regions - meaning early opportunities to control the spread were lost.

Then, once the virus began spreading, the Communist Party began censoring public information about it and spread disinformation overseas - including suggesting that US troops could have been the initial carriers.

Even now, prominent politicians have warned that infection and death totals being reported by the regime are likely to be wrong - with locals in the epicenter of Wuhan suggesting the true tolls could be ten times higher.

Initial outbreak

Doctors in China, including Li Wenliang, began reporting the existence of a new type of respiratory infection that was similar to SARS in early December last year.

But rather than publicise the reports and warn the public, Chinese police hauled Wenliang and eight of his colleagues who had been posting about the virus online in for questioning.

Wenliang, who would later die from the virus, was forced to sign a document admitting the information he published was false.

While China has been widely-praised for a draconian lockdown that helped slow the spread of the virus, evidence suggests that the country could have acted much quicker to prevent the spread.

Dr Li Wenliang, one of the first Chinese medics to report the existence of the new coronavirus, was forced by police to confess to spreading false data. He later died from the virus

Samples analysed as early as December 26 suggested a new type of SARS was circulating, the Washington Post reported, but Wuhan was not locked down until January 22 - almost a month later.

Wuhan's mayor also admitted an error that allowed 5million people to travel out of the city before the lockdown came into place without being checked for the virus, potentially helping it to spread.

Chinese authorities have also been reluctant to had over information on the country's 'patient zero' - or the first person known to have contracted the virus.

While Beijing claims the first infection took place on December 8, researchers have traced the virus back to at least December 1 and anecdotal evidence suggests it was spreading in November.

A lack of information about the first patient has meant scientists are still unclear how the disease made the leap from animals into humans.

Theories include that it could have been carried by a bat or pangolin that was sold at a market in Wuhan and then eaten by someone, but this has not been confirmed.

Early reports

Chinese authorities initially reported that the virus could not spread person-to-person, despite evidence that it was spreading rapidly through the city of Wuhan including doctors being infected by patients.

This was used as justification for keeping the city of Wuhan operating as normal through a major CCP conference that was held between January 11 and 17, with authorities claiming zero new cases in this period.

China did not confirm human-to-human transmission of the virus until late January, when large parts of Hubei province including Wuhan were put into lockdown.

Despite reporting the existence of a 'novel type of pneumonia' to the World Health Organisation on December 31, Wuhan's largest newspaper also made no mention of the virus until the week of January 20.

That meant people in the city were not taking precautions such as social distancing to stop it spreading.

It also meant that people had begun travelling for the Lunar New Year holiday, which was due to start on January 24 and sees millions of people visit relatives, spreading the virus further.

Furthermore, China delayed reports suggesting that some 14 per cent of patients who initially tested negative for the virus or who appeared to have recovered tested positive a second time, only confirming such cases in February.

That further hampered efforts at early containment of the virus in places such as Japan, where patients who tested negative on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship were allowed to leave - only to test positive later.

Authorities in Beijing were also slow to report the deaths of two doctors from the virus, including one who was killed on January 25 but whose death was not reported by state media until a month later.

The market was shut on January 1 after dozens of workers there had contracted the disease

Origin of the virus

Despite early admissions that the virus began in the city of Wuhan, China later back-tracked - even going so far as to suggest American troops had brought the infection over after visiting the province.

Lijian Zhao, a prominent official within the Chinese Foreign Ministry, tweeted out the claim on March 12 while providing no evidence to substantiate it.

'When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals,' he wrote.

Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian accused American military members of bringing the coronavirus to Wuhan

Referencing a military athletics tournament in Wuhan in October, which US troops attended, he wrote: 'It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan.

'Be transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an explanation!'

In fact, America's 'patient zero' was a man who travelled from China to Washington State on January 15. The case was confirmed by the CDC six days later.

Chinese has also tried to push the theory that the virus originated in Italy, the country with the most deaths, by distorting a quote from an Italian doctor who suggested the country's first cases could have occurred much earlier than thought.

Zhao spread the theory in a tweet, while providing no evidence to back it up

Giuseppe Remuzzi said he is investigating strange cases of pneumonia as far back as December and November, months before the virus was known to have spread.

Chinese state media widely reported his comments while also suggesting that the virus could have originated in Italy.

In fact, Remuzzi says, there can be no doubt it started in Wuhan - but may have spread out of the province and across the world earlier than thought.

Infection total

China has reported a total of some 82,000 infections from coronavirus, claiming a domestic infection rate of zero for several days in a row recently - even as it eased lockdown restrictions in placed like Hubei.

But, by the country's own admission, the virus is likely still spreading - via people who have few or no symptoms.

Beijing-based outlet Caixin reported that 'a couple to over 10 cases of covert infections of the virus are being detected' in China every day, despite not showing up in official data.

Meanwhile foreign governments have heaped scorn on China's infection reporting cannot be trusted.

Marco Rubio, a prominent Republican senator and former presidential candidate from the US, tweeted that 'we have NO IDEA how many cases China really has' after the US infection total passed Beijing's official figure.

'Without any doubt it's significantly more than what they admit to,' he added.

Meanwhile the UK government has also cast doubt on China's reporting, with Conservative minister and former Prime Ministerial candidate Michael Gove claiming the Communist Party could not be trusted.

'Some of the reporting from China was not clear about the scale, the nature, the infectiousness of this [virus],' he told the BBC.

Meanwhile sources told the Mail that China's true infection total could be anything up to 40 times as high as reports had suggested.

Marco Rubio, a prominent Republican senator, has said that China's figures cannot be trusted and a far higher than has been reported

Death total

Doubt has also been cast on China's reported death toll from the virus, which currently stands at around 3,300.

Locals in epicenter city Wuhan have been keeping an eye on funeral homes since lockdown restrictions were partly lifted, claiming they have been 'working around the clock' to dispose of bodies.

China has reported 3,300 deaths from the virus, but social media users in Wuhan have suggested the toll could be in excess of 42,000

Social media posts estimate that 3,500 urns are being handed out by crematoriums each day, while Caixin reports that one funeral home in the city placed an order for 5,000 urns.

Locals believe that efforts to dispose of the bodies began March 23 and city authorities have said the process will end on or around April 5.

That would mean roughly 42,000 urns handed out in that time frame, ten times the reported figure.

Chinese aid packages

As it brought its own coronavirus epidemic under control and as the disease spread across the rest of the world, China attempted to paint itself as a helpful neighbour by sending aid and supplies to countries most in need - such as Italy.

In fact, while the Chinese Red Cross supplied some free equipment to the Italians, the country purchased a large amount of what it received.

Meanwhile officials in Spain said that a batch of coronavirus testing kits bought from China had just 30 per cent reliability - unlike the 80 per cent they were promised.

China has said it is willing to help supply the world with much needed aid and supplies, but has been accused of hoarding protective equipment and selling test kits that don't work

China is also the world's largest manufacturer of disposable masks of the kind being worn to slow the spread of the virus by people while out in public.

But as the disease began gathering speed in the country in January, China began limiting exports of the masks while also buying up supplies from other countries, the New York Times reported.

As well as halting virtually all exports of masks, China also bought up some 56million masks and respirators from overseas while fears of a pandemic were still far off.

Despite reports from US mask manufacturers of factories in Shanghai being effectively nationalised, China denies it has any such policy in place and has said it is 'willing to strengthen international cooperation' on the issue.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They’re Britain’s most wanted criminals — with the faces to prove it. Among them is a man who stabbed and paralysed his victim with a machete, another who raped a seven-year-old girl, one who killed a teenager with a 12-gauge shotgun and yet another who flooded Britain’s streets with heroin worth millions of pounds.

Twenty of the 21 people pictured on the National Crime Agency’s Most Wanted List are just as you’d expect from hardened career offenders — cruel-looking men with scars and menacing stares.

But the 21st face is an anomaly: a woman, 5ft 7in, with ‘mousey’ hair and blue eyes. She seems an unlikely lawbreaker, but in fact she helped perpetrate an astonishing scam — one that you paid for.

Sarah Panitzke, 47, has evaded the efforts and impressive resources of the National Crime Agency, HMRC, Europol and Crimestoppers, as well as multiple public appeals for information on her whereabouts

Sarah Panitzke, 47, played a key role in an 18-strong gang in which she laundered up to £1billion, much of it stolen from the British taxpayer.

Her 17 co-conspirators have now all been caught, convicted and sentenced — yet, sensationally, and to the ongoing fury of investigators, she remains at large having absconded before the trial had concluded.

For eight years, Panitzke has evaded the efforts and impressive resources of the National Crime Agency, HMRC, Europol and Crimestoppers, as well as multiple public appeals for information on her whereabouts. If — or when — she is caught, she now faces 17 years behind bars, as well as owing millions to you and me.

In Yorkshire this week, her middle-class family spoke out to distance themselves from her crimes. And last night, HMRC renewed its appeal for information on one of its tricksiest fugitives.

This week, the Mail uncovered a previously unseen photo of Sarah, taken in 1983, as a nine-year-old pupil at York College for Girls

Circled, Panitzke in 1983. She was a bright student but a rebel who would sneak off to parties, drink and smoke

The gang were arrested, and at their trial at Kingston Crown Court in 2013, 39-year-old Sarah and her co-conspirators pleaded not guilty

So where could Panitzke be today — and how on earth did an angelic, studious public schoolgirl become Britain’s most wanted woman? Certainly, there was nothing in her privileged upbringing that could have predicted such disgrace.

The eldest of two siblings, Sarah grew up in a large detached house in the picturesque village of Escrick, near York. This week, the Mail uncovered a previously unseen photo of Sarah, taken in 1983, as a nine-year-old pupil at York College for Girls. A proud-looking blonde girl, she wears an intense expression.

‘Her family were all flash cars, big houses and suntans,’ an old friend, who grew up with her in the 1970s, told the Mail this week. On the family driveway were said to be parked Porsches, BMWs and Mercedes.

He added: ‘They always seemed to have plenty of money and were always going on holidays in the sun. Sarah was very bubbly and there was nothing cloak-and-dagger about her then. But she was very confident for her age. You could tell from the way she spoke to everyone in her posh voice.’

From a young age, Sarah was a popular girl and mixed with wealthy families in her village, including that of a Conservative councillor.

Sarah’s father, Leo, hailed from Durham (the surname is thought to be German originally), and her mother, whom the Mail has chosen not to name for legal reasons, gave birth to Sarah in her early 30s.

For eight years, Panitzke has evaded the efforts and impressive resources of the National Crime Agency, HMRC, Europol and Crimestoppers. (Pictured, Europol headquarters, The Hague)

Two years later, brother Leon arrived, and together with dog Ben, they seemed to comprise the perfect family.

Leo Panitzke was earning enough as a residential property developer and insurance broker to be able to send both of his children to the highly prestigious St Peter’s School in York, the third-oldest school in the world (founded in 627AD), where boarding fees today can reach £34,500 per child annually.

And she was bright, studying ten GCSEs and three A-Levels, and being commended by the school magazine as an ‘outstanding’ debater. Yet even at 13, young Sarah appeared to be something of a rebel.

She set her eyes on one boy, several years her senior, who recalled this week that ‘she was just a kid, but she more or less said to me to come back and see her when she was a few years older’.

At home, her parents constructed a bar at the end of their garden, complete with a pool table and TV, for Sarah to host friends instead of sneaking out to party.

But that didn’t stop her. ‘We’d hang out in central York and go drinking and smoking, and do all the things we shouldn’t have been doing,’ her ex-boyfriend James Brooks, 47, told Vice magazine this week. ‘She wasn’t one for going shopping with the girls. She’d rather go and have a pint and a fag with the lads.’

Teenage summers were spent on the Costa Blanca, where her parents had a second home, and from where Sarah would fearlessly free-dive off cliffs into the sea.

These experiences prompted her to study Spanish at Manchester Metropolitan University with ambitions of owning a hotel.

Then came a turning point in life. In 1993, when she was 19, Sarah’s father Leo was arrested for buying council houses and selling them on early for a large profit. An investigation was ordered and he was subsequently sentenced to four years in prison.

‘Her dad was always propping up the bar in the Black Bull in Escrick, buying drinks for everyone,’ said one local, who asked not to be named.

‘He seemed like a jolly fellow. He was loud and brash. He called himself a pensions adviser. But a lot of people said he was more like a conman. There was a lot of talk about him fleecing people and getting away with it for years.’

During Leo’s stint in prison, Sarah and her mother would visit him — disrupting the girl’s studies at university.

Letters sent by Sarah to her boyfriend at the time, seen by the Mail and written from her university digs, reveal her state of mind.

‘The situation I was in this summer is probably one of the worst I have ever been in, what with my dad being in prison and a two-year relationship ending,’ she wrote in October 1993.

Sarah was the launderer, holding the purse strings and travelling to Dubai, Spain and the tax haven principality of Andorra to clean the money the gang had stolen. (Pictured, Dubai city centre)

In another letter, she apologises for not being able to visit her boyfriend, who has asked us not to name him.

‘I am visiting father on Saturday from 1.30 to 3.30 so that’s the afternoon almost taken up’, she writes, referencing her father’s incarceration in Thorp Arch in West Yorkshire, now HMP Wealstun.

‘He is still in a bad mood. Let’s hope it gets better soon because he really is upsetting mum.’

In a letter dated the next day, she adds romantically: ‘My bed is boring and wasted without you here.’

When Leo left prison, Sarah travelled to Barcelona to study for a master’s degree in Business Management.

Over the next decade in Spain, she learnt French and Catalan, worked for property rental companies and volunteered in local not-for-profit groups.

But at some point, she became embroiled in white-collar crime of her own. She met an acquaintance of the notorious tax criminal Geoffrey Johnson, now 78, who recruited her into his web of 18 fraudsters located throughout the UK, from Sussex to Scotland.

Together, the group established a complex network of companies that bought mobile phones VAT-free from Europe, then sold them in the UK for higher, tax-inclusive prices. After the phones were sold, the company would disappear without paying anything to HMRC in a scam known as ‘missing trader intra-community fraud’ (MTIC).

Their network organised a ‘carousel’ of companies which shifted the money around, enabling them to then ‘claim back’ tax that had never in fact been paid — thereby robbing the public purse twice.

‘At one stage there were more mobile phones being purchased and exported by a single crime syndicate in the space of a month than actually bought or sold in the country as a whole,’ lawyer Abbas Lakha told Vice magazine.

Sarah was the launderer, holding the purse strings and travelling to Dubai, Spain and the tax haven principality of Andorra to clean the money the gang had stolen.

The VAT fraud was so successful that, all in all, she laundered over £1billion over several years.

Throughout the scam, Sarah kept up appearances, maintaining front-jobs as a hotel worker and property investor.

With her two dogs and long-term partner, she lived in a gated community in the hills of the historic fishing village Vilanova i la Geltrú, an hour from the centre of Barcelona. Friends in the Spanish city said that while she seemed well-off, they didn’t suspect a thing.

But she made sure to enjoy the fruits of her labours, regularly frequenting the nearby town of Sitges — known as the ‘Saint Tropez of Spain’ due to its mega-mansions and wealthy European residents — enjoying fine dining and expensive wine.

By 2005, however, when she was around 31, the taxman had smelled a rat. HMRC began to notice suspicious activity in some of Sarah’s accounts, and conducted a 21-month investigation into the fraud gang, code-named ‘Operation Vaulter’.

The gang were arrested, and at their trial at Kingston Crown Court in 2013, 39-year-old Sarah and her co-conspirators pleaded not guilty. They claimed they sold phones, but that they weren’t aware the sales were part of a fraud carousel.

The jury refused to accept this, and the gang’s 18 members received sentences totalling 135 years. Sarah was handed an eight-year sentence.

But before the trial had concluded, Sarah somehow managed to disappear, having been granted bail and having not been asked to surrender her passport.

The Mail has learnt she was permitted to travel to and from Spain during the trial, and one day she simply did not return. At the very least, this raises serious questions of those whose job it was to watch her. She was convicted and sentenced in her absence.

Police believe Sarah absconded to Spain — possibly to the notorious ‘Costa del Crime’, home of organised crime gangs on the Costa del Sol. (Pictured, a beach on the Costa del Sol)

Three years later, a confiscation order was made against her, meaning that if she didn’t repay £2.4 million, further time would be added to her prison sentence.

The deadline for this has long passed. If Sarah is ever apprehended, she now faces a total of 17 years’ incarceration.

In 2017, the ringleader Geoffrey Johnson — who had also been on the run with his son Gareth — was arrested in Dubai using a fake passport, having travelled there from Tanzania and Kenya.

The Scot was sentenced to 24 years in prison and ordered to repay the public £109 million. Now, Sarah is the only member of the 18-band crime ring still on the run.

Following the trial, her family spoke of their shock at the extent of her crimes. In 2016, when she first became Britain’s ‘Most Wanted Woman’ at the age of 42, her father Leo told the Mail it was a ‘shock’ to hear she was on the NCA’s list, saying it felt ‘terrible’.

Her brother Leon, who now works as the director of a communications agency and whose wife is the CEO of a charity, also told Vice magazine this week that ‘the whole saga has been incredibly difficult for everyone involved’.

Approached this week at the Yorkshire home she shared with Sarah’s father Leo, Sarah’s mother refused to speak.

Other family members were also keen to distance themselves from Sarah’s crimes. ‘We in no way condone what Sarah has done,’ said an elderly female relative in Hull, who declined to be named. ‘At the time it was an enormous shock for the family… I expect the truth will come out one day and then everyone will know the full story.’

In April last year, Leo Panitzke passed away at the age of 78. Needless to say, Sarah did not attend the funeral.

‘I know she’ll be heartbroken that she couldn’t have been there to see her dad’s funeral, and be with her mum and brother to support them,’ her ex-boyfriend told Vice. ‘That must be playing on her mind every minute of every day.’

Police believe Sarah absconded to Spain — possibly to the notorious ‘Costa del Crime’, home of organised crime gangs on the Costa del Sol — using a fake identity. But eight years later, she could be almost anywhere.

When she first disappeared, some friends on social media wished her luck in her new life on the run. ‘Hope she is sunning herself on a beach somewhere, drinking cocktails,’ wrote one. The private school girl has outfoxed everyone.

Have you seen Sarah Panitzke? Call the HMRC fraud hotline on 0800 788 887 or (0)203 080 0871

Additional reporting: MARK BRANAGAN
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CONTRIBUTORS STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

1.1 The definitions and rules of interpretation in this Clause apply in these Terms and Conditions.

“ANL” means Associated Newspapers Limited, registered address, Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London W8 5TT and registered company number 84121;

“Affiliates” means in relation to a person, any direct or indirect parent undertaking or subsidiary undertaking from time to time of such person, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings from time to time of any parent undertaking of such person. An undertaking is a “subsidiary undertaking” of another undertaking (its “parent undertaking”) if that other undertaking, directly or indirectly, through one or more subsidiary undertakings:

(a) holds 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(b) it is a member of the undertaking and has the right to appoint or remove 50% or more of its board of directors or equivalent managing body; or

(c) it is a member of the undertaking and controls alone, or pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders or members, 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(d) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over it, for example by having the right to give directions with respect to its operating and financial policies, with which directions its directors are obliged to comply.

“Content” means any and all text, Images, Videos, Lineage, audio or video material, recordings of moving images with or without sound, all stills, images, content, materials, information, data, software and executable code, in whatever medium or form supplied or made available by or on behalf of the Supplier in connection with these Terms and Conditions;

“Fees” means the fees that we have agreed to pay the Supplier respect of the licence of the Content as set out in the self-generated Invoice;

“Images” means any photos, print graphics, interactive or digital graphics or other still images;

“Intellectual Property Rights” means all intellectual property rights wherever in the world arising, whether registered or unregistered (and including any application), including copyright, know-how, confidential information, trade secrets, business names and domain names, Marks, patents, petty patents, utility models, design rights, semi-conductor topography rights, database rights and all rights in the nature of unfair competition rights or rights to sue for passing off;

“Lineage” means written content or text material accompanying the content supplied by Supplier;

“Licensed Media” means:

(a) any and all digital or electronic publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website, and which in each case is owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time including those which operates under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, ‘Metro’ or ‘This is Money’ brands, or any derivative of such brands, including, but not limited to the publications owned or operated by ANL and which are located at www.metro.co.uk, www.mailonline.co.uk, Mailonline.co.uk/au, www.dailymail.co.uk, www.dailymail.com and www.thisismoney.co.uk and any subsequent or additional URLs which may replace them from time to time;

(b) any and all print publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed which ANL operates including those under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, or ‘Metro’ brands, or any derivative of such brands;

(c) any of the above publications’ pages or articles (including its mobile versions) on any social media accounts or news aggregator websites from time to time (including, but not limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, MSN, Apple i news and Yahoo; and

(d) any media player owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time (with or without embedding functionality and whether incorporated in the publications set out above or in any third party sites, services, apps or publications).

“Marks” means any and all trade marks, trade names, service marks, trade dress, logos, URLs, identifying slogans or other distinctive brand features of a party to these Terms and Conditions, whether or not registered;

“Supplier” means the entity set out in the self-generated Invoice; and

“Video” means a recording of moving images with or without sound supplied by Supplier.

2. GRANT OF LICENCE

2.1 Subject to these Terms and Conditions, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL and each of its Affiliates a non-exclusive (unless otherwise agreed), royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence to use, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform, display, edit and transmit the Content in connection with and through the Licensed Media and to make the same available to end users of the Licensed Media.

2.2 The Supplier, by granting the licence detailed in Clause 2.1, also grants ANL the express right to ANL and each of its Affiliates to grant a sub-licence to end users and readers of Licensed Media to the extent necessary for end users and readers to view

and use the Content in accordance with the Licensed Media’s terms of use from time to time.

2.3 The Supplier agrees that ANL shall be entitled to change, modify and edit the Content for technical or editorial purposes (including, without limitation, cropping or framing the Content).

2.4 ANL shall be entitled to reproduce the whole or any part of any Content in any secondary reproductions of Licensed Media (e.g. compilations, screen shots, stills, thumbnails) in order to promote or market the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including any and all print, digital and electronic publications.

2.5 If the Content includes Videos, ANL shall be entitled to embed, and enable, facilitate and support the embedding and organic sharing of Content by any end user of, all or any part of the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including without limitation, on any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website. ANL shall be entitled to manage, control and change the embedding functionality and settings of any of its media players from time to time as ANL shall determine in its sole discretion.

2.6 ANL agrees that it shall include the credit marked on the Images and Videos or notified by the Supplier on any use or reproduction of the Images and Videos.

2.7 Any inadvertent failure by ANL to accord the credit shall not constitute a breach of these Terms and Conditions by ANL provided that ANL uses its reasonable endeavours to remedy such failure that the Supplier makes ANL aware of, as soon as reasonably practicable and on a prospective basis only. For the avoidance of doubt, ANL will not be required to recall any print or other material already printed nor incur legal costs or expenses.

2.8 The Supplier hereby waives all moral rights in the Content to which the Supplier may be entitled under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) or the Copyright Act 1968 (Australia) as amended from time to time (and under all similar legislation from time to time in force anywhere in the world) to the extent necessary for ANL to exploit the Content in the Licensed Media.

2.9 The Supplier hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Content may be copied or reproduced under separate licences or arrangements with NLA Media Access and all other such database aggregators and services. As such, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL all such licences and rights as are required in order to enable others to access, copy and reproduce all or part of the Licensed Media (whether via press cuttings or similar services) pursuant to those licences or arrangements, including the non-exclusive right to syndicate (including electronic syndication or syndication for use in electronic databases) or distribute the Licensed Media (containing the Content) to NLA Media Access and all other owners of such databases, databanks and services for storage, copying, republication and redistribution to third parties for further storage, copying, publication and distribution in any medium.

2.10 ANL will have the non-exclusive right to store the Content (whether or not the Content has been published by ANL) in any of its electronic databases and to allow access to the databases for research purposes.

3. MARKS

3.1 The Supplier acknowledges and agrees that ANL owns all right, title and interest in and to the Licensed Media and ANL’s Marks. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall confer in the Supplier any right of ownership in the Licensed Media or ANL’s Marks.

3.2 Supplier hereby grants to ANL a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty free licence to use, reproduce, display and transmit the Supplier’s Marks solely for the purposes of performing its obligations under these Terms and Conditions, including in connection with the presentation of the Content within the Licensed Media.

4. FEES AND PAYMENT

4.1 In consideration of the provision of the Content by the Supplier, ANL shall pay the Fees which shall be all inclusive for the rights granted above (including syndication).

4.2 ANL will send Supplier a self-generated invoice (“Invoice”) reflecting the uses along with the payment of the Fee, no more than forty-five (45) days after the use. If the Supplier believes ANL has used Content that is not reflected in an Invoice, or for which payment was not made within forty-five (45) days after the use, the Supplier will promptly notify ANL:

(a) via mailonlinecontributionqueries@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s online digital publication and provide links to the URL(s) or scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment; or

(b) via accountspayable@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s print publications and provide scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment,

Each of (a) and (b) a (“Notification”). If ANL accepts that Content has been used without timely payment of the Fee, it will pay the Fee within fifteen (15) business days of ANL’s receipt of the Notification.

4.3 Payment shall be made direct to the bank account nominated in writing by the Supplier.

4.4 If a party fails to make any payment due to the other under these Terms and Conditions by the due date for payment (due date), then, without limiting the other party's remedies under these Terms and Conditions, the defaulting party may be required to pay interest on the overdue amount at the rate of 2% per annum above the Bank of England base rate from time to time. Such interest shall accrue on a daily basis from the due date until the date of actual payment of the overdue amount, whether before or after judgment. The defaulting party shall pay the interest together

with the overdue amount. This Clause shall not apply to payments that the non-paying party disputes in good faith.

4.5 If ANL disputes any invoice or other statement of monies due, ANL shall immediately notify the Supplier in writing.

4.6 ANL may, without limiting any other rights or remedies it may have, set off any amounts owed to it by the Supplier against any amounts payable by it to the Supplier.

4.7 All Fees are exclusive of VAT or GST, as applicable.

5. WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES

5.1 Each party to these Terms and Conditions represents and warrants to the other party that:

(a) it has the full corporate right, power and authority to enter into these Terms and Conditions and to perform its obligations hereunder;

(b) the execution of these Terms and Conditions by such party, and the performance by such party of its obligations and duties hereunder, do not and will not violate any agreement to which such party is a party or by which it is otherwise bound;

(c) it shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to the performance by it of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions including but not limited to all applicable laws and regulations concerning bribery and corruption; and

(d) when executed and delivered by such party, these Terms and Conditions will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of such party, enforceable against such party in accordance with its terms.

5.2 The Supplier represents and warrants to ANL that:

(a) it has sufficient rights in the Content to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(b) it has secured all third party permissions and releases necessary to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(c) it will take all reasonable precautions in accordance with generally recognised industry standards not to provide Content that contains any matter which is defamatory, libellous, unlawfully threatening or unlawfully harassing, causes injury, invades privacy rights, or is otherwise actionable in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed;

(d) the Content:

(i) does not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights;

(ii) is created, compiled and published using reasonable care and skill and do not violate any law, statute, ordinance, rule, court order, code of practice or regulation (whether on a regulatory or statutory basis) or generally recognised industry standards, in each case in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed, including but not limited to the Editors’ Code of Practice issued by the Editors’ Code of Practice Committee in the UK, and where relevant the Statement of General Principles issued by the Australian Press Council from time to time; and

(iii) does not contain any viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time bombs, cancel bots or other computer programming routines that are intended to damage, detrimentally interfere with, surreptitiously intercept or expropriate any system, data or personal information;

(e) the only costs to be borne by ANL in respect of the use of the Content in the manner envisaged by these Terms and Conditions are the Fees and (with the exception of the Fees) it shall be responsible for all payments, fees, royalties, charges or otherwise due to all and any third parties arising out of the same; and

(f) the Supplier’s Marks do not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights or other rights of any third party.

5.3 The Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless and keep ANL (and each of its employees, directors and agents) fully and effectively indemnified from and against any and all losses, demands, claims, damages, costs, expenses (including consequential losses and loss of profit, legal costs and expenses and VAT or GST thereon) and liabilities suffered or incurred, directly or indirectly by ANL as a result of any breach by the Supplier of the warranties set out in Clauses 5.1 and 5.2.

5.4 Should any legal proceedings against ANL follow from the publication of any Content, then ANL or any other Affiliate shall be entitled, in its absolute discretion (but shall be under no obligation), to take such action as it shall deem fit, including without limitation, settling or defending such claim. The Supplier shall make itself available to assist ANL in every reasonable way possible and hereby acknowledges and agrees that it shall have no claim against ANL in any way relating to ANL's conduct of any such claim where ANL has used the Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

6. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES AND LIABILITY

6.1 Nothing in this Clause 6 shall limit a party’s liability for death or personal injury.

6.2 The liability of the Supplier shall not be limited in respect of a claim by ANL under Clause 5.3.

6.3 Subject to Clauses 6.1 and 6.2, the liability of ANL to Supplier in contract, tort, negligence, pre-contract or other representations or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or the performance or observance of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions shall be limited in aggregate to the aggregate Fees paid by ANL to the Supplier in the six months immediately preceding the incurring of such loss or damage.

6.4 ANL shall not be liable in contract, tort (including negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent misrepresentations) or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions for:

(a) any economic losses (including, without limitation, loss of revenues, profits, contracts, business or anticipated savings); and

(b) any loss of goodwill or reputation; or

(c) any special, indirect or consequential losses, in any case, whether or not such losses were within the contemplation of the Supplier at the date of these Terms and Conditions, or were suffered or incurred by that party arising out of or in connection with the provisions of these Terms and Conditions or any matter arising under these Terms and Conditions.

The following clause 6.5 does not apply to, and shall have no effect in, Australia:

6.5 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereof, whether imposed by statute or by operation of law or otherwise, that are not expressly stated herein, including without limitation, the implied warranties of satisfactory quality and fitness for a particular purpose.

The following clause 6.6 applies to, and has effect in, Australia only:

6.6 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions and to the extent permitted by law, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereto. To the extent that ANL’s liability for breach of an implied warranty or condition cannot be excluded by law, ANL’s liability will be limited, at ANL’s election, to the resupply of the services or the payment of the costs of the resupply of the services.

6.7 Each provision of this Clause 6 excluding or limiting liability shall be construed separately, applying and surviving even if for any reason one or other of these provisions is held inapplicable or unenforceable in any circumstances and shall remain in force notwithstanding the expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions.

6.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in these Terms and Conditions, if ANL believes that any Content may create liability for ANL, ANL may remove such Content from the Licensed Media as ANL believes, in its sole discretion, is prudent or necessary to minimise or eliminate ANL’s potential liability.

7. POST- TERMINATION RETENTION OF CONTENT

7.1 ANL’s right to use the Content as contemplated hereunder is perpetual and shall survive the termination of these Terms and Conditions.

7.2 On expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions for any reason, all provisions of these Terms and Conditions shall cease to have effect, except that any provision which can reasonably be inferred as continuing, including, but not limited to,

the perpetual rights and licences granted under Clause 2.1, shall continue in full force and effect.

7.3 For the avoidance of doubt, neither the termination (for any reason) nor expiration of these Terms and Conditions shall require ANL to delete or destroy copies of, or remove from transmission or display, all or part of any Licensed Media containing Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

8. GENERAL

8.1 Any notice required to be given under these Terms and Conditions shall be in writing and shall only be deemed to have been duly served if hand delivered or sent by first class recorded delivery within the United Kingdom and outside the United Kingdom by registered airmail and to the party’s registered address and in the case of ANL to Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London, W8 5TT with a copy to contracts@assocnews.co.uk

8.2 Any notice pursuant to Clause 8.1 shall be deemed to have been served:

(a) if hand delivered, at the time of delivery;

(b) if sent by post, two days after posting; and

(c) if sent by airmail, seven days after posting.

8.3 Supplier shall not be entitled to assign the benefit and/or burden of these Terms and Conditions in whole or in part without the ANL’s prior written consent.

8.4 Unless a signed and dated agreement exists between the parties, these Terms and Conditions contain the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter covered and supersede any previous agreements, arrangements, written or oral, between the parties in relation to such matters.

8.5 The parties acknowledge that no standard terms and conditions sent to the Supplier by A&N Media Finance Services Limited (A&N) shall apply to these Terms and Conditions. Similarly, no terms or conditions endorsed upon, delivered with or contained in the Supplier's quotation, acknowledgement or acceptance of order, specification, invoice or similar document shall take effect in relation to the licence of Content under these Terms and Conditions and the Supplier waives any right which it otherwise might have to rely on such terms and conditions.

8.6 The parties acknowledge that ANL enters into these Terms and Conditions for the benefit of itself and each of its Affiliates. Any Affiliate from time to time may for its own benefit enforce in its own right any term of these Terms and Conditions subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the terms of these Terms and Conditions may be varied, amended or modified or these Terms and Conditions may be suspended, cancelled or terminated by agreement in writing between the parties or may be rescinded, in each case without the consent of any such Affiliate. Except as provided in this Clause 8.6, a person who is not a party to these Terms and Conditions has no right under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any terms of

these Terms and Conditions but this Clause 8.6 does not affect a right or remedy of a third party which exists or is available apart from that Act.

8.7 If any provision (or part of a provision) of these Terms and Conditions is found by any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain in force.

8.8 If any invalid, unenforceable or illegal provision would be valid, enforceable or legal if some part of it were deleted, the provision shall apply with whatever modification is necessary to give effect to the commercial intention of the parties.

8.9 Each party shall do, sign, execute and deliver all deeds, documents, instruments and acts reasonably required of it by notice from the other party to carry out and give full effect to these Terms and Conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties under it.

8.10 Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture of any kind between the parties or as constituting either party as the agent of the other party for any purpose whatsoever and neither party shall have the authority or power to bind the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the other party in any way or for any purpose.

8.11 These Terms and Conditions and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) are governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England.

8.12 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

The following clause 8.13 shall have apply to, and have effect, in, Australia only:

8.13 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have non-exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

APPENDIX 1

Invoice format:

The invoice for content licensed under this agreement must at a minimum include or be supplemented with the following information:

· Type of content claimed (video, words, pictures)

· Article IDs or links

· Video IDs for video invoices

· Title of caption

· Fee claimed if exclusively negotiated/applicable

Please note that standard rates apply where exclusive rates have not been agreed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The British Government has said it will be sending 600 troops to Afghanistan to help British nationals flee as the taliban continue to seize territory around the country, with Kandahar and Lashkar Gah - the capital of the southern province of Helmand - the latest to fall to the insurgency.

'I have authorised the deployment of additional military personnel to support the diplomatic presence in Kabul, assist British nationals to leave the country and support the relocation of former Afghan staff who risked their lives serving alongside us,' Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said.

Wallace described the deployment was a 'pre-planned phase' to 'enable the next step of leaving'.

However, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) appeared to contradict this, saying that the additional deployment was 'in light of the increasing violence and rapidly deteriorating security environment in the country'.

Speaking on Friday morning, Wallace said was worried that Afghanistan was spiralling towards a failed state that could become a breeding ground for militants such as al Qaeda which would probably come back.

'I'm absolutely worried that failed states are breeding grounds for those types of people,' the Defence Secretary told Sky. 'al Qaeda will probably come back.'

Wallace said the West had to understand that it could not instantly fix countries such as Afghanistan but should manage situations.

He said that Afghanistan's second biggest city of Kandahar and the town of Lashkar Gah was 'pretty much now in the hands of the Taliban.'

Some 4,000 British nationals are estimated to still be in Afghanistan, according to the Foreign Office. The Sun reported that only a skeleton staff, including ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow, will remain in Kabul.

Troops will aim to secure the city's airport, where both the UK and US embassy will be relocated to, the paper reported.

The announcement from the Government came shortly before the Taliban captured Lashkar Gah, capital of the southern province of Helmand, after two weeks of heavy fighting, according to a police official on Friday.

Government and senior armed forces officials flew by helicopter out of the government's last stronghold in the city at about midnight on Thursday ahead of the capture, said the official, who declined to be identified.

'About 200 ANDSF members, who were left in the governor's compound, with the intervention of elders, surrendered to the Taliban,' said the official, referring to members of the national defence and security forces and tribal elders.

The fall of Lashkar Gah comes after Afghanistan's second and third biggest cites, Kandahar and Herat, fell on Thursday - further squeezing the country's embattled government just weeks before the end of the American military mission there.

The seizure of Kandahar and Herat marks the biggest prizes yet for the Taliban, who have taken 12 of Afghanistan's 34 provincial capitals as part of a week-long blitz.

While Kabul itself isn't directly under threat yet, the losses and the battles elsewhere further tighten the grip of a resurgent Taliban estimated to now hold some two-thirds of the nation.

The United States said on Thursday it will also send 3,000 troops to evacuate nationals from Kabul, as a rapid Taliban advance across Afghanistan saw more than a third of the country's provincial capitals fall in a week.

In this picture taken on August 13, 2021, a Taliban fighter holds a rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) along the roadside in Herat, Afghanistan's third biggest city, after government forces pulled out the day before following weeks of being under siege

In this picture taken on August 13, 2021, Taliban fighters stand on a vehicle along the roadside in Herat. The British Government has said it will be sending 600 troops to Afghanistan to help British nationals flee the country

Pictured: Taliban fighters are pictured in a vehicle along the roadside in Herat, Afghanistan's third biggest city, on Friday

The Taliban has now seized around two thirds of the country from the government in a little over three months

The seizure of Herat - a strategic provincial capital near Kabul - marked the biggest prize yet for the Taliban, which has taken 11 of Afghanistan's 34 provincial capitals as part of a weeklong blitz.

Taliban fighters rushed past the Great Mosque in the historic city - which dates to 500 BC and was once a spoil of Alexander the Great - and seized government buildings.

Witnesses described hearing sporadic gunfire at one government building while the rest of the city fell silent under the insurgents' control.

An AFP correspondent filmed the Taliban flag flying over the police HQ in Herat, while the insurgents tweeted 'the enemy fled... Dozens of military vehicles, weapons and ammunition fell into the hands of the Mujahideen'.

'Right until this afternoon the situation in the city was normal,' Herat resident Masoom Jan told AFP.

'Late afternoon everything changed. They (the Taliban) entered the city in rush. They raised their flags in every corner of the city.

Herat had been under militant attack for two weeks, with one wave blunted by the arrival of warlord Ismail Khan and his forces. But on Thursday afternoon, Taliban fighters broke through the city's defensive lines.

Afghan lawmaker Semin Barekzai also acknowledged the city's fall to the Taliban, saying that some officials there had escaped.

Footage posted online showed heavily armed Taliban fighters rampaging through Herat today after they seized the strategically important third-biggest city in Afghanistan

The Taliban has captured Afghanistan's third biggest city, Herat, further squeezing the country's embattled government just weeks before the end of the American military mission there. Pictured: Taliban fighters pose for a photo in Ghazni on Thursday

Witnesses described hearing sporadic gunfire at one government building while the rest of the city fell silent under the insurgents' control. Pictured: A Taliban fighter poses for a photo in Ghazni on Thursday

Herat had been under militant attack for two weeks, with one wave blunted by the arrival of warlord Ismail Khan and his forces. But on Thursday afternoon, Taliban fighters broke through the city's defensive lines. Pictured: A Taliban fighter poses for a photo in Ghazni on Thursday

News of the capture of Herat came as the United States accused the group of executing Afghan government troops who had surrendered. A Taliban flag is seen flying in a square in the city of Ghazni on Thursday

Timeline of Afghanistan's provincial capitals falling to the Taliban Aug. 6 - ZARANJ - The Taliban take over the city in Nimroz province in the south, the first provincial capital to fall to the insurgents since they stepped up attacks on Afghan forces in early May. Aug. 7 - SHEBERGHAN - The Taliban declare they have captured the entire northern province of Jawzjan, including its capital Sheberghan. Heavy fighting is reported in the city, and government buildings are taken over by the insurgents. Afghan security forces say they are still fighting there. Aug. 8 - SAR-E-PUL - The insurgents take control of Sar-e-Pul, capital of the northern province of the same name. It is the first of three provincial centres to fall on the same day. Aug. 8 - KUNDUZ - Taliban fighters seize control of the northern city of 270,000 people, regarded as a strategic prize as it lies at the gateway to mineral-rich northern provinces and Central Asia. Government forces say they are resisting the insurgents from an army base and the airport. Aug. 8 - TALOQAN - The capital of Takhar province, also in the north, falls to the Taliban in the evening. They free prisoners and force government officials to flee. Aug. 9 - AYBAK - The capital of the northern province of Samangan is overrun by Taliban fighters. Aug. 10 - PUL-E-KHUMRI - The capital of the central province of Baghlan falls to the Taliban, according to residents. Aug. 11 - FAIZABAD - The capital of the northeastern province of Badakhshan is under Taliban control, a provincial council member says. Aug. 12 - GHAZNI - The insurgents take over the city, capital of the province of the same name, a senior security officer says. Aug 12 - FIRUS KOH - The capital of Ghor province, was handed over to the Taliban on Thursday night without a fight, security officials said. AUG 13 - QALA-E-NAW - The Taliban have captured the capital of the northwestern province of Badghis, a security official and the Taliban said. Aug 13 - KANDAHAR - The Taliban have captured Afghanistan's second biggest city of Kandahar, government officials and the Taliban said. Aug 13 - LASHKAR GAH - The Taliban have captured the capital of the southern province of Helmand, police said. Aug 13 - HERAT - Capital of Herat province in the west was under Taliban control after days of clashes, a provincial council member said. Provincial capitals being contested as of Aug. 13: FARAH - Capital of the western province of Farah. PUL-E-ALAM - Capital of Logar province in the east Advertisement

The Taliban has now seized around two thirds of the country from the government in a little over three months.

News of the capture of Herat came as the United States accused the group of executing Afghan government troops who had surrendered.

'We're hearing additional reports of Taliban executions of surrendering Afghan troops,' the US embassy in Kabul tweeted on Thursday. 'Deeply disturbing & could constitute war crimes.'

It was not immediately clear where the new reports had come from. Video taken in Faryab province last month did appear to show Taliban fighters massacring 22 Afghan commandos after they had surrendered, including the son of a prominent general.

Hundreds of government troops have surrendered to the Taliban since fighting escalated in May with the withdrawal of US troops - some without firing a shot, others after being cut off and surrounded with little or no chance of reinforcement or resupply from the government in Kabul.

In an attempt to stop the bloodletting, Afghan diplomats in Qatar said they had approached the Taliban with a deal today that would see the group included in a national unity government in return for halting the fighting.

But such talks have been stalled for years over 'unreasonable Taliban demands to turn the country into an Islamic emirate - and there is little reason to believe they will have softened that stance after their battlefield triumphs.

In a sign of the rapidly worsening situation, the US today told all of its citizens to leave the country as soon as possible by any commercial means. It comes a week after the UK gave its citizens the same advice, and after India pulled its diplomatic staff out.

On Thursday, the US said it would send troops to assist with the evacuation of civilians.

'We are further reducing our civilian footprint in Kabul in light of the evolving security situation,' US State Department spokesman Ned Price told reporters, while noting the embassy would remain open.

Price added the US would also start sending in daily flights to evacuate Afghan interpreters and others who assisted the Americans and are fearful for their lives due to the Taliban's sweeping offensive across Afghanistan.

Earlier on Thursday, it was announced the jihadists had taken the city of Ghazni, located just 80 miles from Kabul and along the main highway to the south. The Taliban already controls the main highway going north, and is tightening the noose on what could soon become Ghazni's last stronghold.

The capture of Ghazni, meanwhile, cuts off a crucial highway linking the Afghan capital with the country's southern provinces, which similarly find themselves under assault as part of an insurgent push some 20 years after US and NATO troops invaded and ousted the Taliban government.

Thousands of people have fled their homes amid fears the Taliban will again impose a brutal, repressive government, all but eliminating women's rights and conducting public amputations, stonings and executions. Peace talks in Qatar remain stalled, though diplomats met throughout the day.

Lashkar Gah, capital of Helmand, appears on the verge of falling to the Islamists after a huge IED explosion destroyed part of the police headquarters on Wednesday and allowed fighters to capture it

The latest US military intelligence assessment suggests Kabul could come under insurgent pressure within 30 days and that, if current trends hold, the Taliban could gain full control of the country within a few months.

The Afghan government may eventually be forced to pull back to defend the capital and just a few other cities in the coming days if the Taliban keeps up its momentum.

The onslaught represents a stunning collapse of Afghan forces and renews questions about where the over $830 billion spent by the US Defense Department on fighting, training those troops, and reconstruction efforts went - especially as Taliban fighters ride on American-made Humvees and pickup trucks with M-16s slung across their shoulders.

Afghan security forces and the government have not responded to repeated questions from journalists over the days of fighting, instead issuing video communiques that downplay the Taliban advance.

The jihadists said Lashkar Gah was briefly captured on Wednesday, but later revised to say that fighting is still ongoing and the city is not fully under their control.

A huge IED exploded near the main police headquarters yesterday, sending a plume of smoke into the sky and partially destroying the outer walls - allowing Taliban fighters to stream inside.

Multiple police officers were killed, the jihadists said, but some government troops managed to escape the slaughter and made it to the governor's office, where they have resumed their fight.

Nasima Niazi, a lawmaker from Helmand, said she believed the Taliban attack killed and wounded security force members, but she had no casualty breakdown.

Another suicide car bombing targeted the provincial prison, but the government still held it, she said.

In Kandahar, the Taliban claimed to have captured the city's prison on Wednesday, freeing 'hundreds' of inmates which including some of its own fighters, who have now rejoined the ranks as reinforcements.

The loss of the jail is an ominous sign for government forces defending the city, which has been besieged for weeks by an assault that shows no sign of letting up.

Afghan President Ashraf Ghani is trying to rally a counteroffensive relying on his country's special forces, the militias of warlords and American airpower ahead of the US and NATO withdrawal at the end of the month.

He was in the city of Mazar-i-Sharif, in the country's traditionally anti-Taliban northern strongholds, on Wednesday in an attempt to rally his men as jihadists approached its outskirts with a major offensive expected soon.

Fighting has displaced hundreds of thousands of Afghan civilians who have fled their homes, with thousands of those heading for the safety of government-held Kabul (pictured)

A woman carries her child through a refugee camp in the Afghan capital of Kabul where thousands are now living after being displaced by fighting elsewhere in the country

Children forced to flee their homes due to fighting in Afghanistan drink tea as they sit in a refugee camp in Kabul

Young boys rest in a refugee camp in Kabul, Afghanistan, after fleeing fighting elsewhere in the country

Makeshift camps are springing up around Kabul to house thousands of refugees who have fled their homes due to fighting

Families rest in a camp in Kabul after they fled their homes due to fear of the Taliban and sought shelter in government areas

With the Afghan air power limited and in disarray, the US Air Force is believed to be carrying out some series of strikes to support Afghan forces.

Aviation tracking data suggested US Air Force B-52 bombers, F-15 fighter jets, drones and other aircraft were involved in the fighting overnight across the country, according to Australia-based security firm The Cavell Group.

It's unclear what casualties the US bombing campaign has caused. The US Air Force's Central Command, based in Qatar, did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday.

The success of the Taliban offensive also calls into question the outcome of long-stalled peace talks in Qatar aimed at moving Afghanistan toward an inclusive interim administration as the West hoped.

Instead, the Taliban appears to be aiming to seize power by force, threatening a split of the country into factional fighting like it did after the Soviet withdrawal in 1989.

In Doha, US envoy Zalmay Khalilzad has met with diplomats from China, Pakistan and Russia in an effort to as a group warn the Taliban they could again be considered international pariahs if they continue their offensive, State Department spokesman Ned Price said.

Khalilzad also plans to meet with Afghan government and Taliban officials as the fighting goes on without a sign of it abating.

The multiple battle fronts have stretched the government's special operations forces - while regular troops have often fled the battlefield - and the violence has pushed thousands of civilians to seek safety in the capital.

A family including women and children rest at a makeshift camp in the Afghan capital of Kabul after fleeing fighting

An internally displaced Afghan family, who fled from Takhar province due to battles between Taliban and Afghan security forces, sits inside their temporary tent at Sara-e-Shamali in Kabul

Internally displaced Afghan families, who fled from Kunduz, Takhar and Baghlan province due to battles between Taliban and Afghan security forces, walk past their temporary tents at Sara-e-Shamali in Kabul
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A swimmer said he was circled by up to 50 sharks in the sea off Dorset while training for his record-breaking bid for the fastest swim around the Isle of Wight.

Oly Rush, 36, set off from the glamorous Sandbanks peninsular in Poole for a midnight training swim last month when he described feeling a shark bump against his leg - just 240ft off the coastline.

Diving underwater while his friend Ashley McPherson, who accompanied him in a kayak, shone a torch, he started taking pictures of the sharks with his phone concealed in a waterproof case.

The plasterer claims dozens of smooth hound sharks, which are common to UK waters and can grow to 4ft in length, circled him for 15 minutes - and even nibbled at his hands and feet, which were not covered by a wet suit.

But rather than swim away, Mr Rush - who made headlines by building his fiancee Tess a £75 hot tub after their wedding was cancelled due to Covid restrictions - basked in the 'fantastic' experience.

Oly Rush, 36, set off from the glamorous Sandbanks peninsular in Poole for a midnight training swim last month when he described feeling a shark bump against his leg - just 240ft off the coastline

The plasterer claims dozens of smooth hound sharks, which are common to UK waters and can grow to 4ft in length, circled him for 15 minutes - and even nibbled at his hands and feet, which were not covered by a wet suit

Oly Rush said he was circled by up to 50 sharks around 240ft off the coast of Dorset

He said: 'Before we set off I had joked about being attacked by sharks and we were laughing about it. It was my first night-time swim, so it was pretty unnerving when I suddenly came up against something in the water.

'When Ashley shone his torch there were all these eyes staring at us - we counted around 50 sharks.

'When I realised what it was I just enjoyed the experience - it was fantastic to see so many sharks in the wild just behaving naturally and in such good health. I felt very privileged.'

He added: 'After about 15 minutes I swam on and left them to it. I think they might have been attracted to a flashing light in my tow float that I swim with.

A swimmer said he was circled by up to 50 sharks in the sea off Dorset while training for his record-breaking bid for the fastest swim around the Isle of Wight

Mr Rush was preparing for a non-stop 24-hour swim around the Isle of Wight which he aims to complete at the end of the month for charity

Mr Rush made headlines by building his fiancee Tess a £75 hot tub after their wedding was cancelled last year due to Covid restrictions

'The sharks' nibbles didn't hurt because they don't have teeth.'

Mr Rush was preparing for a non-stop 24-hour swim around the Isle of Wight which he aims to complete at the end of the month for charity.

He will set off from Seaview, near Ryde, on August 22, and swim 65 miles anti-clockwise around the island - the equivalent of going between Dover and Cap Gris-Nez in France three times.

He is aiming to break the current record of 26 hours set in 2016 by Scott Dawson and raise over £5,000 for charities which clean up plastic on Britain's shores.

Last summer the vegan environmentalist swam the length of the Jurassic Coast and raised over £10,000 for charity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Channel migrants ran from a boat and disappeared into a Ministry of Defence firing range during an active shooting exercise.

Firing was abruptly halted as an emergency search for the missing migrants by Border Force and the Ministry of Defence went on for two hours.

When shooting began again after some were caught, four more migrants were seen hidden in undergrowth on the range in Kent, halting the military exercise for a third hour. It is not known if all the migrants were found, a source told the Mail.

The migrants, who were trying to escape Border Force officers on arrival from France, entered the three-mile long coastal range between Dymchurch and Hythe during ‘active firing’ times – advertised publicly online – from 8.30am to 11pm on Wednesday last week.

Firing was abruptly halted as an emergency search for the missing migrants by Border Force and the Ministry of Defence went on for two hours (stock image)

It is thought they ignored or could not read the numerous warning signs surrounded by red flares and bright lights which warn the public not to go into the range during firing hours.

A local who watched the event unfold said: ‘Any of the migrants could have been killed. They were clearly unaware of the dangers of being on MoD land when firing practice was ongoing.’

On the same day, a record 482 migrants crossed the Channel in 21 boats, according to an official Border Force headcount.

A Home Office spokesman said: ‘In the rare event where beach landings do occur, we use aerial surveillance to guide the rapid deployment of officers.’

The MoD firing range is run under strict security regulations to stop accidents.

A Home Office spokesman said: ‘In the rare event where beach landings do occur, we use aerial surveillance to guide the rapid deployment of officers’ (stock image)

One of the oldest military firing ranges in the country, it is 200 years old and used regularly for training exercises.

The firing range emergency happened on a record day for migrant landings.

At least 482 succeeded in crossing the Channel in 21 boats that day, according to an official Border Force headcount of those apprehended at sea or, later, on land.

It is not known how many other migrants arrived on the Kent coast and ran from beaches without being found

The official Border Force tally brought Channel migrant arrivals to more than 10,000 so far this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A family has paid tribute to a boy killed on his 10th birthday alongside his four-year-old sister in a horror crash on the M1.

Relatives posted on social media in memory of Smaller and Lilly McCann who died near Milton Keynes after their car crashed with a lorry on Monday night.

Their mother's Facebook page showed a photograph of Smaller next to a birthday cake and 10th birthday balloon from earlier in the day.

The heartbreaking news comes as a woman was arrested on suspicion of causing death by dangerous driving and drink-driving.

The 35-year-old from Derby was remanded in custody over the deaths of the brother and sister.

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children (left, Smaller, right, Lilly) on social media

Their mother's Facebook page showed an image of smaller next to a birthday cake and 10th birthday balloon from earlier on Monday

There was also a post of a birthday cake showing it was Smaller's 10th birthday on the day he died

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes.

Another child passenger and the driver of the Astra were injured and taken to hospital but have since been discharged.

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday.

It is not known what relation the arrested women is to the children. She remains in custody.

Investigating officer Sergeant Dominic Mahon, of the serious collision investigation unit at Bicester, Oxfordshire, said: 'My thoughts remain with the family of the two children who sadly died at this extremely difficult time.

'We are appealing for anyone who may have witnessed this collision or anyone who may have dashcam footage that may have captured what happened, or either of the vehicles prior to the collision, to please get in touch.'

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children on social media.

One wrote: 'Life is cruel to take them away from my lovely brother. Best old father in the world, he put them first no matter how hard he hit they were his life please god give him the strength.'

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday (file photo)

The children's aunt said: 'RIP my perfect little niece and nephew. Aunt Elizabeth's old pet Smaller and me little frilly Lilly.

'Love you always and forever and never in this lifetime will you ever be forgotten, always loved.'

A family friend put: 'Mortal divine RIP beautiful angels. So sorry for your loss, their poor mommy and daddy.'

A cousin wrote: 'Can't believe I'm even writing this but rest in peace to my two beautiful little cousins Smaller and Lilly.

'I love you with all my heart. I love you so much this don't even feel real. What has this world come to, hearts in bits. RIP my babies.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Police could don jet suits to fly through the air and catch criminals in the years to come if new technology is considered.

Senior police and government officials got to see a human jet suit in action at a demonstration of emerging science and technology that could help fight crime and terrorism.

In a fictitious scenario at the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) based at Porton Down, near Salisbury, the pilot swooped on a would-be assailant on the run by flying rapidly through the air.

Richard Browning, pictured, demonstrated the Gravity system at the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL) in Porton Down

Mr Browning, pictured, chased down the suspect, using the high tech system in front of senior police officers and Home Office personnel, pictured right

A few seconds later, the suspect, wearing a black and white striped top, was only a few feet ahead of Mr Browning

While it is not thought there are any immediate plans to buy and use the kit, chairman of the National Police Chiefs' Council Martin Hewitt – who was among those in attendance alongside Home Office officials – said the event presented some 'important and exciting opportunities' to 'identify where that could be used in the policing world'.

Mr Hewitt described the system as 'incredibly noisy' and quite 'science-fictiony' but 'really impressive' and as having 'lots of potential'.

He added: 'This is all about utility for police officers to be able to do their job better, do it quicker, keep people safer, keep themselves safe.

'We are fascinated to see how it will develop and if there are any possible uses in a policing environment in years to come.'

The thousand horsepower jet system, called Gravity, was founded by Richard Browning, who is also its test pilot.

He said: 'With the flight capability, we can actually go and outrun … and … contain that threat.'

The jet suit could be particularly useful for catching a 'roving threat', such as over rooftops, in crowded urban spaces or on tricky terrains, according to Mr Browning.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seeing my husband, Rob, walk towards me hand in hand with our four-year-old, Lucy, I wondered what he was thinking bringing our daughter in here.

I was sitting on the hospital bed where I’d spent the past few hours recovering from surgery to abort what would have been her baby brother or sister.

Seeing Lucy’s face break into a smile as she caught sight of me, her pace speeding up to a happy skip, I felt a sharp pang of guilt — the strongest I’d experienced since deciding to end a pregnancy that had been unwanted from the start.

In that moment, I felt as if I’d taken something from Lucy; that I’d robbed her of a significant relationship she was unlikely to ever know might have been.

Clare Simpson, who had an abortion at age 42, shared the reason behind her decision, as it's revealed there has been an increase in women having abortions in their 40s (file image)

I doubt I’m the only woman in her 40s — I was 42 then — to have that kind of thought when looking at the child she chose to keep while thinking of the one she let go. And while I never imagined I’d have a termination so late in life, the new figures that show an increase in women having abortions in their 40s certainly don’t surprise me.

Among women in their 40s, 30 per cent of pregnancies ended in abortion in 2019, according to the Office for National Statistics. While just 20 per cent of all pregnancies ended in abortion ten years ago, by 2019 more than a quarter of pregnant women chose a termination, with increases in every age group.

I got caught out because I wrongly presumed I was too old to get pregnant, which I would expect to be the case for many others — women who, like me, will have had a long list of reasons why a baby at that time in their life felt like a disaster.

I was married when I had my abortion, but I know plenty of women who are divorced or long-term single and dating in their 40s, which is becoming more common. If they should fall pregnant in those circumstances, I can see how that would sway their decision, too.

As I hadn’t said anything to Rob about bringing Lucy with him to collect me from the hospital, I did wonder about his motives.

Was it done to subtly prick my conscience because he hadn’t dared directly to question a decision he might have felt railroaded into agreeing with?

But then, from the minute I’d told Rob I was pregnant, he seemed to completely accept I wouldn’t be staying that way a minute longer than I had to.

There were many reasons why having this baby was a terrible idea, after all.

For starters, my age meant I was struggling to find the endless energy it took to raise the two small children we already had. Our daughter Jess was then seven.

Clare said the biggest factor in her wanting an abortion was the fragility of her relationship with husband Rob at that time (file image)

However much I love our girls, I didn’t love the endless merry-go-round of getting them up, dressed and fed, only to have to do it all again in reverse at the end of every day.

But they were older now, able to do more for themselves, and that would only improve. No wonder the thought of having to deal with a three-year-old’s temper tantrums at 46, or having to parent a stroppy teenager in my late 50s, was horrifying. Having a third child would surely break me.

Also, Lucy had just joined Jess at primary school and, for the first time since we started our family, a huge chunk of my wages as a self-employed accountant wasn’t being swallowed up in nursery fees.

We could afford a holiday again. I’d stopped having to tot up the weekly shop in my head as I put each item in the trolley, scared of going over budget. And we weren’t nudging our overdraft limit each month.

We thought I was now too old to get pregnant

Before we had the girls, Rob and I spent everything we had on expensive holidays, nice clothes and meals out. We had rented up until having Jess, and buying a house at the same time as losing my full-time wage hit our finances hard.

Now things were getting easier in that respect, and I didn’t want to have to take unpaid maternity leave again. I knew that after it, I’d only go back to feeling I had to pay through the nose for the privilege of being a working mother every time the nursery bill was due.

At our age — Rob was also 42 — surely we were entitled to a bit more cash to call our own?

Clare admits she was worried about how she would be able to afford being a single mother of three children if her reconciliation with Rob didn't work out (file image)

But the biggest factor in my wanting an abortion was the fragility of my relationship with Rob at that time.

He had only recently moved back into the family home after six weeks in his brother’s spare room, and it still felt as if our 12-year marriage was on probation. If I kept this baby and the reconciliation didn’t work out, then I’d be the single mother of three children. How the hell would I afford that, financially or emotionally?

What’s more, I wanted my marriage to survive on the basis that Rob and I wished to be together, not because we felt obliged to stick it out because I’d got pregnant again.

As the test turned blue I felt furious. Surely this happens to naive girls — not middleaged couples

Parenthood hadn’t exactly brought out the best in our relationship. Endless rows over how we raised the girls — he thought I spoiled them, while I fought his stricter, no-nonsense approach — combined with mutual resentment at how the other spent their days, had inflicted serious damage.

Rob and I met in our late 20s when we worked at the same Manchester accountancy firm. We waited until our mid-30s to try for a family. Luckily, I got pregnant almost as soon as we started trying.

After Jess was born, I went freelance so I could spend more time with her — which was great at first. But over the years, especially after Lucy came along, I began to feel increasingly put upon.

My job had to fit in around the kids’ day-to-day needs by default. It was down to me to ferry them to playdates and gym classes, no matter how busy work became.

Clare said she and Rob thought the withdrawal method would be safe enough, as she was now too old to get pregnant (file image)

If one of them was sick, and during school holidays, the assumption was always that I would look after them.

With growing resentment, I would watch my husband leave the house each morning, able to focus solely on work for the rest of the day. When he moaned about being exhausted, I’d tell him he didn’t know the meaning of tired.

‘Try working and looking after two kids,’ I’d snap.

Rob thought I should be far more grateful for all the time I got to spend with the girls, seeing flexibility and fun rather than the relentless juggling act I found motherhood to be.

He often complained about the long hours he spent out of the house to provide the security my freelance work could never bring. He said he didn’t feel appreciated for any of it.

Would my girls call me a killer if I told them?

By the time he suggested moving out to give us both some breathing space, our relationship had been reduced to a contest over whose life was the hardest. We were barely speaking and hadn’t had sex for the best part of a year.

But the separation was horrible. I got a taste of what being a single mum really would be like — if I felt put upon before, it was nothing compared with doing it alone.

Then, when Rob spent time on his own with the girls instead of enjoying the break, I obsessed over how awful it would be when he got together with someone else and I’d have to share my children with another woman.

Also, I missed Rob and felt lonely without him. In the absence of the arguments, I was able to consider his feelings and realised his grudges were as valid as mine.

Clare said she began treating being pregnant as if it were an illness that would be cured on a set date once her procedure was booked (file image)

We started talking, without recrimination, about how we could help each other feel valued in the relationship again. Rob moved back in, things improved between us and our sex life got a reboot.

And that’s how I got pregnant. When things were bad I’d had my coil removed, loath to have extra hormones released into my body when we weren’t even having sex.

Then, when Rob came home and we began making love again, we thought using the withdrawal method would be safe enough, as I was now too old to get pregnant. Boy, we got that wrong.

Two months later, I had the same rock-hard, sore breasts and strange metallic taste that were the first symptoms in my previous pregnancies and quietly did a test. When it was positive I felt furious: at myself, at Rob, at our stupidity for getting pregnant by accident. This surely was a mistake made by naive young girls, not middle-aged married couples.

‘Many simply can’t afford to have another' Jonathan Lord is co-chair of the British Society of Abortion Care Providers, medical director of MSI Reproductive Choices and a consultant NHS gynaecologist. He says: There is a preconception that women seeking abortions fit into a particular type and age bracket: young, naive and irresponsible. Anyone working in this sector knows that simply isn’t true. We see many women in their 30s and 40s (far more than in their teens) who desperately don’t want to be pregnant again. People might be surprised to know that the majority already have at least one child. Last year, 58 per cent of women seeking abortion were mothers, a steady rise from the 47 per cent 15 years ago. We find many in that group are making the decision not just for themselves but because it is the best thing for their whole family. After all, having children has become very expensive, meaning some women simply can’t afford to have another baby. Childcare bills alone are often crippling. We also see women in a bad place with their relationship — either it is breaking down, has ended, or their partner is abusive and so they just don’t want to have this baby with that father. Contraception failure is a major factor in unwanted pregnancies — it is rare for women needing an abortion not to have used contraception, but even the best can fail. The Pill has a 9 per cent failure rate and even sterilisation is not 100 per cent effective — so for the unlucky, abortion is a vital backstop. We know that women are choosing smaller families and delaying having children, so it is inevitable that we will see more women in older age groups with contraceptive failures. But whatever makes a woman choose an abortion, it is not an option most take lightly. Afterwards, the word we hear most from patients about how they feel is ‘relief’. I am often asked if my job is demoralising but the opposite is true. I find it fulfilling to help someone in an incredibly distressing situation to find a safe medical solution that will let her move forwards. Advertisement

Everything about it felt wrong. Discovering we were having the girls — both planned — had been lovely, shared experiences: we had watched the tests turn positive together, hugging and kissing, full of excitement at the enormous experience to come.

This time, when Rob walked into the kitchen as I unloaded the dishwasher, I just looked up, my face stained with a day’s tears, and said: ‘I’m pregnant.’

The girls were watching TV in the next room. Rob paused briefly, then came over and hugged me.

‘We’ll do whatever you want,’ he said, then listened quietly as I told him there was no way I could go ahead with having this child. I’ve felt so grateful to him for handling it like that ever since.

He didn’t even question that I had arranged a doctor’s appointment to discuss options for the next day.

I wonder now whether he was so accepting because he was as reluctant to have another baby as I was. Or maybe he didn’t feel he had any rights in this incredibly sad scenario. Either way, I never asked him how he felt about any of it.

I think I didn’t want to risk him saying something that might make this wretched decision any harder for me — if he had questioned it, even once, I would have felt more guilty but no less determined to go ahead with it. That might have been the end of us.

Instead, he sat quietly next to me while I told our GP how devastating to my mental health keeping this baby — I was about nine weeks pregnant — would be.

‘There’s no shame in doing what’s right for you and your family,’ she insisted, as she referred me to a local hospital.

Once we had a date for the procedure, nearly two weeks later, I longed for it to come, desperate for the nausea and insomnia the pregnancy hormones were causing to lift. I began treating being pregnant as if it were an illness that would be cured on a set date. Now I wonder if that was all a coping mechanism, to stop me allowing myself to sink into a pit of guilt.

On the day, a friend took the girls to school and Rob took me to hospital. He stayed until I was taken to the ward for surgery — we talked about the weather, about the girls’ tea, but not about what was happening.

On the ward, I had the same sort of health checks and conversations with the anaesthetist you’d have for any minor operation.

I kept waiting for someone to be horrible to me; for some snide remark that would make me feel I was selfishly abusing precious NHS resources. But no one did.

I fell asleep with a nurse holding my hand and woke with another doing the same, while assuring me everything was all right.

I spent the afternoon on a ward with three other women who I presume had also terminated their pregnancies. None of us spoke to one another.

Instead, we just lay there, our stomachs cramping, quietly waiting to be told we could go home.

I was the last to leave, glad to no longer feel pregnant while wondering if little Lucy, now holding my hand, would ever go through this experience herself. And if so, whether she’d tell me — I certainly had no intention of telling my mum.

Again, I didn’t want to risk sensing her disapproval in case it made me question what I’d done.

I know many people will be appalled that I aborted my baby — some believe all abortion is terribly wrong. But I don’t. I think my reasons were valid and right for me and my family at that time.

Clare said the only proper conversation she and Rob have had about the abortion was on the night itself, after their daughters went to bed (file image)

That said, now, seven years on, I do have the occasional regret.

The thing is, Rob and I did stay together. That time apart, and the realisation that we needed to work harder at our relationship, made us much stronger and happier as a couple.

Sometimes I do catch myself wondering ‘what if’, especially as regards depriving Jess and Lucy of a younger sibling. Would they look at me differently, call me a killer, ask why I kept them and not the other baby, if I confessed?

Of course, my age means that really was our last chance for another child. Had we gone ahead with the pregnancy, I know the baby would have been loved as deeply as the girls are.

We have had some great holidays since my abortion, but it has occurred to me that no amount of financial security can match the love you feel for your child.

Knowing we aborted our baby feels like an unspoken secret between Rob and me. I told two of my closest friends, but that’s all.

Our GP offered counselling but we didn’t take it. It’s not something Rob and I have ever really talked about since. The only proper conversation we had about the abortion was on the night itself, after the girls went to bed.

I asked Rob if he had brought Lucy to the hospital to somehow punish me. He was adamant that wasn’t the case — that Lucy had kicked up such a fuss when he’d tried to leave her at his mum’s, he had simply given in.

I believed him and was glad when he then told me he felt only enormous relief once it was over. In the end, despite the inevitable sadness and guilt, that was also my overriding emotion.

I just hope the other women in their 40s having abortions feel that way, too. Sometimes, it just feels like the only right thing to do.

Names have been changed to protect identities.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous 18 months that has seen their education disrupted due to Covid-19.

Rather than formal exams, which were cancelled due to the pandemic, grades have been decided by teachers' estimates based on previous pieces of work and mock exams over the last year.

While some students will be looking forward to starting at university this autumn after securing their required results, there will be disappointment for others who fail to hit the mark.

But no matter what grades your child receives, it is important to be ready to give them the best advice possible.

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous year that saw their education disrupted due to Covid-19. Here, experts share their advice. Stock image

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education and exam experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm concerned parents and guardians with everything they need to know.

Offering words of encouragement to students receiving their results, Ms Marchant said: 'Great opportunities for next year will be available to you, whatever situation you are in now, and any of them could be the beginning of a great story.

'You might be soon studying an undergraduate degree in your original chosen subject, looking for a new course in Clearing, or exploring apprenticeships to get you set for a stellar career.

'Whether your grades are higher, lower, or different to what you were anticipating, there is a route for you and we're here to help navigate through your choices through straightforward, personalised information and advice.'

Remember: Results aren't everything

Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College, explained the most important thing is to keep the results in perspective - no matter what they are.

'The most important thing to remember is that the grades a student gets at A Level doesn't determine how successful they will be in the future,' she said.

Stuck for what to say? Psychologist shares her advice on how to help Dr Amanda Gummer, parenting expert and child psychologist, said: 'Parents should also remind their children of their strengths outside academic achievements - this could be a talent at art or sport, or perhaps they are a really kind or have shown help or generosity towards others. 'Life is about much more than exams, although this can be hard to realise for both parents and children right now.' Advertisement

'I’ve met so many incredible people who either didn’t get the grades they wanted first time round so tried again and succeeded, or who took a completely different path and achieved great things.

'Whatever happens, there are so many opportunities to take advantage of, so help them stay positive, move forward and keep going.'

Dr Amanda Gummer, parenting expert and child psychologist, said: 'With the challenges children have had to cope with over the last year and a half, they and their parents should just be so proud of what they have achieved.

'It's not a reflection on how hard they've worked or how well their parents have home-schooled them, so my suggestion is for parents to go easy on themselves and their children whatever the results are.

'Parents should offer comfort and reassurance to their children if they don't get the results they were hoping for. It’s important to remind them what other things they are good at. If their results this week affect a child's plans for their next steps, parents should talk through their options once they have had time to get over the initial shock. There is always another route, it just might not be immediately obvious in the moment this week.'

Before your child checks their results...

Find a back up option

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm parents and guardians with everything they need to know. Stock image

Dr Lisette Johnston, ex BBC World News Editor and Head of School at ScreenSpace, said it is worth your child spending some time considering and researching a 'Plan B' before receiving their results - just in case they aren't quite what they are expecting.

'Have a look for similar courses to their chosen one, they might find one with lower entry requirements,' she said.

'For example, if you've applied to do Film or Media Studies why not look at other courses that focus on film or media, such as Film and Screen Business, or for some courses check the requirements comparing a BA with a BSc - this works with courses such as Economics.'

If their heart is set on a particular university then consider getting a head start and registering through clearing to save time if he or she does need to go through the Clearing process.

Be prepared for phone calls

Make sure your child is ready to make Clearing calls today, advised Amy Smith, Associate Director of Admissions and Applicant Experience at Nottingham Trent University.

For parents or guardians, this involves taking a step back.

'It is the student that universities want to speak to, and not their parents or advisers, so ensure they are ready to make the call themselves and have everything to hand that they might need – results, UCAS login, and a pen and paper to note down next steps and make sure they don't miss any important information.'

If they haven't achieved the grades they need...

Still check UCAS Track - you might have been accepted

Ms Smith said: 'First thing to do when a student receives their results is to log on to UCAS Track.

'Even if they have not done as well as they expected in their A levels or other qualifications, the university that they have applied to may have been able to accept them anyway, or made an alternative offer for a related course with lower entry requirements.

'Students shouldn't make any assumptions about the outcomes of their applications until they have logged on to UCAS to find out.'

Find a course through Clearing or Clearing Plus

Clearing

Clearing is how universities and colleges fill any places they still have on their courses. A student can apply for a course using Clearing if they are not already holding an offer from a university or college, and the course still has places.

There are around 30,000 courses to search in Clearing on UCAS.

A student can use Clearing if:

they're applying after 30 June

they didn't receive any offers (or none they wanted to accept)

they didn't meet the conditions of their offers

they've declined their firm place using the 'decline my place' button in Track

The most important thing is to reassure your child that there is no need to feel unsettled or anxious if they find themselves in Clearing.

Last year, a record 58,000 people secured their place in Clearing after applying earlier in the year, and a further 25,000 applied directly into Clearing.

Combined, that means that almost 15 per cent of everyone accepted last autumn took this route.

Clearing Plus

If your child finds themselves in Clearing this year, the UCAS team will personally match them to courses they may be interested in, using what they have shared in their application, and what universities and colleges are looking for in a student.

This information will be fed to the student when they log in to UCAS Track. They will be able to see a personalised list of courses available to you.

If they see a course they are interested in, they can express and interest using Track and the university will be in touch.

Last year, over 20,000 people found their course by using the Clearing Plus service.

Defer a year and take a leap

Jo Caine, MD and specialist HR recruiter for Cathedral Appointments, said: 'Just because your child thought they were going to go to university in 2021 doesn't mean they have to go to university in 2021.

'If their results didn't quite hit the mark this year, they may be able to strike a deal with the university of choice and defer the place for a year. This scenario is more common than you may expect and may be the best decision.'

With a year out, your child can take the time to do something completely different.

'Perhaps travelling the world could be on the agenda or volunteering with a charity – maybe work experience in their chosen field to give them an early step up on the career ladder,' Ms Caine continued. 'The list is endless.'

If their grades are better than expected...

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September. Stock image

'First of all, they should be very proud of themselves,' said Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College.

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September.

There is also the chance to reconsider where and what they study through UCAS Adjustment.

Ms Marchant explained: 'Adjustment is a straightforward process and each year several hundred students use it to secure their place on a different course.

'Follow the instructions within Track, and a student can hold only their confirmed place, while searching for a new one if they've achieved all the grades their conditional firm choice asked for, and at least one higher.

'If they don't find anything new that's suitable, that's ok. They will still have their place at their original firm choice.'

If they've had second thoughts on their original choice...

'Clearing is also available if you've changed your mind on your original choices,' explained Ms Marchant.

If your child had been planning to go to university and isn't sure about what they want to do now, it's important to think about the reasons why they wanted to apply to higher education originally, because they will still be valid in the future.

'This year is clearly different to previous years, but I encourage students to progress as they originally planned. Universities and colleges continue to be incredibly flexible in response to the pandemic and are sharing stories of how they've supported their current students over the past 18 months.'

Ms Smith added: 'Contact the university that they are interested in, to see if there are any spaces available.

'Usually this is done over the phone, and students can look on university websites now to find the clearing hotline numbers that they might want to use on results day.'

It might also be possible to defer for a year to give them more time to consider.

If they are not sure they want to go to university...

Alternate routes

Ms Caine said: 'Nowadays, university isn't the be all and end all of higher education. Holding A-Levels gives you the opportunity to explore numerous pathways into further learning and careers and, more often than not, for a lot less money.

'Apprenticeships, vocational studies, or alternate exam-based qualifications (such as the ACCA qualification for budding Accountants) are all options available.

'Not only are they much more accessible than university, many of these choices will allow students to 'earn while you learn', giving valuable experience and allowing them to have financial independence – a luxury not many students have.'

Interim roles

'It may be that when your child opens their results, university simply isn't on the cards anymore - and that's okay,' said Ms Caine. 'Some of the brightest minds of past generations have been those without a degree.

'But this complete u-turn may mean they're a little unsure of where to go in terms of getting their foot in the door with a career. This is where interim or temporary roles are invaluable. Working for a specific sector for a short period of time will give key industry experience and well as transferrable skills, but without the worry of being tied down for a long time.

'Through short bursts of employment, a student can work out where their passions lie and what career path is perfect for them while also garnering brilliant knowledge and skillsets for their CV.

'And, more often than not, once they've found that perfect role – an interim job has the opportunity to become a permanent placement.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@First time sex with anyone you like can be nerve wracking – but imagine what it's like to sleep with someone who has sex for a living?

I've met lots of people who work in the sex industry as part of my job and know they are no different to you or me generally. But I've never slept with any.

Which got me thinking…what's it really like having sex with someone who is the consummate professional? Are porn stars as good in bed as we all imagine? What's it like sharing a partner sexually?

On the flipside, what happens when people who work in the sex industry tell prospective partners, 'Hey, guess what I do for a living?'

Do most people run…or look aroused? And what happens when love sneaks into the equation as well?

Truth is, you need the same things you need in any good relationship to make something like this work – but in bucketloads. Exemplary communication skills, oceans of trust and a tremendous respect of boundaries.

These types of relationships only work with people who are secure in themselves, not prone to jealousy and able to think outside society's square.

Here – in their own words – are some personal accounts of what it's like to have sex with a sex worker, from both sides of the coin.

All the names have been changed to protect privacy

From dealing with jealousy to partners who don't understand that you're not always in the mood, sex workers have revealed what it's really like to be in a relationship with someone outside the industry (stock image)

THE WEBCAM MODEL

Lexie, 30, is bi-sexual and works as a webcam model on a popular streaming site. She also produces adult content for OnlyFans

'I'm bisexual and, in my experience, find other women to be more accepting and respectful of sex work. I've previously matched with a few guys on Tinder who, after finding out what I do for a living, immediately ask for 'nudes' or free trials to my premium pages which is annoying. People expect that you'd date someone in the industry but every woman I know in it, dates 'civilians' rather than other sex workers.

'I suffered with performance anxiety before I became a sex worker. I had no confidence and would always let my partner take the lead. If anything, sex work has increased my confidence all round and that definitely shows in the bedroom. I've never had any complaints!

'I don't think people are wrong to assume that anyone who works in the sex industry is fantastic in bed. That's 1,000,000 per cent right - we're amazing. But it's not true that we're always ready for action. Away from work, we're just regular people with regular sex drives and we have days where we want to be left alone, too.

'Sex when I am working is different because I never fully get lost in the moment. My mind tends to wander and I'll find myself thinking about the weekly shopping list or what jobs I've got to do on the weekend despite what's happening to my body at the time. When I have sex with my partner, it's completely different. It's just her and I, in that moment. I can fully let myself be vulnerable. It's intense and passionate and amazing.'

Lexie's partner, Julie, is 25. They met on Instagram through Lexie's professional page

Tracey Cox has interviewed sex workers to find out: Are porn stars as good in bed as we all imagine? What's it like sharing a partner sexually? And how do dates react to the job?

'We have the most phenomenal sex life. When she cams online, I get to watch and, if anything, it makes me want her even more. I think her stage performance looks similar to when she's having real orgasms but when we're together, I know she's not performing. Our connection is insane. We both agree that our sex is exceptional and not much tops it.

'It doesn't make me insecure what she does. She chooses me, day in, day out and that makes me feel secure given how wanted she is by others. It's her job to be flirty and desirable.

'If I had trust issues with her feelings towards her clients, I shouldn't be with her. Sex work is a job, regardless of the stigma around it and really should be treated exactly like one. She treats her work as work and I feel I am in a very happy and secure relationship.'

THE ESCORT

Jason, 35, ended a promising relationship with an escort after three months

'I met her in the most innocent circumstances – walking our dogs in the park. She told me on our first date that she was an escort and it did sometimes involve full sex (though you'd be surprised how many clients she had who paid purely for her company and affection).

'I was shocked but also blown away by her. She was funny, great-looking, kind and we hit it off immediately. We talked a lot about her work and I felt reassured enough to give it a go.

'I was terrified the first time we had sex. I couldn't get an erection – I was convinced she was comparing me to all the other men she'd slept with. But she was understanding and I got over it, though I never truly relaxed. I'd find myself watching her, trying to work out if she was really having a good time or pretending to.

'I thought I would be able to handle what she did for a living but I couldn't. It messed with my head. Every time I introduced her to someone, I was terrified they'd guess what she did. She always looked amazing but she definitely dressed way sexier than your average girl.

'I couldn't tell my friends and family what she did – they are all quite traditional and conservative. I didn't take her to meet my parents because I didn't want to lie to them. If I was 22 and not looking for something serious, it would have been different. But I was 34 and looking to settle down.

'I hated letting her down. She is a great girl and she deserves to be loved and respected. I did love her and respect her but I couldn't cope with the stigma. I want to have kids and I don't want the mother of my children to have had that background. She judged herself, as well, and struggled with her self-esteem despite being outwardly confident.

'I felt awful ending it and I do miss her. I know we're socialised to think that when you're in a committed relationship sex is something that should be reserved exclusively for each other. But I can't help it: I want a relationship where sex is something you only do with each other.'

THE PORN STAR

John, 29, is a well-known gay male porn star

'Most of the time potential partners are a little taken back when I tell them what I do. Sex is a big part of a relationship and realising they share you sexually is a big hurdle for people to overcome. One guy really didn't like it and told me I'll end up with STIs and that beauty fades and end up unwanted. Fuelled by all the nasty preconceived ideas of what a porn star/sex worker might be. A few days later, he messaged me to meet up for sex. I blocked him.

'I have definitely had guys place expectations on my sexual performance and expect sex to always be a certain level. One guy wanted to have my porn playing in the background while we had sex. People assume porn stars want crazy, hot sex all the time and that we are always horny. The reality is, after shooting a scene, I come home, eat junk food and watch Netflix.

'Do I have performance anxiety when I'm in bed with someone I really care for? Absolutely! I make sure I tell them they are having sex with me not the porn star and not to expect every time to be a big performance. Sometimes, I set my own standards too high and it makes having sex difficult: I'm too in my head. It's true that porn stars are typically naturally gifted in bed - that's why we're chosen - but we are human and have our off days and off moments.'

Matt, 32, has been John's partner for three years

WHAT MOST MEN MISTAKENLY THINK ABOUT SEX WORKERS I spoke to dozens of women who work in the industry to research this article. Here's their top four pet hates of what (some) men assume about them. They assume we hate what we do 'They presume you can't get a job anywhere else. You're desperate. Why else would you work in the porn industry? Well, there's a good sprinkling of college educated, feminist women who are using the industry to their benefit and actually quite like what they do. Sure, there are parts of the job we don't enjoy but don't assume we're forced into doing what we do.' They date us to show off 'Some guys just want to show off: they see it as a status symbol to date someone in the industry. I went out with one guy who paraded me around like I was a show pony: he'd drop into the conversation what I did as quickly as he could. Lots of guy are up for having a casual relationship with a porn star or sex worker but as a serious, life-long partner? A future mother of their kids? No way.' They assume we'll stop once the relationship becomes serious 'I tell potential partners early on so I'm not wasting time. Some men are so rude, they'll literally screw their faces up and take a step backwards. Other men assume you'll stop the minute you're in a serious relationship. (Are you going to pick up all my bills?) The worst reaction is when they think they can sleep with whoever they want because 'that's what you're doing'. The minute there's shaming, I'm out of there.' They assume we're promiscuous 'Most people make the assumption that if someone is a porn star, they are promiscuous. But it's impossible to generalise. Some porn stars get married and are monogamous; others enjoy having sex with lots of people outside their job. There are more than a few of us that are polyamorous - probably because we already have the skills needed to negotiate feelings and boundaries of having sex with people outside the relationship. But I don't know any who sleep around indiscriminately.' Advertisement

'I wouldn't expect John to have sex after a long day at a video shoot as that's just not fair. He comes home to me at night and if he needs to chill out, that's fine. He has never made me feel like second best and treats me like the person he loves.

'He is even better in bed than you would expect! I can't honestly think of a time when we have not had good sex. The difference is our sex is all about what we choose to do in bed rather than what he's told to do on set. It's not his choice then, but it is when we're together.

'I would never ask John to stop doing what he does. I want him to be happy and he enjoys it and is really good at it. If he chose to stop tomorrow, I would support him but if he wants to continue, I will also support him. That's what a loving relationship is all about.

'My friends and family know what he does and initially they were like, 'Oh! How does that make you feel?'. But now they know him and understand, I think most of my family love him more than they do me.'

THE DOMINATRIX

Sara, 28, is a female professional dominatrix and sex coach

'Dating can be difficult as people overly sexualise you. Even when I've just put 'sex and relationship writer', I've had a lot of men message me, thinking that I have loose knickers. In fact, I'm very difficult to sleep with if I'm becoming romantically involved with someone. I want to get to know their personality a lot before I sleep with them. If I just want to get laid, I might as well get paid for it!

'Jealousy can be a big issue. I had one person say they didn't want someone else's sloppy seconds – I dumped them right then and there. For me, if they can't talk about sex and relationships seriously, then it's not the right relationship for me anyway.

'Sex is different recreationally and I'm very good at compartmentalising. There are rules when it's a work encounter: the limits are strict and I don't budge. I have complete control of the situation and I won't emotionally get involved with my clients.

'Am I better in bed than the average person? I do have skills a lot of individuals don't - and I'm trained, so I can offer things that other can't. But I have terrible moments, like everyone else. I can be clumsy, knock teeth, fall off when on top.

'One of the biggest myths of people who work in the sex industry is that we all take drugs. I can't give blood because of it. But I don't take drugs and many others in the industry don't.'

Sara's partner Jack is 26 and they met on Twitter

'Do I feel like she is performing when we're together? We are all performing to some degree or another. We all perform to different people, friends, family, workmates, people you don't like at work. Do I worry that her feelings towards me aren't genuine? No. Everyone is different.

'It doesn't matter how many people you've slept with, everyone's likes are different. You need to learn your partner's preferences, so while some skills are transferable, you're always going to need to learn what your partner likes, what their hard limits are, and their preferred relationship style.'

Visit traceycox.com for more practical information on sex and relationships, to listen to Tracey's SexTok weekly podcast and to find her product ranges.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Do you know Davison? Did you witness the incident in Plymouth? Email tips@dailymail.com

Advertisement

The gunman who shot and killed five people in Plymouth before turning his gun on himself was named by locals as Jake Davison

The gunman who murdered five people in Plymouth before turning his gun on himself has been named by people in the Devon naval city as Jake Davison with a three-year-old girl feared to be among his victims.

Several witnesses reported that apprentice crane operator Davison, 23, kicked down the door of a house in Biddick Drive and opened fire with a long-barreled gun on the people inside, believed to be members of his family.

He then left the property and is understood to have walked along the cul-de-sac shooting at strangers, exiting the road on to Henderson Place where another person was gunned down.

The killer then went into a park where he allegedly ran into two dog walkers and opened fire in a horrifying incident detectives insist was not terrorism-related.

Davison, a keen bodybuilder who lived on the street where he started the rampage and is believed to have a job in a high-security naval dockyard, then reportedly shot himself dead.

His rampage left the young girl, two women, and two men dead. More were injured.

The mass shooting – the first in Britain involving an 'active gunman' for 11 years - will spark an inquiry into how Davison was able to get the weapon in a country with strict gun controls. There will also be questions for the police about whether he was known to them before the attack. Devon and Cornwall Police are yet to comment on any contact they may have had with him.

Writing on Twitter, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said: 'My thoughts are with the friends and family of those who lost their lives and with all those affected by the tragic incident in Plymouth last night. I thank the emergency services for their response.'

Witnesses described seeing the gunman dressed in black and grey and kicking down the door of a semi-detached house and opening fire in the Keyham area of the city just after 6pm yesterday.

He was carrying a long-barreled gun and was seen fleeing to the rear of the property and into a park where he allegedly ran into the two dog walkers and opened fire.

The area of the naval port city where the killings took place was put in lockdown as emergency response teams raced to the scene.

Local MPs urged residents to 'remain calm' and stay indoors as they awaited more information, adding that it was a 'grim day for our city and our community'.

The incident was so serious that Home Secretary Priti Patel was given regular updates. Security sources said it was not being treated as a terror incident.

Sharron Turner, 57, who lives behind the scene of the shooting, said that a gunman had 'kicked in' the front door of a semi-detached house before shooting a young mother and her daughter, who was aged about three.

'We heard a number of loud bangs which I said sounded like gunshots,' Miss Turner told The Times. 'Then he ran into the park and there were further shots. I heard someone say he had shot his brother.'

Police forensic officers at the scene in Biddick Drive, Plymouth today where five people were murdered by a gunman who turned the weapon on himself

A police investigator carries a tripod and evidence markers in Royal Navy Avenue, where the rampage continued after Biddick Drive, and then into Henderson Place (right) where more shots were fired

The Hazardous Area Response Unit (HART), National Police Air Service and around three air ambulances race to the scene in North Prospect, Plymouth, after the gunman opened fire in Biddick Drive just after 6pm

Around three air ambulances raced to the scene in North Prospect, Plymouth, last night after the 'serious' incident began to unfold

Biddick Drive, a once sleepy residential cul-de-sac in Plymouth that became the scene of chaos yesterday evening after a gunman opened fire and killed five people

A cordon is put in place as police officer attend the scene where a gunman opened fire and killed at least five people

Armed police descended upon the scene in Plymouth last night as locals were urged by MPs to stay indoors

An air ambulance lands near the scene where the shooter went on a murderous rampage in Plymouth last night, killing at least five people at random

After the attack the gunman escaped through a park behind the house in Northdown Crescent and shot two dog walkers, she claimed.

A second witness wrote: 'I've just had to emergency drive out of my house. There's [someone] on the rampage in my cul de sac with a real gun and he's already shot two people. They are laying on the ground. One is dead, blood everywhere. I'm shaking like a leaf.'

Robert Pinkerton, 54, told the BBC he had 'bumped into a bloke with a shotgun' after he heard a 'loud bang'.

Mr Pinkerton then saw an injured woman in the doorway of a hairdressers and witnessed a man trying to give her medical attention.

While local resident Michelle Abdullah wrote said: 'Sad day, a man shot his whole family then went on a random shoot out. Police right outside my house. Three air ambulances at the park out my back garden.'

Last night a video posted on social media showed a body covered in a sheet lying on a pavement as an armed policeman stood close by.

One witness told MailOnline: 'I was at my mate's house after going to the gym. We were in his kitchen making some sandwiches and suddenly we heard shouting followed by screaming.

'We really thought nothing of it as the area can be noisy sometimes. We soon after heard what we thought was a firework going off so then walked towards the front off the house.

'We then saw the body of the gunman and called 999.'

And resident, John, said: 'I heard the air ambulance helicopters, and two of them landed in the playing field behind us.

'Then we could hear police cars screeching and we saw armed response officers running up the hill, carrying guns. And loads of ambulances arrived. I went out to check that people were all right and to ask if there was anything we could do, and the Police Community Support Officers told everyone to get back indoors.

'Then we saw the ambulances take people away. It all seemed to be happening at the man's family home, I think. People are saying that the man has killed himself. He's only a young guy, late teens or early 20s.'

Last night, armed police, the Hazardous Area Response Unit (HART), National Police Air Service and around three air ambulances raced to the scene of the 'serious and tragic incident following reports of 'loud bangs' and 'gun shots' just after 6pm.

In the aftermath of the attack, Johnny Mercer, the Conservative MP for Plymouth Moor View, sought to reassure his constituents on Twitter, saying the incident was 'not terror-related' and the suspect involved was not 'on the run'.

As the scenes continue to unfold, local Labour MP Luke Pollard also tweeted: 'Really worrying news coming out of Keyham in Plymouth. Please can everyone stay safe, stay indoors and follow police advice.'

He added: 'Awaiting confirmation of number of victims but this looks like a very grim day for our city and our community.

'Please can I ask that you think of the families and our community and not share any images or videos of any of the victims. #keyham.'

And Home Secretary Priti Patel said: 'The incident in Plymouth is shocking and my thoughts are with those affected.I have spoken to the Chief Constable and offered my full support.

'I urge everyone to remain calm, follow police advice and allow our emergency services to get on with their jobs.'

Meanwhile Labour leader Keir Starmer said: 'There's much we don't know about the shocking events in Plymouth.

'However it's clear tragedy has hit Keyham. My thoughts are with the families and neighbours of those caught up in this nightmare. I pay tribute to our emergency services who ran towards events we'd all run from. '

Elsewhere, shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds tweeted: 'Truly terrible news. Thinking of the families and friends of those who have died and those injured. Thank you to our remarkable emergency services.

'I've been in contact with local representatives to express my support for the whole community of Plymouth on this awful evening.'

And Plymouth Argyle FC tweeted: 'Our hearts go out to victims of tonight's tragic incident in our city, alongside their families, friends, and the wider Plymouth community.'

Tonight, London Mayor Sadiq Khan wrote: 'Deeply saddened by the loss of life in Plymouth this evening. My thoughts and prayers are with all those affected and the emergency service workers responding to this tragic incident.'

Emergency crews, including armed police, arrive to the scene following reports of multiple shootings in the Keyham area

Officers stand at the scene of the major incident in Plymouth as a nearby school sports centre is closed down and people are told to stay indoors

Police remain at the scene after the serious firearms incident in the Keyham area of Plymouth last night

Emergency services arrive to the the scene following a shooting in Keyham in Plymouth, which saw a gunman kill five people

Forensic teams carry out their investigations after the gunman went on a murderous rampage in Plymouth last night

The once quiet cul-de-sac where the killings took place was placed under lockdown as emergency response teams raced to the scene

A police officer patrols the area with a sniffer dog as emergency crews arrive to Biddick Drive in North Prospect just after 6pm

Police put a tent up in the area and a cordons is put in place around a block of flats to prevent pedestrians accessing the area

The Hazardous Area Response Unit (HART), National Police Air Service and paramedics are at the scene

Members of the force and forensic teams descend upon the area as the region was placed under lockdown as emergency responded to the shooting

Police officer and emergency crews at the scene where the gunman who went on a shooting spree in Plymouth last night killed five people

Forensic teams carry out their investigations after the gunman went on a shooting spree in Plymouth last night

Elsewhere Alison Hernandez, police and crime commissioner for the area, said: 'Aware of tonight's tragic incident in Plymouth. Thank you to Devon and Cornwall Police for dealing with the situation. Thoughts with those directly affected and the City of Plymouth tonight.'

Devon and Cornwall Police said: 'Police were called to a serious firearms incident in Biddick Drive, in the Keyham area of Plymouth at around 6.10pm today [Thursday 12 August].

'Officers and ambulance staff attended the scene.

'Following attendance at the scene, two females and two males were deceased at the scene. A further male, believed to be the offender, was also deceased at the scene. All are believed to have died from gunshot wounds.

'Another female treated at the scene for gunshot wounds, died a short time later in hospital.

'All of the next of kin of the deceased have been located and informed by Devon & Cornwall Police officers.

'Devon & Cornwall Police would stress this is not a terrorism related incident.

'The area has been cordoned off and police are not looking for anyone else in connection with the incident.

'Investigations are continuing into the incident and disruption to the road network in the Keyham will remain throughout the night.

'Police continue to ask any members of the public with mobile phone footage of the immediate aftermath of the incident not to post this on social media platforms and to respect those families who have lost loved ones this evening.'

Earlier today, a South Western Ambulance Service spokesman said: 'We were called at 6.12pm to an ongoing incident in Plymouth.

'We responded to the incident with a significant number of resources, including Hazardous Area Response Teams (HART), multiple ambulances, air ambulances, multiple doctors and senior paramedics. We will provide an update here in due course.'

Emergency crews were called to the area just after 6pm following reports of a 'serious and tragic' incident

A nearby school sports centre has been closed down and people are being told to stay indoors by police

A cordon remains in place on the road as officer and ambulance crew members remain at the scene of the attack

A nearby school sports centre has been closed down and people are being told to stay indoors by police.

Cordons have also been put in place around a block of flats to prevent pedestrians accessing the area.

And Drake Circus Shopping Centre in Plymouth has also been evacuated as a precaution.

The last active shooter incident was the Cumbria shootings on June 2, 2010, when taxi driver Derrick Bird went on the rampage in Whitehaven and the surrounding countryside, killing 12 people and injuring 11.

Other mass killings in the UK since then have involved explosives or knife attacks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Children as young as four will be able to change their gender at school without their parents’ consent under guidance introduced in Scotland.

Any pupil who decides they want to switch gender must be supported and listened to in school following the Scottish Government advice.

The guidance applies in primary schools, where the youngest children are only four or five, because ‘recognition and development of gender identity can occur at a young age’.

It also tells teachers not to question a child who says they want to transition to live as a boy or a girl - and instead ask for their new name and pronouns.

Scottish education secretary Shirley-Anne Somerville said: ‘This guidance outlines how schools can support transgender young people while ensuring that the rights of all pupils are fully respected'

Schools have been told they do not have to inform parents if a pupil informs them they wish to change gender

Primary and secondary schools have also been told to put books featuring transgender people on the curriculum, allow pupils to choose which changing room or toilets to use, and consider introducing a gender neutral uniform.

But the guidance was branded ‘shocking’ and led to concerns that children are being allowed to make life-changing decisions at too young an age.

The advice says: ‘Some young people are exploring their gender identity in primary school settings. Primary schools need to be able to meet the needs of these young people to ensure they have a safe, inclusive and respectful environment in which to learn.’

A section on ‘changing name and recorded sex’ says children simply need to tell others informally that they want to use a different name, and that they don’t need to record this formally on their official school record. Advice to school staff on what to do if a child wants to discuss their gender includes asking ‘what name and pronoun you should use to address them’.

It also says that they should ask if their family are aware they are considering their gender identity – but does not suggest the teacher should contact them.

The guidance document also states that no Scottish law compels people to use the toilets that correspond to the gender they were assigned at birth.

Marion Calder, director of the For Women Scotland campaign group, said: ‘To be transgender you have to have a diagnosis of gender dysphoria. What are they thinking? Parents will be very concerned to be reading this document.’

Scottish education secretary Shirley-Anne Somerville said: ‘This guidance outlines how schools can support transgender young people while ensuring that the rights of all pupils are fully respected.

‘It provides schools with practical suggestions. The guidance is not prescriptive and does not promote transitioning.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The security guard arrested on suspicion of spying at the British embassy is an oddball fan of military and Nazi history with two Russian flags and at least three Soviet military caps in his flat.

The 57-year-old Briton - named locally as David Smith, who is overweight and drives a Ford Fiesta - lives in a rented one-bedroom ground floor flat in the city of Potsdam south west of Berlin.

Bookshelves in his flat visible from the window outside are crammed with Russian language books and military histories including two books about Hitler's feared SS 12th Panzer Division which committed war crimes in World War Two.

His other books include the spy novel A Murder of Quality written by John Le Carre in 1962, and David Icke's self-published book The Trigger which is full of conspiracy theories.

A large Russian red, white and blue flag on a pole could be seen today propped up in the corner of Mr Smith's living room with a smaller one on the floor beside a TV.

First images have emerged revealing the inside of suspected Kremlin spy David Smith's flat in Potsdam, Germany, which features a large Russian flag in the corner (left)

There is a Soviet officer's hat on top of his book case, with Russian-themed memorabilia on the top shelf along with a badge of the Ukrainian special police

Several Cyrillic-language books adorn the shelves, alongside insignia of the Russian Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific fleets

On another book shelf close to the window are tomes on First World War history and Red Partisan, which is about a Soviet resistance fighter behind Nazi lines during World War Two

Soviet military caps showing hammer and sickle emblems on a red star surrounded by a wreath were also visible from the window.

One was sitting on the head of a cuddly toy Rottweiler dog on the floor while another sat proudly on display on top of a book shelf and a third was on his cream coloured leather sofa.

Other memorabilia adorning the flat includes insignias of the Russian Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific fleets, and a Russian military insignia - not fully visible - which partially reads 'technical battalion'.

But the image of Smith as military-obsessed is undercut by a number of incongruous items and books - including three volumes on embroidery.

His flat also contains a collection of teddy bears and other cuddly stuffed animals, while a PlayStation sits on the floor alongside floral ornaments.

Many of the books on his shelves are also related to psychology, including volumes entitled 'Guide to the Brain', 'Psychological Influence', 'Open subconscious' and two books by SIgmund Freud.

Visible on a shelf close to the window are books on First World War history, several texts in German, and one book called Red Partisan - the memoir of a Soviet resistance fighter behind Nazi lines during the Second World War.

One book title reads: 'Sex. The Complete Illustrated Guide.'

Other titles on his book shelves included A Military History of Germany, Für Volk and Führer: The Memoir of a Veteran of the 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte, The Somme, Dieppe 1942, Berlin by acclaimed historian Antony Beevor, Fighters and Bombers, Eastern Front Combat, For The Homeland, Frontline Ukraine, and Red Road from Stalingrad.

Another book about Operation Bodenplatte told of the last ditch attempt by the Luftwaffe to attack Allied air forces in liberated Europe on January 1, 1945.

There was also a biography of Reinhard Heydrich, the high-ranking German SS and police official who was a principal architect of the Holocaust.

Another shelf seemed devoted to books on philosophy and psychology, alongside a framed insignia of Berkut, Ukraine’s special police force.

Lower shelves included books by Sigmund Freud, three books about embroidery and cross stitching and the framed insignias of Russia’s Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific fleets.

A second Soviet military cap, emblazoned with the Communist hammer and sickle symbol, sits on the head of a stuffed Rottweiler dog

A coffee mug bearing the Russia flag was seen sitting on a shelf at Smith's apartment

Items on a side table in the living room include Smith's car keys and wallet

On the floor of the apartment is a PlayStation, alongside a couple of floral ornaments

The German newspaper Bild reported that Mr Smith drives a silver Ford Fiesta which was today still parked in a reserved parking place around 15 yards from the door to his block.

The car had a teddy bear on the front passenger seat next to a first aid kit which is a legal requirement for all motorists to have in their cars in Germany.

There was also a pair of black leather gloves on the back seat together with what appeared to be cleaning spray and a bottle of screenwash.

The Bild article joked about how the hatchback vehicle was very different from the Aston Martin sports cars favoured by Britain’s fictional spy James Bond.

It described Mr Smith as living in an ‘anonymous, modern new building’. The article added: ‘No Aston Martin is parked in front of it, but the spy's Ford Fiesta.’

A young mother called Julia who lives nearby said: ‘There are a lot of families here. It is a lovely place to live. There are lots of open spaces and plenty of playgrounds for children.’

A nanny called Irma who works in the area, said: ‘This is a very peaceful and quiet neighbourhood. I feel safe here. It is very different to the centre of Berlin.’

German prosecutors announced yesterday that they had detained a man named only as ‘David S’ on suspicion of spying for Russian since at least November last year.

The Federal Prosecutor's Office said: ‘On at least one occasion he forwarded documents obtained in the course of his professional activities to a representative of a Russian intelligence service.

‘In return for providing information, the accused received cash in a previously unknown amount.’

Smith is believed to have been arrested after being kept under round-the-clock surveillance by British and German security services.

It is believed that he had little access to secure computers inside the embassy and his duties were largely limited to processing visitors and security patrols.

But there are fears that his role may have given him the perfect cover to move through most areas of the building unchallenged.

Elsewhere he had a desktop computer and several loose papers on a table in his apartment in the quiet tree-lined street of Kiepenheuerallee, Potsdam.

Notes in front of his computer are difficult to decipher but one says: 'DOCS FOR MEETING AT WEEKEND' while another says 'USING WIFI’

There is another miniature Russian flag next to the computer, while there is a paper shredder on the floor of his office

Smith also appears to have an interest in collecting teddy bears and cuddly animal toys

His neighbours, who described him as being bald and stocky and around 5ft 9ins tall, were baffled to hear of his arrest for alleged spying and insisted that he lived a quiet life.

His flat - which is believed to cost around 1,200 euros a month to rent - is in a four storey block and has its own ground floor terrace overlooking two tram lines.

Outside the front door of the flat is a communal table tennis table, but neighbours said they had not seen him using it.

One said: 'He is a very nice man, but he does not have a lot to do with people around here. I just exchange greetings when I see him.

'He is always pleasant, and says, 'Good Morning.' I can't really say how long he has lived here. I really don't know. I did not realise he worked at the British Embassy.

'People here are very private and do not ask each other's business.'

Bild newspaper reported that police arrested Mr Smith at his flat at around 11pm on Tuesday and stayed searching the apartment until 4am.

There were no officers at the flat today and there was no sign that it had earlier been at the centre of police activity.

Mr Smith's surname was written on his doorbell beside his front door and on the intercom buzzer for visitors to gain entry to his block.

The residents of the other 11 flats appear in the block all appear to be German.

The living room patio windows of Mr Smith's flat are full of pot plants, and there are stick-on pictures of daffodils on another window at the property.

Most of the blinds and shutters at the flat were drawn today, but journalists were able to peer through a gap below a patterned frosted glass screen over one window.

Above the kitchen door is more memorabilia including a miniature Jack the Ripper pub sign

On the back seat of his car were a pair of black leather gloves and various cleaning products

A Ford Fiesta that is thought to belong to Smith is seen parked next to a police van, with neighbours saying officers spent hours searching his flat yesterday

Little evidence of the police presence was apparent on Thursday, with neighbours saying they barely knew Smith and had no idea he worked for the embassy

Not exactly James Bond! Short, fat, bald security guard with 'extreme right-wing views' - who drives a Ford Fiesta not an Aston Martin - is revealed as man accused of being Kremlin spy in UK's Berlin embassy

Details of the man at the centre of an international espionage scandal are beginning to emerge, with neighbours' descriptions suggesting he's no James Bond.

David Smith, a security guard at the British Embassy in Berlin, is accused of passing on classified terrorism documents to a Russian spy, it emerged last night.

In echoes of Cold War espionage, Smith received a bundle of cash in return for providing highly sensitive reports to a Kremlin agent, it is alleged.

Smith, 57, was charged in Germany yesterday for handing over information obtained from the British embassy in Berlin.

A British embassy official is accused of passing on classified terrorism documents to a Russian spy, it emerged last night. Pictured: A still from Steven Spielberg's 2015 Cold War thriller Bridge of Spies

Prosecutors and intelligence services have evidence that David Smith was passing secrets to the Kremlin from November last year – but suspect this could have been happening for months before this date. Pictured: Russian President Vladimir Putin (left) during a meeting

The purported spy worked as a security guard inside the building and would have had access to the counter-terrorism tactics which would be deployed in the event of an attack.

Such details would be invaluable to enemy agents looking for weaknesses at an embassy in a city where Russian espionage is rife.

Smith was monitored by MI5, Scotland Yard and German intelligence for months before he was arrested at his apartment in Potsdam, a city near to Berlin, on Tuesday afternoon.

Smith's neighbours told Germany's Bild newspaper that he was a bald, stocky man of about 5ft 7 who left home early and returned late each day. He drives a Ford Fiesta, which was also searched by police.

They said that he had lived with a woman in the Potsdam apartment for some years, but they had not seen her recently.

There are fears Smith may have been susceptible to being blackmailed by agents working for Putin due to his alleged 'extreme right-wing views', The Sun reported.

Following his arrest, Smith was charged with 'activity as an agent for a foreign secret service' yesterday and appeared before a judge at the Federal Court of Justice in the south-western city of Karlsruhe. He was remanded in custody last night.

In a statement, the federal prosecutor's office said: 'On at least one occasion he conveyed documents that he had obtained in the course of his professional activities to a representative of a Russian intelligence service. In return for this information the suspect received a currently unknown quantity of cash.'

Prosecutors and intelligence services have evidence that Smith was passing secrets to the Kremlin from November last year – but suspect this could have been happening for months before this date.

Smith's alleged spying took place during a period of heightened tension between Russia and the West, which was inflamed by the poisoning of Vladimir Putin critic Alexei Navalny last August.

Navalny was treated in a hospital in Berlin after he was poisoned with Novichok – the same nerve agent used during the Salisbury poisonings in 2018.

The British embassy 'spy' could have done a 'lot of damage', says intelligence expert It has been revealed that the British man arrested in Germany on suspicion of spying for Russia and handing over documents for cash while working at the British Embassy in Berlin was a security guard. The 57-year-old suspect, identified as David Smith, was arrested on Tuesday in Potsdam, west of Berlin, based on cooperative investigations by German and British authorities. As a security guard at the British embassy, Smith would have more access than other members of staff, Dr Victor Madeira, author of Britannia and the Bear: the Anglo-Russian intelligence wars, told MailOnline. For instance, Smith could have access to security patrol schedules, how to arm and disarm alarm systems as well as emergency contact numbers for all staff, Dr Madeira said. 'He could potentially even have access to classified areas, depending on his own security clearance,' Dr Madeira, a Contributing Author at The Cambridge Security Initiative, told MailOnline. German online magazine Focus Online reported that he provided the Russians with documents containing information on counterterrorism. Dr Madeira, speaking about those reports, said: 'The reports that Smith passed on counter-terrorism documents suggests that Moscow could be trying see how much the UK is helping Germany tackle Russian assassinations on their soil. 'Russia could also be trying to find out what the UK and Germany may be discussing about counter-terrorism more generally, like the impact on Europe of the unrest in Afghanistan.' He explained: 'The information doesn't have to be specific to Russian activities in Germany to be of great interest to Moscow - information can be weaponised for influence operations of every kind.' Before his arrest, Smith worked as a local staff member, otherwise known as a 'local hire' at the embassy, which is a scheme available for UK citizens who want to work in Germany. It means that he was not a diplomat and therefore he does not have diplomatic immunity. Foreign embassies in most countries rely in part on these 'local hires' to fill a variety of roles. The positions are often advertised on generic job search websites in the host country - and the identity of the employer is kept vague until applicants pass an initial screening process. Local hire positions in embassies are usually in fields such as media affairs, maintenance or visa processing which do not usually give access to classified information - or if they were, it would be limited. But Smith could have been able to provide valuable information to Russia, such as WiFi passwords and staff lists including their addresses and mobile phones, Dr Madeira said. He could also have been able to form profiles of diplomats and MI6 officers stationed in Berlin. Dr Madeira said 'one of the biggest problems we have in the West is that we confuse seniority with access'. He said: 'Just because someone is 'just' a driver, 'just' a messenger, is utterly irrelevant. Just because someone is a local hire and therefore not formally a foreign service officer or a diplomat, that doesn't mean that the person couldn't have done a lot of damage. 'Anything - especially with cyber being so critical nowadays - from WiFi passwords, any sort of administrative lists like staff lists, addresses, mobile phones could be accessible. That would make it easier for the Russian intelligence services to track those mobile phones. 'They would be able to identify who is a genuine diplomat and who is not.' Dr Madeira warned: 'There's a real range of damage that a person like this could do. Let's not confuse seniority, title or status with access. It's incredible what someone who is teed up to look for certain things can pick up. 'It's a well-established, tried and tested method. Pretty much everyone does it. Every country will try and recruit someone working in a hostile embassy.' Advertisement

Last night British security sources played down the possibility of finding any direct link between Smith's alleged activities and the poisoning of Navalny.

But the spying case is seen as part of a growing attempt by Russian spies to infiltrate Western intelligence operations in recent months.

Stung by the criticism over their treatment of Navalny – as well as the ongoing row over Ukraine – the Kremlin is known to have diverted intelligence resources to undermining Nato members.

Thomas Haldenwang head of Germany's domestic intelligence service, said Russian espionage is now as active as it had been during the Cold War.

He added: 'Methods are becoming rougher and the means more brutal.' Questions will undoubtedly be raised about the vetting procedures at the British embassy in Berlin, which is still seen by Moscow as a prime intelligence target.

Smith, who was referred to as 'David S' by German officials, was understood to have been hired directly by the embassy – rather than through the Foreign Office in London.

The suspect was understood to have a permanent role inside the building – which sits just 500 yards from the Russian embassy in Berlin.

His role would have allowed him to obtain the shift patterns of senior diplomats and logs showing him who was inside the embassy at any given time.

As a security guard, he had information about the physical security of the building and measures taken to protect staff.

He would have been able to get hold of detailed plans of the building's layout and its emergency exits.

Smith may also have been able to provide profiles of senior diplomats and their families, and possibly even names of MI6 officers stationed in the city.

Even seemingly mundane information can help a foreign intelligence service build a picture of an adversary and provide a way in to sensitive data.

After being monitored for months by security services, a warrant for Smith's arrest was secretly issued on Wednesday last week. Following his arrest, agents have started searching his home in a post-war apartment block near Sanssouci, the old Prussian royal palace.

His office inside the embassy is also being examined.

The Potsdam area where Smith lives is home to politicians and millionaires, as well as former Stasi generals.

The Germans have evidence of what the documents Smith allegedly sold, but the extent of it will not be clear until forensic searches are complete.

He does not have diplomatic immunity and because of this he is expected to face trial in Germany.

Yesterday, Smith appeared at the Federal Court of Justice in Karlsruhe, Germany.

It came as officials in Britain suggested Smith would be 'better off staying in Germany' than being extradited to the UK due to the outdated terms of the Official Secrets Act.

A source told The Times: 'It is extremely difficult to get prosecutions over the line in the UK. He might be better off staying in Germany.

'They have strong powers there to keep suspects remanded in custody much longer.'

Last year then head of MI5 Sir Andrew Parker also said the 1911 Official Secrets Act was 'dusty and largely ineffective' amid calls for the act to be reformed, and Dame Cressida Dick said the Official Secrets Act should be 'firmed up'.

According to the act, secret material must be a 'sketch, plan, model, note or secret official password and code word' rather than a document. This means Smith may not meet the criteria for prosecution if extradited to the UK.

At yesterday's pre-trial hearing, which was conducted in private, a judge ordered Smith into 'pre-trial detention'.

This is used in Germany when a suspect is accused of committing a serious criminal offence. It can last up to a maximum of six months before it is automatically reviewed by judges. A source told the Daily Mail last night: 'It is really hard to say how much time the investigation will take because we need to get enough evidence for a trial.

'But given the nature of the case, there is a real need to move quickly.'

Speaking about the allegations in Berlin yesterday, Germany's foreign minister Heiko Maas said: 'We take the information that the detained person's intelligence activity was carried out on behalf of a Russian intelligence agency extremely seriously.

'Spying on a close ally on German soil is absolutely unacceptable and we are in full solidarity with our British friends.'

Labour MP Chris Bryant, the chairman of the all-party parliamentary Russia group, told the Daily Telegraph the British Government 'must review the security of all contractors at UK embassies as a matter of urgency'.

He described the arrest as potentially 'one of the most serious security breaches at a UK embassy for many years'.

In a statement, the UK Home Office said: 'An individual who was contracted to work for the Government was arrested yesterday by the German authorities. It would not be appropriate to comment further as there is an ongoing police investigation.'

Meanwhile, Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, said the allegations potentially amounted to a 'serious breach of UK national security'.

The spying case is seen as part of a growing attempt by Russian spies to infiltrate Western intelligence operations in recent months. Pictured: Jill Gallard, Ambassador of the United Kingdom to Germany

So why haven't we filled the post of security minister?, asks Labour By David Barrett, Home Affairs Correspondent Labour has said the case in Berlin raises 'questions' about the Prime Minister's failure to appoint a new security minister. The post has been vacant for more than a month after James Brokenshire stepped down to focus on his cancer recovery. Labour's security spokesman Conor McGinn said it 'beggars belief' that the role has yet to be filled five weeks on. But his criticisms were dismissed as 'laughable' by a Home Office source. Mr McGinn said: 'Britain's national security is under threat 24 hours a day, seven days a week, but the UK has not had a security minister in position for over a month. 'Following today's events, it raises questions about who in Government is overseeing the most serious task of keeping the British public safe and secure. It beggars belief that the Prime Minister has failed to appoint a replacement for James Brokenshire. 'He's either forgotten or doesn't think it's important. This is just the latest security lapse from a Prime Minister and Government that can't be trusted with national security.' A Home Office source said: 'The Home Secretary is responsible for matters of security. 'For the party that tried to make Jeremy Corbyn prime minister to suggest we are lax on security matters is laughable.' Mr Brokenshire was first diagnosed with early-stage lung cancer in December 2017 when he was Northern Ireland Secretary. The politician – who has never smoked – said he went public with his diagnosis in a bid to end the stigma of lung cancer sufferers. As security minister in January this year he took a leave of absence to prepare for further cancer treatment, but resigned the post on July 7, telling Boris Johnson his recovery was taking 'longer than anticipated'. Advertisement

He added: 'All measures must now be taken – urgently – to establish exactly what information has been passed to Russian intelligence and the impact this has on the UK, as well as that of our allies.'

And Conservative Chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, Tom Tugendhat, told the BBC: 'We're not talking about some Kim Philby-type story; we're talking about somebody relatively low down who has ... possibly betrayed their country – we don't know.'

Germany has arrested a number of people in recent years accused of spying for Russia, but the capture of a suspect from a close ally is highly unusual.

In June, a Russian man who worked at a German university was arrested on suspicion of espionage for allegedly passing information to Russian intelligence, German prosecutors said.

The suspect, identified only as Ilnur N., was arrested and his home and workplace were searched.

Federal prosecutors said he worked as a research assistant for a science and technology professorship at a German university. They didn't identify the university or specify where in the country he was arrested.

The man is accused of meeting at least three times with a member of a Russian intelligence service, which prosecutors didn't identify, between October of last year and June. In two of those meetings, he is alleged to have handed over information on the university in exchange for an unspecified amount of cash.

And German prosecutors in February filed espionage charges against a German man suspected of having passed the floor plans of parliament to Russian secret services in 2017.

Moscow is at loggerheads with a number of Western capitals after a Russian troop build-up on Ukraine's borders and a series of espionage scandals that have resulted in diplomatic expulsions.

In June, Italy said it had created a national cybersecurity agency following warnings by Prime Minister Mario Draghi that Europe needs to protect itself from Russian 'interference'.

The move came after an Italian navy captain was caught red-handed by police selling confidential military documents from his computer to a Russian embassy official.

The leaders of nine eastern European nations in May condemned what they termed Russian 'aggressive acts', citing operations in Ukraine and 'sabotage' allegedly targeted at the Czech Republic.

Several central and eastern European countries expelled Russian diplomats in solidarity with Prague, but Russia has branded accusations of its involvement as 'absurd' and responded with tit-for-tat expulsions.

British spy chiefs say both China and Russia have sought to steal commercially sensitive data and intellectual property as well as to interfere in politics, while Russian agents are also accused of carrying out an attack on former Russian spy Sergei Skripal on British soil in 2018.

The Scripals were poisoned after two Russian agents smeared the deadly nerve agent on the door handle of Mr Skripal's home. Pictured: Russian agents Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov in Salisbury

Yulia Skripal (left) and her double agent father Sergei Skripal, 68, (right) were poisoned with novichok on March 4 2019

Beijing and Moscow say the West is gripped with a paranoia about plots. Both Russia and China deny they meddle abroad, seek to steal technology, carry out cyberattacks or sow discord.

The Berlin case has echoes of the shadowy world of espionage practised during the Cold War, when double agent Kim Philby and others in a ring of British spies known as the 'Cambridge Five' passed information to the Soviet Union.

Relations between London and Moscow have been at a low point since the attempted poisoning of former spy Sergei Skripal in British Salisbury in 2018.

The Kremlin has denied any involvement in either case.

Chancellor Angela Merkel's government has moreover worked to maintain a sanctions regime over Moscow's annexation of the Crimean peninsula.

And Germany has repeatedly accused Russia of cyberattacks and cyberespionage on its soil.

Despite the frictions, Berlin has pressed ahead with plans to finish the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, set to double natural gas supplies from Russia to Germany.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The devastated family of the Plymouth gunman's last victim were alerted to the shooting by his loyal dogs.

It is believed that Stephen Washington, 59, was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path past homes on Biddick Drive when he was shot by Jake Davison.

The 22-year-old killer had already fatally shot his mother Maxine before going out into the street and firing 'at random'.

The Huskies are then believed to have raced back to his family home nearby and alerted relatives of the shocking incident that was unfolding.

Neighbours say Stephen Washington, 59, was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path in Plymouth when he was shot and killed by gunman Jake Davison, 22

Mike Moore, who lives nearby said: 'Both the dogs ran back to Stephen’s home and that’s when the family became concerned.

'Stephen was well known around here because he was always out with his beautiful dogs.

'He wasn't friends with Jake and there’s nothing connecting them so we think it was completely random.'

The grandfather's Huskies are then believed to have raced back to his family home nearby and alerted relatives of the shocking incident that was unfolding

Stephen was the last person to be killed by Davison before he turned the gun, said to be a 'pump action firearm', on himself.

Devon and Cornwall Police today identified the other victims as Maxine Davison, 51, who was Davison's mother.

Sophie Martyn, who was just three years old, was killed alongside her father Lee Martyn, aged 43.

Kate Shepherd, aged 66, was injured at the scene and died later at Derriford Hospital.

22-year-old killer Jake Davison had already fatally shot his mother Maxine before going out into the street and firing 'at random'

Stephen's son Simon paid tribute to his father in a post, writing: 'After tonight’s events we lost our dad, my mum lost her world, my kids and brothers and sisters kids lost their grandad.

'Each and everyone of us will miss him deeply. RIP dad you will be missed love you xxxx.'

The mass shooting – the first in Britain involving an 'active gunman' for 11 years since taxi driver Derrick Bird killed 12 people in Cumbria - will spark an inquiry into how Davison was able to get the weapon in a country with strict gun controls.

Home Secretary Priti Patel was briefed throughout the evening as was Boris Johnson, who today tweeted: 'My thoughts are with the friends and family of those who lost their lives and with all those affected by the tragic incident in Plymouth last night. I thank the emergency services for their response'.

Local MP Luke Pollard called the incident 'utterly devastating' and 'probably the darkest day in Plymouth's history since the end of the Second World War', when Nazi Luftwaffe carpet bombed the city and its world-famous docks.

There will also be questions for the police about whether he was known to them before the attack. Devon and Cornwall Police are yet to comment on any contact they may have had with him or how he got the gun.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Police have launched an investigation after a serving West Mercia officer and a three-year-old child were found dead at a house in Kidderminster.

The bodies of Dave Louden, 39, and the child were discovered in the Worcestershire town by officers from the same force following concerns for their welfare.

The name and sex of the child have not been released.

Ambulances, paramedics and a Hazardous Area Response team attended the scene.

An investigation has been launched into the deaths, which are being treated as unexplained and have been described by the force as a 'tragic incident'.

Emergency crews found the body of West Mercia Police officer Dave Louden, 39, and a three-year-old child at a property in Kidderminster, Worcestershire

Assistant Chief Constable Rachel Jones said: 'It is with great sadness that I share the news that a serving police officer and a three-year-old child have passed away.

'While the circumstances of the deaths are not fully known, this is clearly a tragic incident and our deepest condolences are with family and colleagues.'

A police spokesman said: 'Earlier today we attended an address in Cairndhu Drive in Kidderminster following concerns for the welfare of a man and young child.

'On arrival officers found the man, aged 39, and a three-year-old child had sadly passed away. The man was a serving West Mercia Police officer.

'We have launched an investigation into the deaths, which are currently being treated as unexplained. It is with great sadness that we share this news today.

'Whilst the circumstances surrounding the deaths are not fully known, this is clearly a tragic incident. Our deepest condolences are with the officer's family, friends and colleagues.'

Cairndhu Drive in Kidderminster, Worcestershire, where the discovery was made (file image)

A West Midlands Ambulance Service spokesman said: 'We were called to reports of a medical emergency at a property on Cairndhu Drive at 9.21am.

'Two ambulances, a paramedic officer and our Hazardous Area Response Team attended the scene. On arrival we discovered two patients, a man and a young child.

'Sadly, it quickly became apparent that neither patient could be saved and they were confirmed dead at the scene.'

Kidderminster is a large market town with an estimated population of 55,000, and is located 17 miles south-west of Birmingham.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ministers were accused of presiding over the biggest foreign policy catastrophe in 65 years last night as the Taliban seized control of Afghanistan.

After a 20-year occupation by Western forces that saw 457 British lives lost and £22billion spent, the insurgents took the capital Kabul after routing Afghan forces in just a week.

The astonishing collapse of the Afghan regime prompted the families of British soldiers who died fighting in the country to say they felt like their loved ones had laid down their lives for nothing.

Last night there was a desperate scramble by thousands of British nationals and diplomats to escape Kabul – helped by RAF planes, paratroopers and the SAS.

Amid dramatic scenes, most UK Embassy staff were understood to have been flown out of the city on a RAF transport aircraft.

But after Kabul's Hamid Karzai International Airport was closed to civilian flights there were fears that hundreds of Afghan translators had been left behind in the frantic dash to flee. Up to 1,000 translators and their family members are thought to still be in the country, potentially at the mercy of vengeful Taliban fighters.

The coffin of Acting Sergeant Michael Lockett is carried from Cathcart Old Parish Church during his funeral in Glasgow, October 15, 2009

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

Boris Johnson led a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee and ordered the recall of Parliament on Wednesday

Afghanistan conflict: 457 British service personnel lost their lives in the conflict - 100 in one year alone Across the 20-year conflict, 457 brave British service personnel lost their lives. Hundreds more were seriously injured and others also suffered the lasting mental scars of war. Across those 20 years of war, the bloodiest in terms of British losses was 2009, when 100 British soldiers were killed in Afghanistan. Five of those died on July 10, 2009, alone - the bloodiest day of the conflict in terms of British losses. Five members of 9 Platoon, C Company, 2 Rifles lost their lives after a series of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) detonated during an early morning foot patrol, near the patrol base in Wishtan, in Sangin, Helmand province. Several more were wounded in the attack. Pictured here are the 100 British service personnel who died in 2009 in Afghanistan. Pictured here: They are: TOP ROW: Serjeant Chris Reed, 25; Marine Travis Mackin, 22; Capt Tom Sawyer, 26; Cpl Danny Winter, 28; Acting Cpl Richard 'Robbo' Robinson, 21; Cpl Daniel 'Danny' Nield, 31; Marine Darren Smith, 27; Lance Cpl Stephen Kingscott, 22; Rifleman Jamie Gunn, 21; Lance Cpl Paul Upton, 31. SECOND ROW: Cpl Tom Gaden, 24; Marine Michael Laski, 21; Lance Cpl Christopher Harkett, 22; Cpl Graeme Stiff, 24; Cpl Dean John, 25; Lance Sgt Tobie Fasfous, 29; Cpl Sean Connor Binnie, 22; Rifleman Adrian Sheldon, 25; Sgt Ben Ross, 34; Cpl Kumar Pun, 31. THIRD ROW: Lieutenant Mark Evison, 26; Marine Jason Mackie, 21; Fusilier Petero 'Pat' Suesue, 28; Sapper Jordan Rossi, 22; Lance Cpl Robert Martin Richards, 24; Lance Cpl Kieron Hill, 20; Lance Cpl Nigel Moffett, 28; Cpl Stephen Bolger (no age given); Rifleman Cyrus Thatcher, 19; Pte Robert McLaren, 20. FOURTH ROW: Lieutenant Paul Mervis, 27; Major Sean Birchall, 33; Lieutenant Colonel Rupert Thorneloe MBE, 39; Trooper Joshua Hammond, 18; Lance Cpl David Dennis, 29; Pte Robert Laws, 18; Lance Cpl Dane Elson, 22; Capt Ben Babington-Browne, 27; Trooper Christopher Whiteside, 20; Rifleman Daniel Hume, 22. FIFTH ROW: Pte John Brackpool, 27; Cpl Lee Scott, 26; Rifleman Daniel Simpson, 20; Rifleman Joseph Murphy, 18; Rifleman James Backhouse, 18; Rifleman William Aldridge, 18; Cpl Jonathan Horne, 28; Rifleman Aminiasi Toge, 26; Cpl Joseph Etchells, 22; Capt Daniel Shepherd, 28. SIXTH ROW: Guardsman Christopher King, 20; Bombardier Craig Hopson, 24; Warrant Officer Class 2 Sean Upton, 35; Trooper Phillip Lawrence, 22; Craftsman Anthony Lombardi, 21; Cpl Kevin Mulligan, 26; Lance Cpl Dale Thomas Hopkins, 23; Pte Kyle Adams, 21; Pte Jason George Williams, 23; Lance Bombardier Matthew Hatton, 23. SEVENTH ROW: Rifleman Daniel Wild, 19; Capt Mark Hale, 42; Pte Richard Hunt, 21; Sgt Simon Valentine, 29; Lance Cpl James Fullarton, 24; Fusilier Simon Annis, 22; Fusilier Louis Carter, 18; Private Johnathon Young, 18; Serjeant Paul McAleese, 29; Fusilier Shaun Bush, 24. EIGHTH ROW: Sgt Lee Houltram, Royal Marines (no age given); Sgt Stuart Millar, 40; Pte Kevin Elliott, 24; Lance Cpl Richard Brandon, 24; Pte Gavin Elliott, 19; Cpl John Harrison, 29; Kingsman Jason Dunn-Bridgeman, 20; Trooper Brett Hall, 21; Acting Serjeant Stuart McGrath, 28; Acting Sgt Michael Lockett MC, 29. NINTH ROW: Pte James Prosser, 21; Acting Cpl Marcin Wojtak, 24; Guardsman Jamie Janes, 20; Lance Cpl James Hill, 23; Cpl James Oakland, 26; Cpl Thomas 'Tam' Mason, 27; Staff Sgt Olaf Schmid, 30; Cpl Nicholas Webster-Smith, 24; Cpl Steven Boote, 22; Guardsman James 'Jimmy' Major, 18. TENTH ROW: Sgt Matthew Telford, 37; Warrant Officer Class 1 Darren Chant, 40; Serjeant Phillip Scott, 30; Rifleman Philip Allen, 20; Rifleman Samuel Bassett, 20; Rifleman Andrew Fentiman, 23; Cpl Loren Marlton-Thomas, 28; Sgt Robert Loughran-Dickson, 33; Acting Sgt John Amer, 30; Unnamed soldier from 1st Battalion The Royal Advertisement

Late last night, the situation in the city appeared to be deteriorating rapidly, with reports of explosions and gunfire at the airport. There appeared to be chaotic scenes in the departure hall, with some people screaming and an apparent stampede.

The US Embassy in Kabul issued a warning instructing American citizens still in the city to 'shelter in place' citing the rapidly changing security situation.

Britain has already sent 600 paratroopers to help with the evacuation, but last night there were claims that the UK could deploy more, with the Royal Marines on standby.

Meanwhile, dramatic images showed Taliban fighters posing inside Kabul's presidential palace after Afghan forces collapsed and president Ashraf Ghani fled the country, believed to be bound for Tajikistan. He later said he had left to 'avoid bloodshed'.

Last night, Britain and America were accused of a 'shameful' failure and of abandoning the Afghan people. There are now fears of a humanitarian disaster as refugees try to escape the country, a brutal re-imposition of Taliban rule and the resurgence of Al Qaeda's global terror network.

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country, in Kabul, Afghanistan

A Taliban fighter poses with a US-made Afghan air force Blackhawk helicopter at captured Kandahar airfield

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

Commons foreign affairs committee chairman Tom Tugendhat said it was 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster' since the Suez crisis, while defence committee chairman Tobias Ellwood said the 'surrender' to the Taliban was a humiliation. On an extraordinary day:

The rights of women already painted over A workman daubs white paint over posters of glamorous brides outside a Kabul wedding shop – in a chilling reminder of the Taliban's hatred of women's rights. The picture was shared online by a journalist with an Afghanistan news channel. It came as activist Malala Yousafzai, 24, who was shot in the head by a Taliban gunman as a schoolgirl, warned the country's female MPs could face horrific reprisals. The Nobel Prize winner tweeted: 'We watch in complete shock as Taliban takes control of Afghanistan. I am deeply worried about women, minorities and human rights advocates. Global, regional and local powers must call for an immediate ceasefire, provide urgent humanitarian aid and protect refugees and civilians.' Under the last Taliban regime, girls were not allowed an education past the age of 12, while women could not leave their homes without a burka to cover their face and body and a male relative as a chaperone. Rangina Hamidi, a minister of education, told the BBC: 'I might face consequences that I never even dreamed of.' Another female MP, Farzana Kochai, said: 'We are just scared of what will happen.' Advertisement

Taliban fighters posed in Kabul's presidential palace as they prepared to declare an Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan;

Helicopters air-lifted diplomats from the US embassy in scenes reminiscent of fall of Saigon in Vietnam;

Boris Johnson led a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee and ordered the recall of Parliament on Wednesday;

The Prime Minister insisted the West needs to work collectively to ensure Afghanistan doesn't again become a 'breeding ground for terror';

Britain called for urgent meetings of Nato's North Atlantic Council and the UN Security Council, as the PM issued a warning to Russia and China not to unilaterally recognise a Taliban-led government;

Mr Johnson vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country, but gloomily conceded the situation was 'extremely difficult';

The UK's ambassador to Afghanistan Sir Laurie Bristow put on hold plans to leave the country and remained at Kabul airport to help process the applications of those seeking to leave;

Videos showed chaotic scenes with hundreds of people attempting to cram on to military transport planes;

Afghans fearing the Taliban rushed to leave the country, lining up at cash machines to withdraw their life savings;

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was forced to cut short his foreign holiday amid criticism of his absence.

As recently as Friday night, British officials believed they had days if not weeks to evacuate Kabul following Taliban advances across the country. But that proved to be a catastrophic miscalculation as fighters from the hardline Islamic group entered the capital yesterday morning. By the afternoon, the Afghan president had fled and the Taliban seized the presidential palace.

Helicopters shuttled diplomats from the US embassy to the airport, while smoke was seen coming from the rooftop as sensitive material was burned.

The Taliban's takeover of the country came just five weeks after President Joe Biden confidently replied 'none whatsoever, zero' when asked if he saw any parallels between the US withdrawals from Vietnam and Afghanistan.

The Taliban's takeover of the country came just five weeks after President Joe Biden (pictured) confidently replied 'none whatsoever, zero' when asked if he saw any parallels between the US withdrawals from Vietnam and Afghanistan

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as they moved into the capital, which has been gripped by panic throughout the day as US helicopters raced overhead as its diplomats were evacuated from the embassy. Bagram air base, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops on Sunday despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over the past two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Mothers of British Armed Forces personnel killed in Afghanistan demand answers in letter to the Government A group of British mothers whose sons died fighting during the Afghanistan conflict are today demanding answers from the Government after the country fell once more to the Taliban. The mothers are demanding a public inquiry into the 20-year war, that saw 457 British service personnel lose their lives. They have written a letter to Boris Johnson urging him to launch a probe into the conflict - and asking 'what was the point?' In the letter, seen by the Mirror, they wrote: 'There are 457 reasons why no British soldier should ever be sent to fight in Afghanistan again. 'That is the number of heroic fallen soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice, fighting for their country. 'It's an horrific death toll that doesn't include the thousands who returned catastrophically injured, physically and mentally, and the growing suicide count. 'Now we have left the hellhole of Afghanistan and the Taliban are taking over. Again. 'What was the point in our boys giving their lives in a war we should never have been in? For our dead children and the bereaved families left behind, it has been a monumental and heartbreaking waste. 'Now we believe our boys are owed a debt for their sacrifice, with an inquiry that holds every politician that sent us to war accountable – starting with the worst culprit Tony Blair.' Advertisement

Last night, the families of British soldiers who died during the Afghan operation reacted with fury at how the country had been abandoned to fall back into Taliban hands. Sarah Adams, whose son James Prosser died aged 21 when his Warrior armoured vehicle was blown up while he was serving with 2nd Battalion The Royal Welsh in 2009, last night said she was left 'asking what his sacrifice was for'.

'It's devastating to see what's being going on in Afghanistan over the past few days,' said the 59-year-old, of Cwmbran. 'Everything he worked towards will soon be torn apart. It's heartbreaking to see what's happening, not just for the families who lost sons and husbands, but for those who served and still carry the physical and mental injuries. Now it feels as if none of it was worth it.'

Wendy Rayner, who lost her husband Peter in 2010 aged just 34, said she was 'absolutely disgusted,' adding: 'It just feels like a complete slap in the face after all the sacrifices people like my husband have made.'

Sergeant Rayner, from 2nd Battalion The Duke of Lancaster's Regiment, was leading his men on a routine patrol in Helmand Province when he was killed by an improvised explosive device. His widow has now written to the Prime Minister demanding an inquiry into why the achievements from Britain's sacrifice in Afghanistan have been squandered in a matter of days.

Jack Cummings, a veteran who lost both his legs in 2010 in Afghanistan, tweeted: 'Was it worth it, probably not. Did I lose my legs for nothing, looks like it. Did my mates die in vain. Yep.'

Major General Charlie Herbert, who lost many troops in the conflict, said the 'bravery and bloodshed' of servicemen and women had been 'turned to dust in just a few short days'.

He added: 'How shameful. How unforgivable. I barely have the words to describe how enraged I am.' Despite the scramble to evacuate, the ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow was said to be remaining in the city last night. Mr Johnson said he was at the airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave. The Prime Minister yesterday insisted Britain could 'look back at 20 years of effort and achievement In Afghanistan', as he argued he wanted to 'make sure that we don't throw those gains away'.

UK military personnel boarding an RAF Voyager aircraft at RAF Brize Norton on August 14, 2021 to travel to Afghanistan

He said: 'Remember we went into Afghanistan 20 years ago because America was attacked and America decided to invoke Article 5 of the Nato treaty appealing to all America's allies to mutual defence and to come to help solve a particular problem – the Al Qaeda presence in Afghanistan. And to a very large extent we did help America solve that, and there's been no Afghanistan-originated terror or very much less Afghanistan-originated terror on the streets of the West thanks to that effort.'

But former defence secretary Lord Robertson, who was Nato secretary general on 9/11, angrily accused the Government of a 'lack of purpose'. 'I am sickened by the prospect of the 20th anniversary being marked by the Taliban back in control of Afghanistan,' he added.

The advance of the Taliban to power was hastened by President Biden's announcement in April that all US troops would leave Afghanistan by the end of this month.

At the time he stated that the country would be left in an orderly state, but privately US Intelligence forecast the Taliban returning to power across Afghanistan within six to 12 months. Last week it emerged that this estimate had been revised to three months – but it proved to be more like three days.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern today said that strict border controls will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out.

Ardern said she hoped to cautiously reopen to the rest of the world next year while maintaining the country's virus-free status.

She said the changes would be 'careful and deliberate' to avoid allowing variants such as the highly contagious Delta strain into New Zealand, where there is no local transmission and domestic life is close to normal.

'Rushing could see us in the situation many other countries are finding themselves in,' Ardern said, citing an outbreak of the Delta variant in neighbouring Australia that has forced its two largest cities into renewed lockdown.

The government is also warning its citizens to be prepared for a strict lockdown at the first sign of an outbreak of the Delta variant.

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern today said that strict border controls will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out. Pictured: Ardern delivering the speech on Thursday August 12 in Wellington

Ardern said the government planned to follow the advice of experts and maintain their elimination strategy.

'While the pandemic continues to rage overseas, and the virus continues to change and mutate, the best thing we can do is lock in the gains achieved to date while keeping our options open,' she said.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. Despite pledges that the country would be 'at the front of the queue' for the vaccine, the rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with less than 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated.

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows.

COVID-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said the government's response to an outbreak of the Delta variant is likely to be 'swift and severe.' New Zealand has stamped out the spread of the virus and had previously planned to rely primarily on contact tracing for any small outbreaks.

But Hipkins said the problems that Sydney currently faces in trying to contact trace a growing outbreak showed the delta variant was extremely hard to manage and that New Zealand's tolerance for risk was now very low.

Its vulnerability was exposed after unvaccinated port workers in Tauranga berthed a ship where 11 of the 21 crew had tested positive for the virus. More than 90 port workers have been tested but so far no one has returned a positive test.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. The rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with under 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows

The announcement comes as Ardern faced calls to ease border measures from sectors such as healthcare, hospitality and agriculture, which are facing acute labour shortages due to the absence of foreign workers.

The country's tourism industry - one of its main economic drivers - is on its knees with the borders shut to non-residents and non-citizens.

New Zealand's success in erasing the coronavirus has allowed life to return almost to normal. The South Pacific nation of 5 million people has reported just 26 deaths since the pandemic began.

That's been achieved in part by closing borders to those who aren't residents or citizens.

But many question whether its feasible for New Zealand to maintain a zero-tolerance approach to the virus once international travel resumes.

Ardern said vaccinations would ramp up with the goal of offering jabs to all the eligible population by year's end, allowing a relaxation of border policies.

She said that from the first quarter of next year, the country would begin allowing travelers to arrive on a carefully managed basis.

Under the proposed changes, international arrivals would be assessed on vaccination status and whether they have travelled from a country deemed high, medium or low risk.

Fully vaccinated travelers from low-risk countries would not be required to quarantine, she said. Those arriving from medium-risk countries would need to complete some form of quarantine. And those arriving from high-risk countries, or who were unvaccinated, would need to stay 14 days in a quarantine hotel run by the military, Ardern said.

The government did not provide a ranking of countries by risk, saying it could change quickly.

'Our ultimate goal is to get to quarantine-free travel for all vaccinated travellers,' Ardern said, without providing a timetable.

She said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic.

'Vaccines, border testing and maybe a bit of monitoring of symptoms when you travel will eventually become our baseline. And we will get used to it,' she said.

Ardern said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic

Ardern said a new trial would begin in October that would allow some business travelers to quarantine at home rather than in military-run hotels as a test of the new system it planned to introduce for medium-risk countries next year.

Ardern also announced it was increasing the standard time scheduled between Pfizer vaccine doses from three weeks to six weeks. She said the initial groups targeted for the vaccine - border workers and older people - had already been fully vaccinated.

'From a population basis, it makes sense to get as many New Zealanders at least partially vaccinated quickly,' Ardern said.

The changes were generally welcomed by business owners, including those in the struggling tourism industry. Before the pandemic, more than 3 million overseas travelers visited New Zealand each year and tourism was among the country's largest industries.

'It's important to have a roadmap so all businesses, including tourism operators, can plan ahead and make informed decisions,' said Chris Roberts, the chief executive of Tourism Industry Aotearoa.

Opposition Leader Judith Collins said Ardern's announcements were a step in the right direction but the government needed to speed up its vaccination program.

About 29 per cent of New Zealanders have received one dose of the vaccine and 17 per cent are fully vaccinated.

New Zealand's tentative attempts to relax border controls have so far met with mixed success.

A travel bubble with Australia faced numerous disruptions and was finally suspended in June as multiple outbreaks spread across the Tasman Sea.

Quarantine-free travel is allowed with the tiny Cook Islands, and New Zealand this month launched a scheme to bring in seasonal workers from Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu without having to self-isolate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Britain's daily Covid cases are continuing to rise and new hospital admissions have flicked up for the first time in ten days, official figures revealed today.

Department of Health bosses posted 23,510 positive tests — an increase of 8.4 per cent on last Tuesday's figure of 21,691.

The curve is continuing to pick up pace, with the change in the week-on-week rise in average infections — a more accurate barometer than daily figures which can fluctuate heavily — jumping to 7.3 per cent, up from 5.2 per cent on Monday and 1.9 per cent on Sunday.

There were 146 virus victims today, up 5.8 per cent on last Tuesday (138). Today's figure marks the highest daily death toll since March 12 (175).

And in another worrying sign, daily hospital admissions crept up by 3.3 per cent to 755 on August 6. It was the first time admissions had risen week-on-week since July 26, with hospitalisations now beginning to reflect the jump in cases seen two weeks after restrictions were lifted on July 19.

But in more positive developments, official data also revealed more than three quarters of adults in the UK have now received their first vaccine dose.

Boris Johnson praised the country's 'huge national achievement' in ensuring more than 39.7million over-18s are fully protected against the virus. Department of Health data shows 47.1million (89 per cent) have had a first dose of the Pfizer, Moderna or AstraZeneca vaccine.

The Prime Minister said: 'Our incredible vaccine rollout has now provided vital protection against the virus to three quarters of all UK adults. This is a huge national achievement, which we should all be proud of.

'It's so important that those who haven't been vaccinated come forward as soon as possible to book their jab — to protect themselves, protect their loved ones and allow us all to enjoy our freedoms safely.'

Top Government adviser says No10 will need to scrap asymptomatic swabbing as pandemic phase fizzles out Asymptomatic testing should be wound down as the UK learns to live with the pandemic, one of the country's top coronavirus experts said. Sir Andrew Pollard, who helped develop the Oxford University/AstraZeneca vaccine, said just people who are unwell with Covid symptoms should be tested and treated. As it stands, anyone who has a fever, has a new cough or has lost their sense of taste or smell can get a PCR tests. And anyone can order free lateral flow tests to use at home. NHS Test and Trace was given a £37billion budget for the first two years and had spent more than £4billion on lateral flow tests up to the end of March. Sir Pollard today told the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus that there should be a shift in the testing regime. He said we need to work out 'what does 'learn to live with Covid' mean?' Sir Pollard added: 'What does that mean in terms of the surveillance that we're doing, the testing that we're doing, and also how we should manage patients in hospital or even before hospital in their treatment to try and stop them getting into hospital? 'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the 'living with Covid. 'That doesn't mean that we live with it and put up with it, we still have to manage those cases of patients who become unwell with it.' Advertisement

It comes as:

A top scientist claimed British holidaymakers could be paying 20 times more than the 'fair' price for PCR Covid tests;

One of the country's top coronavirus experts claimed children who aren't unwell shouldn't have to self-isolate to curb the spread of Covid;

Scientists said Eradicating Covid is 'probably feasible' and it will be easier to eliminate than polio;

Official figures revealed Covid is once again killing more people in England and Wales than flu and pneumonia;

A father who refused to get a Covid vaccine admitted he thought he'd never see his family again after he was rushed to intensive care with the virus;

An Arsenal fan who caught Covid after watching England play in the final at Wembley died two weeks later despite being double jabbed.

Friday's rise in hospital admissions was the first time the figure had increased since July 26, when 928 infected patients needed NHS treatment.

Experts believe it reflects the recent uptick in Covid cases, which has been blamed on England's lifting of restrictions on Freedom Day.

Admissions usually lag behind changes in infections by around a week because of how long it can take for infected patients to become severely ill.

The figures come after an expert advising the Government today told MPs herd immunity is 'mythical'.

Professor Sir Andrew Pollard, chair of the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), told the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus that it is not possible for vaccines to provide enough immunity to stop the spread of the virus among people who have yet to have a jab.

He emphasised the roll of vaccines is to minimise severe disease and death from the virus and people who have not had a dose need to get inoculated in order to be protected.

Data from Public Health England (PHE) shows Pfizer's vaccine is 96 per cent effective at reducing hospitalisations while AstraZeneca's is 92 per cent effective.

Figures from PHE and Cambridge University shows that around 60,000 deaths, 22million infections and 66,900 hospitalisations have been prevented by vaccines.

Health and Social Care Secretary Sajid Javid praised the NHS for reaching the 75 per cent milestone for double doses and encouraged more people to come forward for a jab.

The virus was the underlying cause of death for 348 victims in the week ending July 30 – the highest level since March. For comparison, flu and pneumonia were behind 316 deaths during the same week, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). It is the first time the trend has changed for over four months

Health and Social Care Secretary Sajid Javid (pictured today, left, with NHS chief executive Amanda Pritchard at Milton Keynes University Hospital) praised the NHS for reaching the 75 per cent milestone for double doses and encouraged more people to come forward for a jab

All adults in the UK are able to get their second doses after eight weeks. This will mean every adult has the chance to have two doses by mid-September. Graph shows: Proportion of people in each age group who have had their first vaccine dose

Second doses are still lagging behind in younger age groups. Graph shows: Proportion of people in each age group who have had their second vaccine dose

Covid mutations that are vaccine-resistant are inevitable, expert warns Covid variants that can escape the protection given by vaccines are an 'absolute inevitability', infectious disease expert Professor Paul Hunter has said. He was speaking today to the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus, which was hearing evidence on vaccinating children, booster jabs and access to jabs. Professor Paul Hunter, from the University of East Anglia, told the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus: 'It is absolutely inevitable that we are going to get escape variants coming in.' Mutations deemed variants of concern in the UK include the Kent 'Alpha' variant, the South African 'Beta' mutation, the Indian 'Delta' strain and the Brazil 'Gamma' variant. Vaccines are thought to be less effective against Beta and Delta. Professor Hunter said the seasonal coronaviruses in circulation will infect people 'repeatedly' throughout their lives, typically on average every four or five years. He said: 'Quarter of the UK population will get infected on average every year, what that means is about 45,000 people will be infected every day with theses other coronaviruses. 'Ultimately what happened with these other coronaviruses is that although you get a gradual escape, because we are getting re-infected so frequently, we actually keep up.' Prof Devi Sridhar, chair in global public health at the University of Edinburgh, added: 'We have already seen Alpha, Beta, Delta, it is inevitable.' She added that vaccines had 'transformed' the pandemic but 'not solved it'. Advertisement

He said: 'Three in four adults across the UK have now had both doses of the vaccine, which is incredible and a testament to the fantastic work of the NHS, volunteers and everyone involved in the rollout.

'Getting two doses of a Covid vaccine is the key to enjoying a host of new freedoms safely – whether that be to enjoy a trip abroad with family or a night out with friends – as we continue to build our wall of protection.

'The vaccines are allowing us to reconnect with the things we love, but more than that, they're protecting the people we love too.

'Please make sure to come forward for your jab if you haven't already as soon as possible.'

All adults in the UK are able to get their second doses after eight weeks. This will mean every person aged over 18 has the chance to have two doses by mid-September.

People will be required to prove they've had two jabs to enter nightclubs and other venues where large crowds gather by the end of September.

From August 16, double vaccinated people will also no longer be required to self-isolate if they are identified as a close contact of a positive Covid case.

People will continue to be advised to take a PCR test and anyone who tests positive will still be legally required to self-isolate, irrespective of their vaccination status.

And speaking to MPs this morning, Sir Andrew, who helped develop the Oxford University/AstraZeneca jab, warned vaccines alone could not ensure herd immunity.

He said: 'What we know very clearly with the coronavirus that this current variant, the Delta variant, will still infect people who have been vaccinated and that means that anyone who is unvaccinated will meet the virus.

'It might not be this week, this month or this year but they will meet the virus.

'I think we are in a situation here with this current variant where herd immunity is not a possibility because it still infects vaccinated individuals.'

Chair of the APPG on Coronavirus Layla Moran MP said: 'The worrying evidence we heard today suggests that given the emergence of new variants, including vaccine-resistant ones, achieving herd immunity is just a pipe dream.

'The government's plan to learn to live with Covid cannot become a byword for abdicating responsibility to the most vulnerable.

'Ministers must re-evaluate their approach and come up with a new and comprehensive, long-term plan to mitigate the risks posed by Covid and new variants.

'That must include showing moral leadership and stepping up efforts to vaccinate the world.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two children were among eight people reportedly injured at a theme park in Scotland today after a rollercoaster came off its tracks following a mechanical fault.

Dramatic photos appear to show a carriage hanging off the Runaway Timber Train at Landmark Adventure Park in the Highlands this morning.

Witnesses reported hearing a huge bang at the 'packed' resort, before emergency crews had to lift passengers to safety.

Those waiting in line and in the vicinity of the ride then began screaming and 'running away' in panic, it was claimed.

While nobody was badly hurt, two children reportedly suffered minor injuries in the crash, while six other people were assessed by paramedics at the scene.

The train was fully loaded at the time, with some 24 people on board, according to the Sun.

The carriage was hanging off the Runaway Timber Train at Landmark Adventure Park in the Highlands this morning

Photos appear to show one of the carriages tipped on its side, dangling over the tracks

Witnesses reported hearing a huge bang before passengers were reportedly lifted to safety

One witness told The Scottish Sun: 'I heard a big bang and screams. People were coming off crying and then the fire brigade came.'

Another added: 'No one hurt just frightened kids.'

A Twitter user who posted images of the incident said: 'Park was packed, we heard a crash, most people were running away.

'We ran over to see if help needed. Last 2 cars derailed, people lifted off.. Called em servs.'

Police Scotland said in a statement: 'Around 11.30 this morning, police and emergency services were called to a report that a carriage from a rollercoaster had suffered a mechanical failure at an adventure park in Carrbridge, Aviemore.

'Two children sustained minor injuries and were treated at the scene. Police are still at scene and inquiries are continuing.'

The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service (SFRS) sent specialist resources to the scene after being called out at 11.37am.

An SFRS spokeswoman said: 'We were alerted at 11.37am to support a multi-agency response at the Landmark Adventure Park, Carrbridge.

'Operations Control mobilised a number of specialist resources to assist emergency service partners following reports of a rollercoaster derailment.

'Crews left the scene at 12.14pm.'

A special operations ambulance crew remains at the scene of the ride this afternoon.

The carriage was hanging off the Runaway Timber Train at Landmark Adventure Park in the Highlands this morning (file photo)

The ride is one of the most popular at the Scottish theme park (file photo)

The Scottish Ambulance Service said: 'We received a call today at 1141 hours to attend an incident in Carrbridge, near Aviemore.

'We dispatched three ambulance crews, Basics GP, the Pict (Pre-hospital Immediate Care and Trauma) team and our special operations team to the scene.'

Landmark describes the ride on its website as a 'family rollercoaster ride', open to thrillseekers between April and October.

It adds that passengers must be 1.4m high to ride, or 1.1m if accompanied by an adult.

Landmark Adventure Park told MailOnline: 'We can confirm that there was an incident on the Runaway Timber Train today (12/08/21), which resulted in the train coming to a halt at ground level.

'All passengers were safely and immediately evacuated, but emergency services were deployed as a precautionary measure.

'No serious injuries have been reported and, as far as we're aware, nobody has been taken to hospital.

'The rollercoaster will remain closed while a thorough investigation into the incident is carried out. The rest of the park remains open as normal.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'Visit Florence!': Elon Musk has private tour of the Uffizi Gallery with girlfriend Grimes, 33, and his teenage children as he celebrates his 50th birthday

Tesla CEO Elon Musk spotted in Italy with girlfriend Grimes and his teenage children getting a private tour of the Uffizi Gallery in Venice.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

President Joe Biden has authorized an immediate response and named USAID Administrator Samantha Power as the senior official coordinating the US effort to help Haiti after it was struck by a massive 7.2 magnitude earthquake.

USAID will help to assess damage and assist in rebuilding, said Biden, who called the United States a 'close and enduring friend to the people of Haiti.'

A growing number of countries offered help, including Argentina and Chile, which said it was preparing to send humanitarian aid. ´´Once again, Haiti has been hit by adversity,' Chilean President Sebastian Piñera said.

The earthquake struck southwestern Haiti on Saturday, killing at least 304 people and injuring at least 1,800 others as buildings tumbled into rubble. Prime Minister Ariel Henry said he was rushing aid to areas where towns were destroyed and hospitals overwhelmed with incoming patients.

The epicenter of the quake was about 78 miles west of the capital of Port-au-Prince, the U.S. Geological Survey said, and widespread damage was reported in the hemisphere's poorest nations as a tropical storm also bore down.

Red Cross paramedics carry a girl injured during a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

Oxiliene Morency cries out in grief after the body of her 7-year-old-daughter Esther Daniel was recovered from the rubble of their home destroyed by the earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti, on Saturday

People walk past a body following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

People look for survivors at a house destroyed following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake on Saturday

President Biden offered his condolences to Haiti on Saturday after the country was hit by a massive earthquake that has killed over 300 people

The 'Petit Pas' hotel is seen damaged by the earthquake on August 14 in Les Cayes, southwest Haiti

People walk by a collapsed house hit by the earthquake in Les Cayes, southwest Haiti

A house severely damaged by the earthquake is seen on Saturday. Rescue workers scrambled to find survivors after a powerful 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck Haiti early Saturday, killing at least 304 and toppling buildings in the disaster

The epicenter of the shaking, which rattled homes and sent terrified locals scrambling for safety, was about 100 miles by road west of the center of the densely populated capital Port-au-Prince

A house is seen collapsed after the earthquake hit on August 14 in Les Cayes. The epicenter of the shaking, which rattled homes and sent terrified locals scrambling for safety, was about 100 miles by road west of the center of the densely populated capital Port-au-Prince

The parish where the sisters of Our Lady Fatima of the Cayes reside, is seen collapsed after the earthquake hit on August 14, 2021 in Les Cayes, southwest Haiti

The Cayes Sacred Heart Church is seen with large cracks in it's facade after the earthquake hit on Saturday

A woman holds up her arms as she walks past a church in the aftermath of an earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

The quake was stronger and closer to the surface than the magnitude 7.1 quake that damaged much of the capital in 2010 and killed an estimated 220,000 people.

Haiti's civil protection agency said on Twitter that the death toll stood at 304, most in the country's south. Rescue workers and bystanders were able to pull many people to safety from the rubble. The agency said injured people were still being delivered to hospitals.

Henry declared a one-month state of emergency for the whole country and said he would not ask for international help until the extent of the damages was known. He said some towns were almost completely razed and the government had people in the coastal town of Les Cayes to help plan and coordinate the response.

'The most important thing is to recover as many survivors as possible under the rubble,' said Henry. 'We have learned that the local hospitals, in particular that of Les Cayes, are overwhelmed with wounded, fractured people.'

He said the International Red Cross and hospitals in unaffected areas were helping to care for the injured, and appealed to Haitians for unity.

Complicating rescue efforts, the US National Hurricane Center has forecasted that Tropical Storm Grace will reach Haiti late Monday night or early Tuesday morning.

A man helps to carry a person rescued from the rubble in the aftermath of an earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

A truck is covered by parts of a wall that fell on it during an earthquake in Les Cayes

The residence of the Catholic bishop is damaged after an earthquake in Les Cayes

Sacred Heart church is damaged after the earthquake in Les Cayes

People stand in front of recovered bodies, partially covered, in the aftermath of an earthquake in Les Cayes

People stand around the body of a person partially covered in the aftermath of an earthquake in Les Cayes

Petit Pas Hotel is damaged after an earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

The back side of the residence of the Catholic bishop is damaged after an earthquake in Les Cayes

People stand outside the residence of the Catholic bishop after it was damaged by Saturday's earthquake

A woman stands in front of a destroyed home in the aftermath of an earthquake in Les Cayes

Several men work to rescue the body of a girl buried in the rubble of a house in the aftermath of the earthquake

People recover the body of Jean Gabriel Fortune, a longtime lawmaker and former mayor of Les Cayes, from the rubble of the Hotel Le Manguier destroyed by the earthquake

Prime Minister Ariel Henry said he was mobilizing all available government resources to help victims in the affected areas, and declared a one-month state of emergency for the whole country.

He said he would not ask for international help until the extent of the damages is known.

The USGS issued a tsunami warning, saying waves of up to ten feet were possible along the coastline of Haiti but it soon lifted the warning despite a series of smaller aftershocks that continued to shake the island.

Six aftershocks followed the quake and the USGS registered three of them had at least a 4.5 magnitude. A 5.2-magnitude aftershock hit about 12miles northwest of Cavaillon, Haiti, according to the USGS.

'The needs are enormous. We must take care of the injured and fractured, but also provide food, aid, temporary shelter and psychological support,' he said.

Later, as he boarded a plane bound for Les Cayes, Henry said he wanted 'structured solidarity' to ensure the response was coordinated to avoid the confusion that followed the devastating 2010 earthquake, when aid was slow to reach residents after as many as 300,000 were killed.

A major earthquake struck western Haiti on Saturday and was felt across the Caribbean where people fled their homes for fear that buildings might collapse

Photos circulating social media show the earthquake's damage, which was 0.2 stronger than the 2010 quake that killed 250,000 people and flattened swathes of buildings, leaving many homeless

The 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck five miles from the town of Petit Trou de Nippes, about 7.5 miles west of Haiti's capital Port-au-Prince

The 7.2-magnitude earthquake was felt across the Caribbean, including in Cuba and Jamaica

The nearest big town was Les Cayes, with a population of around 126,000, where two residents told Reuters a major hotel and other buildings had collapsed.

In Les Cayes, locals said water had briefly flooded the coastal town, causing panic amid fear of a tsunami, but then appeared to retreat.

Haitian media outlets reported some people along the coast had already fled to the mountains.

The quake - which had a depth of six miles - was felt 200 miles away in Cuba and Jamaica.

'Everyone is really afraid. It's been years since such a big earthquake,' said Daniel Ross, a resident in the eastern Cuban city of Guantanamo, adding that his home stood firm but the furniture shook.

Videos posted to social media showed collapsed buildings near the epicenter and people running into the streets.

People in Port-au-Prince felt the tremor and many rushed into the streets in fear, although there did not appear to be damage there.

Port-au-Prince resident Naomi Verneus, 34, told the Associated Press she was jolted awake by the earthquake and that her bed was shaking.

She said: 'I woke up and didn't have time to put my shoes on. We lived the 2010 earthquake and all I could do was run.

'I later remembered my two kids and my mother were still inside. My neighbor went in and told them to get out. We ran to the street.'

Twitter users have shared devastating photos and videos of the destruction. They mentioned hearing people buried under the rubble crying for their lives

Photos on Twitter showed buildings reduced to rubble and smashed vehicles in the towns of Jérémie and Les Caye

Residents of Port-au-Prince fled their homes after feeling the earth shake

The quake had a depth of six miles, the US Geological Survey (USGS) said

'Everyone is really afraid. It's been years since such a big earthquake,' said Daniel Ross, a resident in the eastern Cuban city of Guantanamo

Sephora Pierre Louis, another resident of Haiti's capital, said: 'In my neighborhood, I heard people screaming. They were flying outside. At least they know to go outside. In 2010, they didn´t know what to do. People are still outside in the street.'

The earthquake struck more than a month after President Jovenel Moïse was killed, sending the country into political chaos, and humanitarian aid groups said the earthquake will add to the suffering.

The country was already battling poverty, spiraling gang violence and Covid-19.

'We´re concerned that this earthquake is just one more crisis on top of what the country is already facing - including the worsening political stalemate after the president´s assassination, COVID and food insecurity,' said Jean-Wickens Merone, spokesman for World Vision Haiti.

'This country just never finds a break!' said Haitian entrepreneur Marc Alain Boucicault on Twitter.

The impoverished country, where many live in tenuous circumstances, is vulnerable to earthquakes and hurricanes. A 5.9-magnitude earthquake that struck in 2018 that killed more than a dozen people.

The 2010 quake destroyed hundreds of thousands of homes, as well as administrative buildings and schools, not to mention 60 per cent of Haiti's healthcare system.

The rebuilding of the country's main hospital remained incomplete as of this morning's earthquake and nongovernmental organizations have struggled to make up for the state's many deficiencies.

Homes have been destroyed and thousands are likely to have been killed, according to USGS

In the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake (pictured) 1.5million Haitians were left homeless and administrative buildings and schools were destroyed, not to mention 60 per cent of Haiti's healthcare system

People stand next to a house destroyed following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

People stand around the body of 7-year-old Esther Daniel who was recovered from the rubble of her destroyed home

The body of a person is covered on a street after being hit by a car in Les Cayes, Haiti, late Saturday

A private residence is damaged after a 7.2-magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

Damage is seen in an area after a major earthquake struck southwestern Haiti, in Latiboliere, Jeremie, Haiti

The reports of overwhelmed hospitals come as Haiti struggles with the pandemic and a lack of resources to deal with it

Among those killed in Saturday's earthquake was Gabriel Fortuné, a longtime lawmaker and former mayor of Les Cayes. He died along with several others when his hotel, Le Manguier, collapsed, the Haitian newspaper Le Nouvelliste reported.

Philippe Boutin, 37, who lives in Puerto Rico but visits his family annually in Les Cayes, said his mother was saying morning prayers when the shaking began, but was able to leave the house.

The earthquake, he said, coincided with the festivities to celebrate the town´s patron saint, adding that the hotel likely was full and the small town had more people than usual.

'We still don´t know how many people are under the rubble,' he said.

On the tiny island of Ile-a-Vache, about 6.5 miles from Les Cayes, the quake damaged a seaside resort popular with Haitian officials, business leaders, diplomats and humanitarian workers. Fernand Sajous, owner of the Abaka Bay Resort, said by telephone that nine of the hotel´s 30 rooms collapsed, but he said they were vacant at the time and no one was injured.

'They disappeared - just like that,' Sajous said.

People in Les Cayes tried to pull guests from the rubble of a collapsed hotel, but as the sun set, they had only been able to recover the body of a 7-year-old girl whose home was behind the facility.

'I have eight kids, and I was looking for the last one,' Jean-Claude Daniel said through tears. 'I will never see her again alive. The earthquake destroyed my life. It took a child away from me.'

The reports of overwhelmed hospitals come as Haiti struggles with the pandemic and a lack of resources to deal with it. Just last month, the country of 11 million people received its first batch of U.S.-donated coronavirus vaccines, via a United Nations program for low-income countries.

Richard Hervé Fourcand, a former Haitian senator, rented a private plane to move injured people from Les Cayes to Port-au-Prince for medical assistance. He told The Associated Press that Les Cayes´ hospital was at capacity.

An earthquake victim sits with her baby on her lap at the Cayes General Hospital in Les Cayes

An earthquake victim lies on a stretcher at the Cayes General Hospital

An earthquake victim lies on a stretcher at the Cayes General Hospital in Les Cayes, southwest Haiti

Earthquake victims lie on the ground at the Cayes General Hospital

The earthquake also struck just over a month after President Jovenel Moïse was killed, sending the country into political chaos. His widow, Martine Moïse, posted a message on Twitter calling for unity among Haitians: 'Let´s put our shoulders together to bring solidarity.'

Rescue efforts were hampered by a landslide triggered by the quake that blocked a major road connecting the hard-hit towns of Jeremie and Les Cayes, according to Haiti´s civil protection agency.

Agency director Jerry Chandler told reporters that a partial count of structural damage included at least 860 destroyed homes and more than 700 damaged. Hospitals, schools, offices and churches were also affected.

The National Hurricane Center has forecast that Tropical Storm Grace will reach Haiti late Monday or early Tuesday.

'This is likely to make matters worse since the country is on the verge of suffering the effects of two disasters in quick succession, a magnitude 7 earthquake and a looming storm,' Chandler said.

Humanitarian workers said gang activity in the seaside district of Martissant, just west of the Haitian capital, also was complicating relief efforts.

'Nobody can travel through the area,' Ndiaga Seck, a UNICEF spokesman in Port-au-Prince, said by phone. 'We can only fly over or take another route.'

Seck said information about deaths and damage was slow coming to Port-au-Prince because of spotty internet service, but UNICEF planned to send medical supplies to two hospitals in the south, in Les Cayes and Jeremie.

People in Port-au-Prince felt the tremor and many rushed into the streets in fear, although there did not appear to be damage there.

Naomi Verneus, a 34-year-old resident of Port-au-Prince, said she was jolted awake by the earthquake and that her bed was shaking.

Damage is seen in an area after a major earthquake struck southwestern Haiti, in Latiboliere, Jeremie, Haiti

A view of the damage to buildings made by an earthquake, in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. A 7.2 magnitude earthquake left at least 304 dead, more than 1,800 people injured and caused considerable material damage

A view of the damage to buildings made by an earthquake, in Port-au-Prince, Haiti

'I woke up and didn´t have time to put my shoes on. We lived the 2010 earthquake and all I could do was run. I later remembered my two kids and my mother were still inside. My neighbor went in and told them to get out. We ran to the street,' Verneus said.

Paul Caruso, a geophysicist with the USGS, said aftershocks likely would continue for weeks or months, with the largest so far registering magnitude 5.2.

The impoverished country, where many live in tenuous circumstances, is vulnerable to earthquakes and hurricanes. It was struck by a magnitude 5.9 earthquake in 2018 that killed more than a dozen people, and a vastly larger magnitude 7.1 quake that damaged much of the capital in 2010 and killed an estimated 300,000 people.

By Saturday night, the island had experienced four aftershocks stronger than 5.0 and nine above 4.0.

Claude Prepetit, a Haitian civil engineer and geologist, warned of the danger from cracked structures.

'More or less intensive aftershocks are to be expected for a month,' he said, cautioning that some buildings, 'badly damaged during the earthquake, can collapse during aftershocks..'

The CaSud restaurant and hotel is damaged after a 7.2 magnitude earthquake struck, in Les Cayes, Haiti, Saturday, Aug. 14, 2021. According to a family member of the owner, the owner and the owner's mother are trapped inside

People search for survivors in a home destroyed by the earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

A view shows a house destroyed following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes

A woman injured during the 7.2 magnitude earthquake lies on a stretcher in Les Cayes

A view shows houses destroyed following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes

The residence of the Catholic bishop lays in ruins after an earthquake in Les Cayes

The bodies of two people lie on the bed of a truck following a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes

A woman recovers belongings from her home destroyed by the earthquake in Les Cayes
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jake Davison was a 'ticking timebomb' who became addicted to bodybuilding steroids and once attacked a pregnant woman, it was claimed yesterday.

The 22-year-old virgin, a self-confessed 'involuntary celibate', had an obsession with guns and violent computer games from the age of five, according to reports.

In 2016, he was let go by police despite hitting Scott Hobbs 15 times and punching his girlfriend Sherrie – sending her falling on to her stomach and fearing she could lose her unborn baby.

The 22-year-old virgin, a self-confessed 'involuntary celibate', had an obsession with guns and violent computer games from the age of five, according to reports

Nineteen-stone Davison was not arrested and received a warning over the assault on the strangers outside a Tesco in Plymouth.

Mr Hobbs, 25, told The Sunday Mirror: 'The police didn't seem to take it very seriously. They said he was 'nothing to worry about'.'

Police gave Mr Hobbs a victims of crime leaflet and he eventually moved house, he said.

In another incident last September, six-foot Davison is said to have repeatedly punched a 16-year-old in the face.

Home Secretary Priti Patel and Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall Police, Shaun Sawyer, visiting the tributes in Plymouth today

A friend of the boy's mother, Caroline Reilly, 38, claimed that when a girl tried to stop him, he spat in her face and told her 'I f****** hate women'.

A friend of Davison said he had been playing violent computer games such as Grand Theft Auto since he was five, and claimed he was obsessed with online pornography by 11.

Meanwhile, a member of a gym where Davison went said drug abuse may have contributed to a deterioration in his mental state.

He claimed the killer had been taking both amphetamines and bodybuilding anabolic steroids since at least December.

He told The Sun: 'He was popping lots of pills... he became edgy, aggressive – and was basically a ticking timebomb.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's the golden girl of Australian television with seven Logies under her belt thanks to starring roles in award-winning homegrown dramas such as Love My Way and Offspring.

And while Asher Keddie has been on TV screens for over 35 years, she's finally got her big Hollywood break at the age of 47 in the highly-anticipated Amazon series, Nine Perfect Strangers.

Asher stars in the drama alongside Nicole Kidman, Melissa McCarthy and Luke Evans.

Better late than never: Asher Keddie has got her Hollywood big break at the age of 47 in Nine Perfect Strangers with Nicole Kidman

It is her very first Hollywood role, aside from a small appearance in the blockbuster movie X-Men Origins: Wolverine.

When asked if the series, which is based on Liane Moriarty's book of the same title, is a launching pad for a glittering Hollywood career, Asher, who shares a son and stepson with her artist husband Vincent Fantauzzo, said she wouldn't rule it out.

'I would like to work anywhere, whether it is the US, the UK, Canada, or Europe,' she said in an interview with the Sydney Morning Herald over the weekend.

'What I’m hoping for is that the next 10 years feels really rich in terms of work and life and that’s me being able to travel again, like all of us. For my children to be able to explore the world. For it not to feel small.'

All-star cast: Asher plays the role of Heather in Nine Perfect Strangers. She is pictured here alongside Regina Hall

Storyline: Nine Perfect Strangers follows nine desperate souls in search of healing at a retreat led by wellness guru Kidman, who leads a particularly grueling course

Asher plays the role of Heather in the drama, which was shot in Byron Bay over six months.

Nine Perfect Strangers follows nine desperate souls in search of healing at a retreat led by wellness guru Kidman, who leads a particularly grueling course.

The show comes from the creators behind The Undoing and Big Little Lies, which is based on Moriarty's books.

Acclaimed: Asher received wide recognition for her role in the critically acclaimed show Offspring, where she played Dr Nina Proudman

With strict rules around filming during the pandemic, she was separated from husband Vincent and her 12-year-old stepson Luca for months.

'It was not possible to just jump on a plane back and forth like I normally would,” she told the SMH.

'But if good work is there, like Nine Perfect Strangers, I’m not going to go, "No, it’s all too hard." I’m supporting a family here and that’s my job.'

Asher was lucky to have the couple's six-year-old son Valentino with her during filming and enrolled him in a local school in Byron Bay for a few months.

Superstar: Asher won the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress five times in a row between 2011 and 2015, and the Gold Logie award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television for her role of Dr Nina Proudman in Offspring

The acclaimed actress has been acting since she was 11, first appearing in western television drama series Five Mile Creek, which also starred Kidman.

She went on to star in several Australian TV series and movies, but received wide recognition for her roles in the critically acclaimed shows Love My Way and Offspring.

Asher won the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress five times in a row between 2011 and 2015, and the Gold Logie award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television for her role of Dr Nina Proudman in Offspring.

Lovers: Asher is married to artist Vincent Fantauzzo

Family: She is also a mother to her six-year-old son Valentino and stepson Luca, 12

Meanwhile, a new trailer for Nine Perfect Strangers was released last week via Good Morning America.

In the trailer, guests including Frances Welty, played by Melissa McCarthy, are seen going increasingly mad at the hands of Kidman's character Masha and it's apparent that there's something sinister brewing.

The nearly three-minute trailer opens with McCarthy getting a vague rundown about the 10-day retreat, which is set in a very secluded wooded area.

Hoping to become the '2.0' version of herself she embarks on a journey along with eight other strangers including Regina Hall (Girls Trip), Samara Weaving (Ready Or Not), Bobby Cannavale (Thunder Force) and Evans (Beauty And The Beast).

'Apparently I'm in need of some fixing,' Melissa's voice says as she gears up for what is sure to be a very unforgettable stay.

First look: The official trailer for the Nicole Kidman led series Nine Perfect Strangers was released last Thursday ahead of its August 18 premiere

Desperate: The drama follows nine desperate strangers who seek help from a wellness guru Kidman at a retreat before things take a turn

Secluded: The 10-day retreat takes place at a destination called Tranquillum House run by Kidman's character Masha

Final attempt: The guests seemed to have exhausted all possibilities which leads them to the retreat

Healer: 'When people come here, they come to heal,' her character's Masha voice entices

The group is quickly introduced to cult-like healer Kidman who welcomes them to Tranquillum House in a billowy white dress.

'When people come here, they come to heal,' her character's Masha voice entices.

And the trailer continues to foreshadow some extreme measures that will be taken. 'I don't want to suffer,' McCarthy says, to which Masha replies 'You're already suffering.'

McCarthy seems more open to embrace the experience than others including Evans who calls wellness retreats 'bullsh**t' and Cannavale's character who begrudgingly says 'lets go meditate.'

Meditation: The wellness guru puts them through a rigorous 10-day experience to unpack trauma

2.0: All the participants are hoping to get rid of personal demons caused by traumatic events in their life

Under her spell: Cannavale's character is resistant to the retreat but Masha quickly gets her claws into him

Pushed to the edge: 'Is Masha bats**t, or is she the real deal?,' her character asks at one point

One sequence shows the nine guests laying in graves they dug for themselves before dirt is shoveled over them, as Masha beckons 'surrender yourself to me.'

It quickly comes to be revealed that the group was hand selected — not of their own free will — as Evans character (who seems to know more than he's letting on) says they all 'compliment each other's demons.'

Adding a comedic flare McCarthy says that the whole thing could end up being a 'real s**t show' before things quickly get out of control. Cannavale says Kidman needed people that were so desperate they would try 'anything' that she wanted.

'This is a particularly volatile group — lets start the protocol,' Kidman menacingly says as she seems to pick up on the group's resistance to follow her lead.

Digging their own grave: One sequence shows the nine guests laying in graves they dug for themselves before dirt is shoveled over them, as Masha beckons 'surrender yourself to me'

Extreme measures: Adding a comedic flare McCarthy says that the whole thing could end up being a 'real s**t show' before things quickly get out of control

Ramping it up: 'This is a particularly volatile group — lets start the protocol,' Kidman menacingly says as she seems to pick up on the group's resistance to follow her lead

Losing it: In a timelapse scanning all the characters they are seen with dazed looks in their eyes, yelling, cackling uncontrollably and even crashing cars

Deviant: Throughout the course of the trailer Masha ramps up the intensity and becomes more menacing

In a time-lapse scanning all the characters they are seen with dazed looks in their eyes, yelling, cackling uncontrollably and even crashing cars.

And in true Moriarty fashion, things eventually culminate in some sort of disaster as police cars come rushing to the retreat.

The limited series — which streams August 18 — also stars Michael Shannon (Boardwalk Empire), Tiffany Boone (Hunters), Manny Jacinto (The Good Place), Melvin Gregg (American Vandal), and Grace Van Patten (Maniac).

Nine Perfect Strangers is launching on Prime Video in the UK on August 20 and Hulu in the US.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades after it was revealed nearly half of this morning's results are expected to be A* or A - but the Tory minister admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers allowed to decide the results again.

The Education Secretary said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption as teachers decided marks for a second year following the cancellation of exams, and said: 'We do expect students to get better grades this year'.

And hinting at more teacher-decided grades next year he said: 'We also recognise that those students who will be looking at taking exams in 2022 will also have had their education disrupted as part of that; that's why, as part of that extensive consultation that we did in the last academic year, we set out some mitigations in order to be able to support those children.'

Around 30 per cent of the qualifications are expected to receive an A with 19 per cent getting an A*, meaning almost half of all results will be top grades. It comes after 38.6 per cent of A-levels were graded A or A* last year when exams were first cancelled due to the pandemic.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show

The Education Secretary said: 'This year is a year we can't compare to other years. No other cohort of students have experienced this before, being kept from the classroom not once just twice'.

Mr Williamson has said the Government will consult on a contingency plan 'largely based around' teacher-assessed grades for next year, but with a hope to move back to an examination system.

Despite criticism about grade inflation, Mr Williamson insisted that 'we must support these students in looking to the future' and insisted universities and employers can have 'confidence' in the grades awarded today.

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

Gavin Williamson (pictured today) defended this year's record high A-level grades and said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption

Universities may lose fees if they don't move back to face-to-face teaching this year Gavin Williamson has said the Government expects all universities to be moving back to face-to-face teaching. He told Sky News: 'Universities are autonomous institutions. Our guidance is clear, our direction is clear and we do expect all universities, unless there's unprecedented reasons, to be moving back to the situation of actually delivering lessons, lectures, face-to-face.' Asked if refunds should be given if that is not the case, Mr Williamson said: 'I think universities have got to sort of stand up their offer to their own students. 'I think that they have the flexibility and the ability to deliver face-to-face lectures, and expect them to be delivering face-to-face lectures.' Pressed to answer the question more directly, he said: 'Universities have got to stand up their offers to their students, but we have got the Office for Students, which is targeting universities which have low-quality courses, which aren't doing enough, and we will give the OFS all the power, all the backing, in order to pursue those universities that aren't delivering enough for students that are paying their fees.' He added: 'I think if universities are not delivering, not delivering what students expect, then actually they shouldn't be charging the full fees.' Advertisement

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Gavin Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, he said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

He said: 'We do have a rigorous system of grading and awarding. People have been awarded this grade on the basis of evidence.

'We took a difficult decision, and that decision was children were to be assessed on what they had been taught. We have seen various amounts of disruption around the country and children's experiences have been different.

'But still, you have a very clear grading system, you still see children who are achieving A*s, As, Bs, Cs, have really achieved so very, very much, and I think employers can have real confidence in the grades that they get. Let's not forget this is an unprecedented year.'

Writing in The Daily Telegraph he said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year – it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Last night, Ofqual's interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said that traditional tests only provided a 'snapshot' of a pupil's ability and the new system allowed a fairer assessment gauged over a longer time period.

A-Levels and Scottish Higher results this year will be based on the in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Speaking to the BBC Mr Lebus admitted that grades may be slightly higher this year, adding: 'I think a good way to think of it is exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph - you capture an instant, it's a form of sampling.

'Whereas teacher assessment, it allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment.

'I think, from that point of view, we can feel satisfied that it's likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.'

Meanwhile Mary Bousted of the NEU told the Times: 'I think there was a political decision to put teachers in the firing line.

'We think there will be a rise in the top grades but I've been assured by government that they won't say teachers have been too generous.'

On average students receiving results today will achieve almost a grade higher than they would have in 2019, a source said.

It comes as Tory peer Lord Lucas predicted that private school pupils will get short shrift in admissions because universities are prioritising the disadvantaged.

Nearly half of today's A-level results are expected to be graded at A* or A as teachers decided marks for a second year following the cancellation of exams. (Stock image)

Around 30 per cent of the qualifications are expected to receive an A with 19 per cent getting an A*. (Stock image)

Lecture pledge to win over applicants Universities from outside the elite Russell Group are bringing back face-to-face teaching faster in a bid to entice students. At least six of them are advertising an end to online learning on their clearing sites, after a poll found 20 of the 24 Russell Group institutions plan to keep some undergraduate teaching virtual. Sussex says it is 'optimistic' that in-person will be the main form of teaching from September. The University of West London plans 'that all sessions will be in person', and East Anglia (UEA) expects 'campus life to largely get back to normal'. Roehampton promises 'in-person teaching on our London campus', while Aberystwyth plans to 'scale-up in-person teaching for the start of the academic year'. Leicester says: 'We'll be back to in-person teaching, guaranteed.' Six in ten students said they preferred in-person studies in a poll by the Higher Education Policy Institute and Advance HE. Education professor Alan Smithers, at Buckingham, said 'Middle-market universities have to be more responsive and the students want in-person tuition.' Advertisement

The editor of the Good Schools Guide said yesterday that institutes will be 'pretty cautious' about giving places to fee-paying youngsters who missed their grades as they had 'all the chances' to succeed.

Instead, they will give leg-ups to pupils who experienced 'challenges' such as having 'nowhere to work' during lockdown.

But despite alleged grade inflation, individual pupils could lose out and there is likely to be variability between schools.

Last night, regulator Ofqual defended the system, claiming the results are 'more accurate' than if exams had been held mid-pandemic.

The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time. We know exams are the fairest form of assessment but in their absence this year there is no one better placed to judge their abilities than their teachers.'

Suggestions that almost half of today's grades will be an A or A* were reported in The Times.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson wrote to all teachers, thanking them for their 'hard work' on grading. The Association of School and College Leaders stressed that qualifications had not been 'devalued'.

Lord Lucas said anyone not getting the grades they need for university should call the admissions tutor.

But he added that 'tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well'.

Today's grades have been based on coursework, mini-assessments and classroom performance.

Most pupils will benefit from it but research by Ofqual shows teachers sometimes show bias.

What can students do if unhappy with grades, can they still sit an exam and how does clearing work? Vital Q&A as teacher-assessed A-level grades are released TODAY

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers.

Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half are to be graded at A* or A.

It is hoped the school-based assessments system will be a major improvement on last year's computer algorithm fiasco which saw a massive public outcry over some unfairly low marks.

However, it is feared that there could be fierce competition for places at leading institutions among students who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers, as there could be fewer selective courses available in clearing.

Unions representing school leaders and teachers have even urged parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results - and appealing against grades just 'for the sake of appealing'.

Here, MailOnline breaks down what students should do if they are unhappy with their final grades, and what to expect today.

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers (stock image)

What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades?

Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made.

Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade.

If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf.

In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed.

Unions have urged parents and students against hiring lawyers to appeal the grades.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.

'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet. Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.

'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

Youngsters who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers are likely to face greater competition for a place at leading institutions as there could be fewer selective courses on offer in clearing (stock image)

How does clearing work?

Ucas, the university applications body, has said competition for places is tougher than ever thanks to inflated grades and a lack of courses.

It warned students going through clearing - which helps people find courses with places remaining - are likely to find it harder to get onto the courses they want as a greater proportion of people receive the top grades.

Clearing is a way for universities to fill any places they still have empty, while applicants who did not receive an offer have another chance at getting into higher education.

Around 90,000 students will be aiming to join different courses, with many trying to switch.

Applications chief Clare ­Marchant said a record number of students will take up places through clearing. She warned that 'for those most selective courses at the most selective institutions, it is likely to be more competitive'.

Ms Marchant has urged students to make a decision about courses 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks as she expects the system to be 'active'.

Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results?

Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn.

AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December.

The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam.

When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results?

Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week.

A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12.

Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead.

The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended this year's grade inflation, saying students 'deserve to be rewarded' after another year of disruption due to the Covid crisis

How have the grades been decided this year?

All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment.

Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate.

Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022?

In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams.

But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic.

The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term.

A 'don't panic' guide for parents on A-Levels results day: Education experts reveal what YOU can do to help your child - from finding a back up option to deferring for a gap year

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous 18 months that has seen their education disrupted due to Covid-19.

Rather than formal exams, which were cancelled due to the pandemic, grades have been decided by teachers' estimates based on previous pieces of work and mock exams over the last year.

While some students will be looking forward to starting at university this autumn after securing their required results, there will be disappointment for others who fail to hit the mark.

But no matter what grades your child receives, it is important to be ready to give them the best advice possible.

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous year that saw their education disrupted due to Covid-19. Here, experts share their advice. Stock image

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education and exam experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm concerned parents and guardians with everything they need to know.

Offering words of encouragement to students receiving their results, Ms Marchant said: 'Great opportunities for next year will be available to you, whatever situation you are in now, and any of them could be the beginning of a great story.

'You might be soon studying an undergraduate degree in your original chosen subject, looking for a new course in Clearing, or exploring apprenticeships to get you set for a stellar career.

'Whether your grades are higher, lower, or different to what you were anticipating, there is a route for you and we're here to help navigate through your choices through straightforward, personalised information and advice.'

Remember: Don't panic

Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College, explained the most important thing is to keep the results in perspective - no matter what they are.

'The most important thing to remember is that the grades a student gets at A Level doesn't determine how successful they will be in the future,' she said.

'If you've done well, that's amazing, but don't be disheartened if you didn't get the grades you were hoping for.

'I've met so many incredible people who either didn't get the grades they wanted first time round so tried again and succeeded, or who took a completely different path and achieved great things.

'Whatever happens, there are so many opportunities to take advantage of, so help them stay positive, move forward and keep going.'

Before your child checks their results...

Find a back up option

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm parents and guardians with everything they need to know. Stock image

Dr Lisette Johnston, ex BBC World News Editor and Head of School at ScreenSpace, said it is worth your child spending some time considering and researching a 'Plan B' before receiving their results - just in case they aren't quite what they are expecting.

'Have a look for similar courses to their chosen one, they might find one with lower entry requirements,' she said.

'For example, if you've applied to do Film or Media Studies why not look at other courses that focus on film or media, such as Film and Screen Business, or for some courses check the requirements comparing a BA with a BSc - this works with courses such as Economics.'

If their heart is set on a particular university then consider getting a head start and registering through clearing to save time if he or she does need to go through the Clearing process.

Be prepared for phone calls

Make sure your child is ready to make Clearing calls today, advised Amy Smith, Associate Director of Admissions and Applicant Experience at Nottingham Trent University.

For parents or guardians, this involves taking a step back.

'It is the student that universities want to speak to, and not their parents or advisers, so ensure they are ready to make the call themselves and have everything to hand that they might need – results, UCAS login, and a pen and paper to note down next steps and make sure they don't miss any important information.'

If they haven't achieved the grades they need...

Still check UCAS Track - you might have been accepted

Ms Smith said: 'First thing to do when a student receives their results is to log on to UCAS Track.

'Even if they have not done as well as they expected in their A levels or other qualifications, the university that they have applied to may have been able to accept them anyway, or made an alternative offer for a related course with lower entry requirements.

'Students shouldn't make any assumptions about the outcomes of their applications until they have logged on to UCAS to find out.'

Find a course through Clearing or Clearing Plus

Clearing

Clearing is how universities and colleges fill any places they still have on their courses. A student can apply for a course using Clearing if they are not already holding an offer from a university or college, and the course still has places.

There are around 30,000 courses to search in Clearing on UCAS.

A student can use Clearing if:

they're applying after 30 June

they didn't receive any offers (or none they wanted to accept)

they didn't meet the conditions of their offers

they've declined their firm place using the 'decline my place' button in Track

The most important thing is to reassure your child that there is no need to feel unsettled or anxious if they find themselves in Clearing.

Last year, a record 58,000 people secured their place in Clearing after applying earlier in the year, and a further 25,000 applied directly into Clearing.

Combined, that means that almost 15 per cent of everyone accepted last autumn took this route.

Clearing Plus

If your child finds themselves in Clearing this year, the UCAS team will personally match them to courses they may be interested in, using what they have shared in their application, and what universities and colleges are looking for in a student.

This information will be fed to the student when they log in to UCAS Track. They will be able to see a personalised list of courses available to you.

If they see a course they are interested in, they can express and interest using Track and the university will be in touch.

Last year, over 20,000 people found their course by using the Clearing Plus service.

Defer a year and take a leap

Jo Caine, MD and specialist HR recruiter for Cathedral Appointments, said: 'Just because your child thought they were going to go to university in 2021 doesn't mean they have to go to university in 2021.

'If their results didn't quite hit the mark this year, they may be able to strike a deal with the university of choice and defer the place for a year. This scenario is more common than you may expect and may be the best decision.'

With a year out, your child can take the time to do something completely different.

'Perhaps travelling the world could be on the agenda or volunteering with a charity – maybe work experience in their chosen field to give them an early step up on the career ladder,' Ms Caine continued. 'The list is endless.'

If their grades are better than expected...

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September. Stock image

'First of all, they should be very proud of themselves,' said Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College.

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September.

There is also the chance to reconsider where and what they study through UCAS Adjustment.

Ms Marchant explained: 'Adjustment is a straightforward process and each year several hundred students use it to secure their place on a different course.

'Follow the instructions within Track, and a student can hold only their confirmed place, while searching for a new one if they've achieved all the grades their conditional firm choice asked for, and at least one higher.

'If they don't find anything new that's suitable, that's ok. They will still have their place at their original firm choice.'

If they've had second thoughts on their original choice...

'Clearing is also available if you've changed your mind on your original choices,' explained Ms Marchant.

If your child had been planning to go to university and isn't sure about what they want to do now, it's important to think about the reasons why they wanted to apply to higher education originally, because they will still be valid in the future.

'This year is clearly different to previous years, but I encourage students to progress as they originally planned. Universities and colleges continue to be incredibly flexible in response to the pandemic and are sharing stories of how they've supported their current students over the past 18 months.'

Ms Smith added: 'Contact the university that they are interested in, to see if there are any spaces available.

'Usually this is done over the phone, and students can look on university websites now to find the clearing hotline numbers that they might want to use on results day.'

It might also be possible to defer for a year to give them more time to consider.

If they are not sure they want to go to university...

Alternate routes

Ms Caine said: 'Nowadays, university isn't the be all and end all of higher education. Holding A-Levels gives you the opportunity to explore numerous pathways into further learning and careers and, more often than not, for a lot less money.

'Apprenticeships, vocational studies, or alternate exam-based qualifications (such as the ACCA qualification for budding Accountants) are all options available.

'Not only are they much more accessible than university, many of these choices will allow students to 'earn while you learn', giving valuable experience and allowing them to have financial independence – a luxury not many students have.'

Interim roles

'It may be that when your child opens their results, university simply isn't on the cards anymore - and that's okay,' said Ms Caine. 'Some of the brightest minds of past generations have been those without a degree.

'But this complete u-turn may mean they're a little unsure of where to go in terms of getting their foot in the door with a career. This is where interim or temporary roles are invaluable. Working for a specific sector for a short period of time will give key industry experience and well as transferrable skills, but without the worry of being tied down for a long time.

'Through short bursts of employment, a student can work out where their passions lie and what career path is perfect for them while also garnering brilliant knowledge and skillsets for their CV.

'And, more often than not, once they've found that perfect role – an interim job has the opportunity to become a permanent placement.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Media outlets across the political divide in the US and Britain have united in their condemnation over Joe Biden's handling of the Afghanistan crisis amid what is being billed the biggest foreign policy catastrophe in 65 years.

Even Left-wing outlets such as CNN and The New York Times - who have been among Biden's biggest cheerleaders - hit out at him for his role in allowing insurgents to take Kabul after routing Afghan forces in just a week, calling it a debacle and a political disaster.

The Wall Street Journal condemned Joe Biden's statement 'washing his hands' of the situation, saying it should 'go down as one of the most shameful in history by a Commander in Chief at such a moment of American retreat'.

As the crisis deepened, a CNN columnist said the 'debacle of the US defeat and chaotic retreat in Afghanistan' was a 'political disaster' for the US President and slammed his 'failure to orchestrate an urgent and orderly exit'.

And an opinion writer in The Atlantic said there was enough blame attached for the Afghanistan crisis to 'fill a library of books', condemning the 'betrayal' of the Afghan people as he placed the 'burden of shame' on Biden.

Meanwhile a New York Post editorial said Biden's claims that he 'inherited' his predecessor Donald Trump's withdrawal plans were a 'lie' and the situation is 'as humiliating an end as the rooftop scramble in Saigon in 1975'.

An opinion piece in The New York Times claimed that Biden would 'go down in history, fairly or unfairly, as the president who presided over a long-brewing, humiliating final act in the American experiment in Afghanistan'.

A Washington Post column said the situation 'is on Biden, and it will leave an indelible stain on his presidency', while a piece in USA Today said 'this catastrophe is appearing on his watch, and he will have to take his lumps'.

Fox News ran a comment from Republican Senator Joni Ernst condemning the 'slap in the face to the thousands of men and women who served in this war' and a 'total abandonment of a country and its people' by Biden.

Columnists in the British Press also hit out at Biden today, with The Sun's editorial saying he 'ignored repeated warnings, then withdrew crucial air support for the Afghan army it has spent billions arming over 20 years'.

Commons Foreign Affairs Committee chair Tom Tugendhat wrote in The Times that it was the 'the biggest foreign policy disaster since Suez' in 1957, while a columnist for the i condemned the 'betrayal of Afghanistan's people'.

The Financial Times said the 'abandonment of Afghanistan raises doubts over the depth of US commitment to supposed allies', while Mark Almond wrote in the Daily Mail that Islamist fundamentalism is now 'back on a roll'.

US President Joe Biden, pictured at the White House last week, has been criticised by media across the political divide

People flee as smoke rises after fighting between the Taliban and Afghan security personnel in Kandahar, Afghanistan

It comes as least five people were killed at Kabul Airport and three stowaways reportedly fell to their deaths from one airborne plane as thousands of Afghans try to get on flights out amid increasingly chaotic scenes.

The Taliban swept into the capital yesterday after the Western-backed government collapsed and President Ashraf Ghani fled, ending a two-decade campaign in which the US and its allies had tried to transform the country.

'The burden of shame falls on President Joe Biden': US media reacts to Afghanistan crisis Wall Street Journal opinion piece by The Editorial Board 'President Biden's statement on Saturday washing his hands of Afghanistan deserves to go down as one of the most shameful in history by a Commander in Chief at such a moment of American retreat.' CNN analysis by Stephen Collinson 'The debacle of the US defeat and chaotic retreat in Afghanistan is a political disaster for Joe Biden, whose failure to orchestrate an urgent and orderly exit will further rock a presidency plagued by crises and stain his legacy.' George Packer in The Atlantic 'The Biden administration failed to heed the warnings on Afghanistan, failed to act with urgency—and its failure has left tens of thousands of Afghans to a terrible fate. This betrayal will live in infamy. The burden of shame falls on President Joe Biden.' New York Post editorial 'President Biden says he 'inherited' President Trump's withdrawal plans, but that is a lie. He could have taken more time, tried to at least secure the capital, and left a small peacekeeping force. Instead, we pulled out in the dead of night, so quickly we had to send troops back just to make sure our embassy was safely evacuated. It's as humiliating an end as the rooftop scramble in Saigon in 1975.' David E. Sanger in the New York Times 'Mr Biden will go down in history, fairly or unfairly, as the president who presided over a long-brewing, humiliating final act in the American experiment in Afghanistan.' Max Boot, columnist for the Washington Post 'Strengthened by the copious U.S. weaponry they have captured — and by the prestige that comes with having humbled a superpower — the Taliban will now be more dangerous than ever. This is on Biden, and it will leave an indelible stain on his presidency.' Paul Brandus, opinion columnist in USA Today 'Biden is in charge now, this catastrophe is appearing on his watch, and he will have to take his lumps. That's the way it goes. Life, and politics, are often unfair. Yet as bad as things look for Biden today, I wonder just how much long-term damage this will actually do to him.' Kyle Smith in the New York Post 'The utterly nauseating and unnecessary abandonment of Afghanistan to its fate recalls a similar humiliation at the hands of Islamist radicals in the Jimmy Carter administration. President Biden's profligate spending policies are unleashing inflation that is sparking voter distrust so noticeable that even NPR is sounding the alarm.' Trey Gowdy on Fox News 'We're just weeks away from the 20th anniversary of the September 11 attacks on our country. Three thousand lives were taken that day. Thousands of lives taken that day and thousands of lives have been lost since in defense of our nation. Tens of thousands of our sons and daughters have been injured. And more than a trillion dollars of your money has been spent in Afghanistan alone. And we are left to wonder why.' Senator Joni Ernst on Fox News 'The rushed and haphazard withdrawal of US forces in Afghanistan is not the 'strategic shift' President Biden sold to the American people. Instead, it's a total abandonment of a country and its people – and a gift to the Taliban.' Advertisement

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western nations have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians.

Almost all major checkpoints in Kabul were under Taliban control by this morning and Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority issued an advisory saying the 'civilian side' of the airport had been 'closed until further notice' and that the military controlled the airspace.

Condemning the comments of Biden in recent days, a Wall Street Journal opinion piece by 'The Editorial Board' said today: 'President Biden's statement on Saturday washing his hands of Afghanistan deserves to go down as one of the most shameful in history by a Commander in Chief at such a moment of American retreat.

'As the Taliban closed in on Kabul, Biden sent a confirmation of US abandonment that absolved himself of responsibility, deflected blame to his predecessor, and more or less invited the Taliban to take over the country.'

It added that Biden's 'Saturday self-justification exemplifies his righteous dishonesty'. The President had said: 'One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country.'

But the WSJ claimed: 'Afghans were willing to fight and take casualties with the support of the US and its NATO allies, especially air power. A few thousand troops and contractors could have done the job and prevented this rout.'

Analysis published on CNN's website by Stephen Collinson stated that the 'debacle of the US defeat and chaotic retreat in Afghanistan is a political disaster for Joe Biden', adding that his 'failure to orchestrate an urgent and orderly exit will further rock a presidency plagued by crises and stain his legacy'.

Mr Collinson continued: 'A stunning Taliban blitzkrieg followed more than 20 years of US and allied policy failures, misunderstandings of Afghan politics and culture, public war fatigue and the culpability and corruption of the failed state's leaders.

'And while Biden's political and geopolitical rivals rush to exploit his mistakes, the true magnitude of the crisis can only be judged in the human tragedy of a people again subject to Taliban persecution.

'And a failure to fulfill the now apparently near-impossible tasks of evacuating all the Afghan translators, workers and fixers on whom the US relied and who now face Taliban retribution would besmirch America's conscience and global reputation.'

Meanwhile George Packer in The Atlantic said there was 'plenty of blame to go around for the 20-year debacle in Afghanistan - enough to fill a library of books'.

He continued: 'Perhaps the effort to rebuild the country was doomed from the start. But our abandonment of the Afghans who helped us, counted on us, staked their lives on us, is a final, gratuitous shame that we could have avoided.

'The Biden administration failed to heed the warnings on Afghanistan, failed to act with urgency—and its failure has left tens of thousands of Afghans to a terrible fate. This betrayal will live in infamy. The burden of shame falls on President Joe Biden.'

And a New York Post editorial accused the President of misleading the public, saying: 'President Biden says he 'inherited' President Trump's withdrawal plans, but that is a lie.

'He could have taken more time, tried to at least secure the capital, and left a small peacekeeping force. Instead, we pulled out in the dead of night, so quickly we had to send troops back just to make sure our embassy was safely evacuated. It's as humiliating an end as the rooftop scramble in Saigon in 1975.'

Elsewhere in the New York Post, columnist Kyle Smith wrote: 'The utterly nauseating and unnecessary abandonment of Afghanistan to its fate recalls a similar humiliation at the hands of Islamist radicals in the Jimmy Carter administration.

'President Biden's profligate spending policies are unleashing inflation that is sparking voter distrust so noticeable that even NPR is sounding the alarm.'

In the New York Times, David E. Sanger stated: 'Rarely in modern presidential history have words come back to bite an American commander in chief as swiftly as these from President Biden a little more than five weeks ago.'

He quoted Biden saying: 'There's going to be no circumstance where you see people being lifted off the roof of an embassy of the United States in Afghanistan.' The President added: 'The likelihood there's going to be the Taliban overrunning everything and owning the whole country is highly unlikely.'

'The biggest foreign policy disaster since Suez': Commentators react in the British Press Nick Timothy in the Daily Telegraph 'It is ludicrous to think Britain – alone or in concert with all the militaries of Europe – could or should have fought a new Afghan war alone. First Donald Trump did a deal with the Taliban promising the withdrawal of troops by May this year. Then President Biden declared he had 'zero responsibility' to Afghanistan, insisting his sole obligation was 'to protect America's national self-interest'. As his predecessor might have put it: America first.' Tom Tugendhat in The Times 'The fall of Kabul is the biggest foreign policy disaster since Suez. The operation to seize the canal in 1956 symbolised the end of Britain's global ambition and refocused us on Nato and alliances. It showed conclusively that the US could limit our actions and change our policy.' Mark Almond in the Daily Mail 'What makes this debacle different from the Americans' hasty retreat from Saigon in 1975 is the existence across the West of small cells of radical Islamists who will be inspired by our humiliating retreat from Kabul. There were no Vietcong cells in London waiting to be activated then. Today things are different. The humiliation of the West in Afghanistan has set Islamist fundamentalism back on a roll.' Simon Tisdall in the Guardian 'What will it take for Joe Biden to admit he is disastrously wrong about Afghanistan? The US leader struck a defiant pose last week. Sounding like a slightly desperate Olympics coach, he told Afghans it was their country. If they want it, they have to fight for it. In American politics-speak, this is called tough love. Without the love.' Ian Birrell in the i 'The withdrawal, begun by a Republican president and speeded up by his Democratic successor, is driven by domestic concerns rather than the slightest consideration for people they are leaving to suffer. It is a betrayal of Afghanistan's people, of our wider strategic interests and all those troops killed or maimed fighting for its future.' Financial Times editorial 'A desire in the White House to wrap up nagging foreign policy problems so it can focus on China is understandable. But the abandonment of Afghanistan raises doubts over the depth of US commitment to supposed allies, and its determination to see military entanglements through to the bitter end.' Leo McKinstry in the Daily Express 'Over the last 20 years, Britain is estimated to have spent almost £40billion in Afghanistan, while 456 of our brave personnel have lost their lives in the struggle, yet those heroic sacrifices tragically look like they were made in vain.' The Sun editorial 'Biden ignored repeated warnings, then withdrew crucial air support for the Afghan army it has spent billions arming over 20 years. It was an action which borders on the criminal. A total and unnecessary moral failure which left Britain powerless.' Advertisement

And Mr Sanger wrote: 'Mr Biden will go down in history, fairly or unfairly, as the president who presided over a long-brewing, humiliating final act in the American experiment in Afghanistan.

'After seven months in which his administration seemed to exude much-needed competence — getting more than 70 per cent of the country's adults vaccinated, engineering surging job growth and making progress toward a bipartisan infrastructure bill — everything about America's last days in Afghanistan shattered the imagery.'

Max Boot, columnist for the Washington Post, said that pundits including him 'love to praise bipartisanship in public policy', but that the the 'calamity in Afghanistan shows the dark side of bipartisanship'.

He said it was a 'disaster that was produced by four administrations, two Republican (George W. Bush, Donald Trump) and two Democratic (Barack Obama, Joe Biden)'.

Mr Boot continued: 'But while 20 years of mistakes had a cumulative impact, there was nothing inevitable about the outcome: The Taliban takeover of Afghanistan less than a month before the 20th anniversary of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

'Strengthened by the copious U.S. weaponry they have captured - and by the prestige that comes with having humbled a superpower - the Taliban will now be more dangerous than ever. This is on Biden, and it will leave an indelible stain on his presidency.'

And Paul Brandus, an opinion columnist in USA Today, pointed out that he did not expect the long-term impacts on Biden to be as severe as might be suggested.

He wrote: 'Biden is in charge now, this catastrophe is appearing on his watch, and he will have to take his lumps. That's the way it goes. Life, and politics, are often unfair.

'Yet as bad as things look for Biden today, I wonder just how much long-term damage this will actually do to him. In late April 1975, as the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army closed in on Saigon, Ford's Gallup approval stood at 39 per cent – he had been hammered by his post-Watergate pardon of Nixon – yet by the end of June, just two months later, it was 52 per cent.

'Americans were sick of Vietnam, at the time the longest war in American history, and the president said enough was enough. Ford's election bid the next year failed, but it wasn't because of his refusal to go back into Vietnam. The pardon and a rough economy did him in.'

Over on Fox News, Republican Senator Joni Ernst said: 'The rushed and haphazard withdrawal of U.S. forces in Afghanistan is not the 'strategic shift' President Biden sold to the American people. Instead, it's a total abandonment of a country and its people – and a gift to the Taliban.

'What the world could soon witness is a nation controlled by the same bloodthirsty terrorists that sponsored Usama bin Laden, Al Qaeda and the attacks on our homeland 20 years ago. It is a slap in the face to the thousands of men and women who served in this war.'

And Sunday Night in America host Trey Gowdy said on his Fox News show last night: 'We're just weeks away from the 20th anniversary of the September 11 attacks on our country. Three thousand lives were taken that day.

'Thousands of lives taken that day and thousands of lives have been lost since in defense of our nation. Tens of thousands of our sons and daughters have been injured. And more than a trillion dollars of your money has been spent in Afghanistan alone. And we are left to wonder why.'

In the British Press, Tom Tugendhat in The Times said the fall of Kabul was the 'biggest foreign policy disaster since Suez'.

He added: 'The operation to seize the canal in 1956 symbolised the end of Britain's global ambition and refocused us on Nato and alliances. It showed conclusively that the US could limit our actions and change our policy.

'The fall of Kabul will be remembered for similar reasons: not just its abject failure, but also because it revealed the nature of US power and our inability to hold a separate line.

FALL OF KABUL: A TIMELINE OF THE TALIBAN'S FAST ADVANCE AFTER 40 YEARS OF CONFLICT Feb. 29, 2020 Trump negotiates deal with the Taliban setting U.S. withdrawal date for May 1, 2021 Nov. 17, 2020 Pentagon announces it will reduce troop levels to 2500 in Afghanistan Jan. 15, 2020 Inspector general reveals 'hubris and mendacity' of U.S. efforts in Afghanistan Feb 3. 2021 Afghan Study Group report warns against withdrawing 'irresponsibly' March Military command makes last-ditch effort to talk Biden out of withdrawal April 14 Biden announces withdrawal will be completed by Sept. 11 May 4 - Taliban fighters launch a major offensive on Afghan forces in southern Helmand province. They also attack in at least six other provinces May 11 - The Taliban capture Nerkh district just outside the capital Kabul as violence intensifies across the country June 7 - Senior government officials say more than 150 Afghan soldiers are killed in 24 hours as fighting worsens. They add that fighting is raging in 26 of the country's 34 provinces June 22 - Taliban fighters launch a series of attacks in the north of the country, far from their traditional strongholds in the south. The UN envoy for Afghanistan says they have taken more than 50 of 370 districts July 2 - The U.S. evacuates Bagram Airfield in the middle of the night July 5 - The Taliban say they could present a written peace proposal to the Afghan government as soon as August July 21 - Taliban insurgents control about a half of the country's districts, according to the senior U.S. general, underlining the scale and speed of their advance July 25 - The United States vows to continue to support Afghan troops "in the coming weeks" with intensified airstrikes to help them counter Taliban attacks July 26 - The United Nations says nearly 2,400 Afghan civilians were killed or wounded in May and June in escalating violence, the highest number for those months since records started in 2009 Aug. 6 - Zaranj in the south of the country becomes the first provincial capital to fall to the Taliban in years. Many more are to follow in the ensuing days, including the prized city of Kunduz in the north Aug. 13 - Pentagon insists Kabul is not under imminent threat Aug. 14 - The Taliban take the major northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif and, with little resistance, Pul-e-Alam, capital of Logar province just 70 km (40 miles) south of Kabul. The United States sends more troops to help evacuate its civilians from Kabul as Afghan President Ashraf Ghani says he is consulting with local and international partners on next steps Aug. 15 - The Taliban take the key eastern city of Jalalabad without a fight, effectively surrounding Kabul Taliban insurgents enter Kabul, an interior ministry official says, as the United States evacuate diplomats from its embassy by helicopter Advertisement

'The redeployment of 2,500 US troops, half as many as it takes to crew a carrier, ended 20 years of British effort in Afghanistan and left thousands of British citizens under Taliban jurisdiction.'

In The Daily Telegraph, blame was attached to America, with Nick Timothy writing: 'It is ludicrous to think Britain – alone or in concert with all the militaries of Europe – could or should have fought a new Afghan war alone.

'First Donald Trump did a deal with the Taliban promising the withdrawal of troops by May this year. Then President Biden declared he had 'zero responsibility' to Afghanistan, insisting his sole obligation was 'to protect America's national self-interest'. As his predecessor might have put it: America first.'

He added: 'This is a humiliating defeat. But if withdrawal was inevitable, its manner was not. By planning earlier, or withdrawing later, the allies could have given themselves time to evacuate their nationals safely, and establish a co-ordinated resettlement scheme for vulnerable Afghans including those who had worked with Western militaries, embassies and aid organisations.'

Meanwhile Mark Almond wrote in the Daily Mail: 'What makes this debacle different from the Americans' hasty retreat from Saigon in 1975 is the existence across the West of small cells of radical Islamists who will be inspired by our humiliating retreat from Kabul.

There were no Vietcong cells in London waiting to be activated then. Today things are different. The humiliation of the West in Afghanistan has set Islamist fundamentalism back on a roll.

Writing in the Guardian yesterday, Simon Tisdall said: 'What will it take for Joe Biden to admit he is disastrously wrong about Afghanistan? The US leader struck a defiant pose last week.

'Sounding like a slightly desperate Olympics coach, he told Afghans it was their country. If they want it, they have to fight for it. In American politics-speak, this is called tough love. Without the love.'

And Ian Birrell said in the i that the Taliban resurgence was 'the latest dismal chapter in the woeful recent history of Western intervention', adding: 'The United States foolishly set a date for departure.'

He continued: 'The withdrawal, begun by a Republican president and speeded up by his Democratic successor, is driven by domestic concerns rather than the slightest consideration for people they are leaving to suffer. It is a betrayal of Afghanistan's people, of our wider strategic interests and all those troops killed or maimed fighting for its future.'

The Financial Times editorial was also scathing of the American response. It said: 'A desire in the White House to wrap up nagging foreign policy problems so it can focus on China is understandable.

'But the abandonment of Afghanistan raises doubts over the depth of US commitment to supposed allies, and its determination to see military entanglements through to the bitter end. As one of the north Atlantic alliance's biggest and most costly foreign policy priorities of this century implodes, those lessons will not be lost on Beijing.'

And Leo McKinstry in the Daily Express looked at the figures involved, saying: 'Over the last 20 years, Britain is estimated to have spent almost £40billion in Afghanistan, while 456 of our brave personnel have lost their lives in the struggle, yet those heroic sacrifices tragically look like they were made in vain.'

Finally, in The Sun's editorial, the newspaper said: 'We pray our 600 hero Paras can safely evacuate the 4,000 UK citizens and allies without further violence. Enough British blood has been spilt. But what a pitiful, shaming and humiliating sight it will prove to be.

'Having made the disastrous decision to pull out, Sleepy Joe Biden and his administration were caught napping by the speed of the Taliban advance. Failure to realise Afghan cities would fall so quickly was a monumental error by US intelligence.

'Biden ignored repeated warnings, then withdrew crucial air support for the Afghan army it has spent billions arming over 20 years. It was an action which borders on the criminal. A total and unnecessary moral failure which left Britain powerless.'

US troops fired shots into the air at Kabul Airport today as Afghans climbed up the outside of airbridges trying to flee

Hundreds of Afghans desperately scale the walls of Hamid Karzai Airport in Kabul today as they try to flee the country Hundreds of Afghans desperately scale the walls of Hamid Karzai Airport in Kabul today as they try to flee the country

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians after the Taliban walked into Kabul's presidential palace
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Electricity tariffs that claim to be ‘green’ will be reviewed by the Government over concerns that some firms are exaggerating their environmental benefits, it was announced today.

There are about nine million UK households on tariffs branded as 100 per cent renewable or eco-friendly.

But experts warned the claims may be misleading. They have accused companies of ‘greenwashing’ by marketing their tariffs as environmentally friendly when some of the energy they supply is from fossil fuels.

Pure Planet said its electricity is classed as renewable in line with watchdog Ofgem rules

They can do this by purchasing Renewable Energy Guarantees of Origin certificates to offset the use of fossil fuels, with each certificate guaranteeing a similar amount of green energy is produced by a renewable generator.

But energy companies do not have to reveal how much of their energy is based on the purchase of certificates or how much is directly from renewable sources, such as wind farms.

Options being explored include looking at whether the system around these certificates needs to be smarter, as well as whether suppliers need to provide clearer information to households about their green tariffs.

Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the energy minister, said: ‘An amazing nine million households have sought to cut their carbon footprint by signing up for green energy tariffs.

'But anyone looking to make this move needs to be certain they are backing companies that make a conscious choice to invest in renewable energy.

'That’s why today, I’m launching a review to make sure companies are delivering on what they promise.’

Energy companies do not have to reveal how much of their energy is based on the purchase of certificates or how much is directly from renewable sources

Earlier this year, consultancy firm Baringa Partners found the worst culprits for ‘greenwashing’ include Bulb Energy, Pure Planet and Shell Energy.

It found as little as 3 per cent of the power supplied by them is ‘genuinely green’.

Pure Planet said its electricity is classed as renewable in line with watchdog Ofgem rules.

Bulb said it only uses certificates that support renewable generators, while Shell said its customers can feel confident they are doing their bit to support renewable generation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There I was savouring the buzzing atmosphere as I enjoyed a pint in the pub with friends, when it became clear that I needed to correct a misapprehension.

All my drinking companions were double vaccinated and seemed to think this made them more or less bulletproof when it came to Covid.

I explained to them this is not the case. While the vaccine is 90 per cent effective, that still means that if 50 million people receive it, five million of them could still fall victim to the virus — although they are certainly far less likely to suffer its most serious effects.

It wasn't my intention to dent my friends' confidence in the vaccine. Indeed, quite the opposite.

I believe we need a dramatic change of stance when it comes to Britain's approach to the pandemic — one that could best be summarised thus: stop fighting Covid, start living with it.

And the best way of achieving that is to understand the facts. Regular readers of this newspaper will know it is a view I've held for some time, even while acknowledging that our world-beating vaccine programme is not a panacea. And I am happy to say I have now been backed by some very eminent colleagues.

Baffled

At a parliamentary committee hearing this week, Professor Sir Andrew Pollard, who led the Oxford vaccine team, declared that while we cannot entirely stop transmission of the Covid virus (and may never achieve the much-desired herd immunity because the Delta variant can still infect the vaccinated), we need to alter our mindset to accommodate life with this pernicious virus.

That means an end to mass testing and the recitation of endless doom-mongering Covid infection figures that, as infectious diseases expert Professor Paul Hunter put it, are largely meaningless if they do not translate into rising hospitalisations and deaths.

To which I can only say 'Hear Hear!' Followed swiftly by 'About time'.

There I was savouring the buzzing atmosphere as I enjoyed a pint in the pub with friends, when it became clear that I needed to correct a misapprehension. All my drinking companions were double vaccinated and seemed to think this made them more or less bulletproof when it came to Covid. Pictured: Diners in Soho, west London

Of course, I welcome the final easing of restrictions next Monday when self-isolation rules will be ditched (and replaced by advice to get a PCR test and daily lateral flow tests for NHS staff), but there is more the Government needs to do.

I have long been baffled by the way our Government has seemed to lack the courage of its vaccine-fuelled convictions despite the astonishing success of the roll-out. We were told repeatedly — and correctly in my view — that vaccination was the key to ending the stranglehold of Covid on our lives and the partially paralysed economy.

Yet here we are, with 75 per cent of the adult population now fully vaccinated, and the 'third wave' far less dramatic than forecast even in the wake of loosened restrictions — but a wartime mentality still pervades.

Which leads me to ask: what on earth were ministers hoping to achieve? Certainly not 'Zero Covid', a shorthand term to describe crushing the virus so comprehensively that it is eradicated.

This was the policy deployed by both the Australian governments which, at various points, claimed to have achieved a Zero Covid status.

Realistic

That is no longer true: both countries are gripped by spiralling case numbers of the Delta variant in spite of ferocious national and local lockdowns and closed borders.

Nor will it ever be true. We are never going to be able to eliminate Covid, just as we have never been able to eliminate other bacterial and viral diseases whether it be TB or influenza or antibiotic-resistant bacteria which remain embedded within the world population.

But that is not a cause for fear, because we now have a much more realistic sense of how the virus affects us and how the vaccine has transformed our landscape even in the wake of the Delta variant.

This week, the Department of Health announced that 60,000 deaths and 66,900 hospitalisations have been prevented by the vaccination. Those numbers will only increase as more of the population receives the vaccine, including 16 and 17-year-olds.

I have long been baffled by the way our Government has seemed to lack the courage of its vaccine-fuelled convictions despite the astonishing success of the roll-out. Pictured: A woman gets her jab at a Newcastle vaccination centre

This, though, is far from an inviolable 'ring of protection'. Analysis by Public Health England has shown that when vaccinated people catch the virus, they have a similar viral load to unvaccinated individuals and may be as infectious.

But we have shown conclusively that mass vaccination makes the virus less likely to spread, while those that contract it are less likely to suffer catastrophic consequences.

That is precisely why those daily new Covid infection figures — announced nightly on the BBC and by other broadcasters — are such a nonsense. They tell us what we already know, which is that the virus is amongst us. But that only matters if it is overwhelming us — which it isn't.

I believe we need a dramatic change of stance when it comes to Britain's approach to the pandemic — one that could best be summarised thus: stop fighting Covid, start living with it, writes Prof Brendan Wren

Meanwhile, there are other genuinely catastrophic consequences playing out every day.

None of us can yet foresee the true long-term impact of the Government's handling of this virus, but we have already paid a huge price both economically and psychologically.

Businesses have gone to the wall, thousands have died awaiting hospital treatment delayed by the pandemic and thousands more have missed out on early diagnosis of life-threatening diseases. Others have been overwhelmed by the psychological toll of social isolation and lives put on hold.

In the latter camp, I would place those people I know who are stll so terrified by the spectre of Covid that they refuse to leave their homes.

But you do not have to be a scientist to understand that, even with the Delta variant and the threat of other mutations, the bottom line is that with mass vaccination, Covid is no longer a lethal threat.

Moreover, as global medical understanding of the virus expands, so do our treatments and therapies. We are a long way from where we were in the bleak months of early 2020.

That is not to say we can ever be complacent. No one can predict the evolution of the virus. But the key thing is whether we can manage it —and I believe that the astonishing acceleration of our vaccine technology in the past 18 months means that we can.

In effect, like seasonal variants of the flu, Covid will become a background problem, efficiently dealt with by an ongoing annual vaccine programme and care of the vulnerable.

Confidence

That certainly seems to be a belief in other parts of Europe, where I have watched with interest as France and Germany have granted privileges to people who have been vaccinated, including access to particular restaurants and bars, in an attempt to persuade the vaccine sceptics.

These aren't mandates as such — although some of the measures come close — and it isn't something I would want to see here.

Either way, now is indeed the time to end the siege culture of mass testing and quarantining.

No one can predict the evolution of the virus. But the key thing is whether we can manage it —and I believe that the astonishing acceleration of our vaccine technology in the past 18 months means that we can

No one is suggesting that people behave recklessly, but our leaders need to acknowledge publicly that, in the UK at least, the worst is over.

I would go so far as to say that it is the duty of our Government to imbue the public with a sense of renewed confidence, encouraging them to stop living their lives in fear.

Yes, Covid is here to stay. But we are already showing that we can and will live with it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A local council has said it is 'appalled' that a new Banksy artwork that had brought excitement to a seaside town has been defaced.

The elusive artist famed for his street art recently paid a visit to Lowestoft, Suffolk, leaving behind a painting of a rat sitting on a deckchair.

But less than 48 hours after it was confirmed to be the work of the famous artist, residents woke on Sunday to the news that the new attraction had been covered with white paint.

A local council has said it is 'appalled' that a new Banksy artwork that had brought excitement to a seaside town has been defaced

Locals have voiced their anger after the artwork, which had been hoped would attract tourists, had been defaced.

White paint appeared to have been applied to the wall using a roller, but the council are 'hopeful' the work can be restored.

There are a total of four Banksy pieces in Lowestoft and further artwork on the Norfolk coast in Great Yarmouth, Gorleston and Cromer.

The Lowestoft mural appeared earlier this month, before the artist revealed he was responsible.

Among the works is a rat sitting on a deck chair enjoying what appears to be a martini underneath an umbrella

Really sad that this has happened over night. It looks like a roller has been used, not sure if it is water based paint.😟 #Banksy #lowestoft @BBCLookEast pic.twitter.com/81ejyDQoi2 — Rich G (@laserusuk) August 15, 2021

In a statement, East Suffolk Council said: 'We are naturally appalled that someone has chosen to behave in such a selfish and mindless way given how excited we all are by the appearance of these works here on the east coast.

'We are, however, hopeful that this particular work can be restored, and are engaging with specialists.'

The council said that prior to the rat art being confirmed as a genuine Banksy it had placed an order for protective materials to safeguard the piece.

It added: 'In the interim, we have also employed security patrols to visit each site and on this occasion, our patrols actually interrupted the individual defacing this work and prevented any further damage occurring.

Banksy uploaded the video to his Instagram account on Friday, confirming he was behind eight new works (Pictured: Grabbing machine situated above a bench)

'We are very grateful for the huge goodwill of local people who are proud of these artworks, but we would kindly ask people not to try and repair the works themselves and to please leave this to professional restorers.'

Earlier this week, the elusive artist, believed to be from Bristol, confirmed he was behind a string of new street art pieces which appeared in Suffolk and Norfolk over the past week.

He can be seen working on eight new pieces in a video entitled A Great British Spraycation, which he uploaded to his Instagram account on Friday.

One image shows a seagull on the side of a building stealing 'chips' from a skip in Lowestoft

'Mindless vandalism': One woman's verdict of this Banksy piece, showing a child with a crowbar, spray-painted on a wall behind a sandcastle

The three-minute clip shows the anonymous artist driving around in a camper van while donning a hoodie as he works on the new pieces.

This was inspired by the summer of so-called 'staycations', which has seen Brits opt to holiday at home owing to strict Covid restrictions on foreign travel.

In the video, shared with his 10.9 million Instagram followers, residents can be seen reacting to the pieces, seemingly unaware that they were created by the iconic artist.

Upon seeing one image of a child holding what appears to be a crowbar next to a sandcastle, a woman says: 'That looks like mindless vandalism, doesn't it?'

Among the new works are a grabbing machine situated above a bench in Gorleston and one of a seagull on the side of a building stealing 'chips' from a skip in Lowestoft.

One piece on a beach in Cromer depicts a feisty gang of hermit crabs

This piece in Nicholas Everitt Park shows three children standing in a boat which appears to have been fashioned out of a piece of scrap metal

One piece in Cromer shows a gang of feisty hermit crabs.

Another, in Nicholas Everitt Park, shows three children standing in a boat which appears to have been fashioned out of a piece of scrap metal.

It features one child looking ahead as though out to sea, another child behind looking over their shoulder, and a third child at the back of the boat appearing to be leaning over the side holding a bucket.

Writing above the artwork says: 'We're all in the same boat.'

The metal part of the artwork has since been removed, and pictures show a man in fluorescent overalls appearing to drag it way.

He also worked on a statue in King's Lynn, putting an ice cream in its hand while making a tongue appear from its mouth.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Travellers from across the UK began to return to the Appleby Horse Fair today, bringing a tense stand-off with locals in a neighbouring market town.

Visitors from the Gypsy, Roma and Travelling (GRT) community begin to arrive for the 250 year-old event in Kirkby Stephen, Cumbria, today after the fair was cancelled last year due to Covid-19.

But when one of their established overnight camps was sprayed with cow manure and sectioned off with boulders, travellers decided to set up camp at the nearby Upper Eden Rugby Club - prompting a confrontation with club management.

Locals claimed threats were made against them as travellers blocked the road during a 'stand-off.'

Members of the Gypsy, Roma and Travelling (GRT) community begin to arrive for the Appleby Horse Fair in Kirkby Stephen, Cumbria

Travellers decided to set up camp at the nearby Upper Eden Rugby Club when one of their established overnight camps was sprayed with cow manure and sectioned off with boulders

They also said there were left furious when police told them they could not close the gate to prevent more travellers coming through - in case those already trespassing on the site needed to leave in an emergency.

The gypsies said they were being victimised and forced off the site for no reason, questioning why the remote spot where they had planned to stay had been covered in manure.

A rugby club stalwart, who asked not to be named, issued a statement on the club's social media channels.

He said: 'Yesterday afternoon at 14.30 I was contacted by the COVID testing personnel to inform me that we had some travellers pitch up at the rugby club.

'I immediately attended the Club and requested support from other club members .... there were 2 police officers on site.

'The COVID testing personnel departed the site and we closed and padlocked the gate, at this point we were confronted by a large number of travellers and a stand off ensued.

'There was a large number of vehicles and caravans blocking the road.

'We requested that the travellers on the Club car park be removed and sent on their way, the police informed us that this was a Civil matter and they had no powers to move the travellers on.

'We were told that we would have to apply for a Court order to remove the travellers. We were also advised not to lock the gate as those travellers on the club premises may need to be out in an emergency or similar situation.

'The travellers gave us their word that they would leave the club today, I can confirm that they offered us money to stay.

'This was refused and we have not received any monies. The police reassured us that they would be performing regular visits to the Club to monitor the situation.

'We held our monthly Exec Meeting last night (Monday) at the Club and there was a large Police presence, The Police have issued the Travellers with a Dispersal order which means that they have to leave the Club today or they will have their vehicle seized and be removed.

'To say that we are not happy with the situation is an understatement as we are a Community Club and we do value our neighbours, residents and businesses of Kirkby Stephen.'

One local said: 'It was a frightening and intimidating situation to have a camp suddenly set up right in the middle of the community.

'And to make it worse the rugby club was told it couldn't lock the gate in case any of them wanted to leave. It's madness.'

Some pubs and businesses in the town chose to close their doors until after the horse fair is over.

But one traveller, Pauline Foster, who was a part of the group, said they 'were doing no harm' and the only reason they had pitched up at the rugby club was because the site they had stayed at for years was soiled with cow manure.

Pauline Foster (pictured) said she and the other travellers 'were doing no harm' and had pitched up at the rugby club because their established site had been sprayed with cow manure

Members of the traveller community said they were being victimised and forced off the site for no reason. Pictured: Visitors from the Gypsy, Roma and Travelling (GRT) community at the nearby Upper Eden Rugby Club

Travellers began to arrive in Kirkby Stephen at the weekend ahead of the fair, which attracts around 10,000 gypsies and 30,000 visitors

The 69-year-old said: 'There were four or five police vans called and we warned we'd be kicked off double quick.

'They took pictures of all our caravans and vehicles and said if we didn't move we'd be charged and if we didn't pay it they's follow us to Appleby to get it from us.

'We were doing no harm at all. The fair begins on Thursday so we'd quickly have moved on into Appleby.

'The only reason that we came here is because the site we've stayed at for years and years was soiled with cow manure and sectioned off with boulders by some farmer.

'It's outside the village of Nateby in the middle of nowhere and the travelling people do no harm there.

'The discrimination and harassment we suffer is getting worse and if this was any other race or culture there would be an outcry, but because it's our community people let it happen.'

Police were there to make sure the travellers moved on without any further disruption by 3pm today as the eviction notice demanded.

One officer told Mailonline: 'They're moving without incident and we've found them somewhere else to stay.'

Although Appleby itself remained quiet, an influx of travellers arrived in Kirkby Stephen at the weekend ahead of the fair, which attracts around 10,000 gypsies and 30,000 visitors.

Police arrive to the scene at Upper Eden Rugby Club after locals clash with members of the traveller community

Scores of caravans and mobile homes were parked on roadsides leading into the town and horses were tethered to graze on verges as lorries rumbled by inches away on the main road between the A66 trans-Pennine route and the M6 motorway.

Long lines of traffic snaked off into the distance as youngsters driving carriages pulled by ponies raced up and down the A685.

A local businessman said: 'It feels as though we've had one year of peace before it all starts again with a vengeance.

'While Appleby gets all the visitors and the income that brings, we get nothing but disruption and so many problems that some businesses choose to close down.'

The travellers denied anyone had been intimidating.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A heron which was shot with an arrow two weeks ago is amazingly still able to fly.

Suffolk Police said today that astonished locals have spotted it flying through the sky, with the arrow still embedded in its body.

It has even been seen 'feeding well' with the shaft of the arrow clearly visible, piercing its body on one side and coming out on the other.

People spotted the stricken bird flying round the villages of Wetherden, Haughley and Woolpit, near Stowmarket.

A heron (pictured) which was shot with an arrow two weeks ago is amazingly still able to fly. Suffolk Police said today that astonished locals have spotted it flying through the sky, with the arrow still embedded in its body

The heron was photographed sitting on a rooftop by Mark Proctor in Woolpit on July 23rd, and there have been several sightings of it in the past few days.

Police aren't sure if the arrow was fired from a longbow or - more likely - from a crossbow.

'It's just unbelievable that someone could do that' said Sgt Brian Calver. 'My concern is that whoever is doing it, it's probably not a one-off, and it's probably not the first time.

'We want to capture any evidence we can in order to capture them and prosecute them.

'That arrow is highly likely to have human DNA on it - nothing would give me greater pleasure than to have whoever is responsible for this brought to justice.'

He said the chances of catching the bird in the next few days were 'sadly fairly slim' as it appeared to be well and flying without any trouble.

'It's just unbelievable that someone could do that' said Police Sgt Brian Calver. 'My concern is that whoever is doing it, it's probably not a one-off, and it's probably not the first time' (stock image)

'It could carry on a for a while, but infection will slow it down.'

He said shooting a heron was not only illegal, but an extreme measure.

'They naturally eat fish, frogs and toads - if you've got a pond and they're causing a problem, put netting over it, there are ways and means without causing harm to them.

'It's disgusting, and it's completely inexcusable causing horrific injuries to these poor things.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Russia and China are staging joint war games in a show of unity amid 'mounting pressure' from the West.

An estimated 13,000 troops from the People's Liberation Army and the Russian Army have taken part in the exercises in northwestern China.

The military drills reflect closer ties between Beijing and Moscow, with the Russian media stressing their aim as being to counter 'mounting pressure' from the West.

They also come as both countries join Western and other international powers in attempting to secure stability in Afghanistan as US-led forces leave and the Taliban continue to make territorial gains.

Footage showed Russian forces firing from Chinese wheeled tanks and other armoured vehicles.

'Russian servicemen hit most of the targets,' despite their lack of experience with the Chinese-made military equipment, TV Zvezda reported. The network is owned by the Russian ministry of defence.

The drills, involving both ground troops and air forces, will continue until Friday in China's Ningxia Hui autonomous region.

Russia and China are staging joint war games in a show of unity amid 'mounting pressure' from the West

An estimated 13,000 troops from the People's Liberation Army and the Russian Army have taken part in the exercises in northwestern China

The region borders Xinjiang, which shares a narrow frontier with Afghanistan. Beijing has voiced concerns of a spillover of 'terrorism' into the formerly restive Xinjiang if the Taliban regain control of Afghanistan.

Xinjiang is also the traditional home of the mostly-Muslim Uighur ethnic group. China has been accused by the US of committing genocide in Xinjiang, while international human rights organisations have said state's actions in the region equate to crimes against humanity.

China has repeatedly denied human rights abuses against the Uighurs. It claims its so-called 're-education' camps and relocation programmes are intended to combat separatism and Islamist militancy.

The drills, involving both ground troops and air forces, will continue until Friday in China's Ningxia Hui autonomous region

Russia has separately deployed forces to the old Soviet border with Afghanistan in a joint operation with its allies in central Asia.

The Chinese-Russian war games aim to 'deepen the joint anti-terrorism operations between the Chinese and Russian militaries and demonstrate the firm determination and strength of the two countries to jointly safeguard international and regional security and stability,' Xinhua reported, citing Chinese and Russian officials.

They show a 'new height of the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era and of the strategic mutual trust, pragmatic exchanges and coordination between the two countries'.

More such military exercises are expected involving the forces of the two states.

Russian expert Alexander Lomanov told Kommersant that the exercises indicate close cooperation between Russia and China.

'The manoeuvres send a clear signal to those forces in the West that expect to divide Moscow and Beijing,' he said.

They 'cement' the cooperation between China and Russia, he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Nearly 1.8million Britons have become day traders for the first time during the pandemic in a surge partially fuelled by social media influencers encouraging young people to buy and sell stocks and currencies.

More than a fifth of UK adults have traded shares since the Covid-19 crisis began, with half (50 per cent) of those making money, nearly a quarter (22 per cent) losing cash and another quarter (23 per cent) breaking even.

Hundreds of investment influencers have popped up across Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, TikTok and YouTube in recent years, encouraging people to join get-rich-quick schemes by posting photographs to boast of their wealth.

And many reality TV stars have been used to promote trading software and apps over the past few years, including Geordie Shore personalities Marnie Simpson, Chloe Ferry and Sophie Kasaei - while The Only Way Is Essex star Lauren Goodger had an Instagram post about forex trading banned last week after failing to say it was an advert.

Their involvement has helped boost the number of young people making investments during the pandemic, with many deciding to invest in stocks and shares for the first time while stuck at home during successive lockdowns.

Marnie Simpson from Geordie Shore, who has 4.2million Instagram followers. She posed for an Instagram forex trader called Ash Trades, who is not FCA-authorised, although it wasn't clear whether she was aware he was unauthorised at the time

Geordie Shore star Chloe Ferry, who has 3.7million Instagram followers, poses with her phone and a picture of trading charts - again for Ash Trades, who is not FCA-authorised, but it wasn't clear whether she was aware he was unauthorised at the time

But some celebrities have been accused of making money from naive investors by persuading them to join supposedly legal but unregulated trading groups after posting pictures of flash sports cars and exotic holidays.

A surge in interest in crypto-currencies such as Bitcoin has also played a part in the trend, along with the rise of so-called meme stocks such as GameStop and AMC, which have been especially popular among young investors.

Both American firms saw their shares rocket after ordinary people coordinating online bought huge numbers of shares and drove up prices - partly to catch out hedge funds, many of which have suffered huge losses as a result.

The study on day traders, carried out by research company Consumer Intelligence for New York-based investment firm GraniteShares, also found half of those who traded shares during the pandemic did so for the first time.

In addition, it revealed three in five investors were motivated to begin investing so they could earn better returns than on their cash accounts, while nearly a fifth did so in order to save for a property deposit, reported City AM.

Geordie Shore star Sophie Kasaei (left) promoted a suspected rogue foreign exchange trader called Bethany. Her spokesman said the post went through the 'usual company checks without any cause for concern'. The Only Way Is Essex's Lauren Goodger (right) had an Instagram post about forex trading banned last week after failing to say it was an advert

Katie Price's Instagram followers were conned out of thousands of pounds after she promoted a rogue trader supposedly called 'Josh Chandler' to her 2.6million followers. Her team said the star was also conned and had no idea it was a scam

But a similar number said they had done it because they were 'bored' or 'to make money fast'. GraniteShares chief executive Will Rhind said: 'When or if things return to normal, then the number of traders may fall back.'

Among the amateur investors who lost money would have been those who bought shares in Deliveroo, whose price plunged by a quarter on its stock market debut in March. It floated at 390p and was at about 345p today.

On Monday, Hargreaves Lansdown reported that investors in their 20s have flocked to the investment platform following a surge of interest in the stock market during the pandemic.

Almost one quarter – 55,900 people – of clients added by Hargreaves were younger than 30 during the year to the end of June. The company added a record 233,000 customers overall, taking the total to 1.6million.

Chris Hill, Hargreaves Lansdown chief executive, said the pandemic had triggered a 'permanent shift in consumer behaviour' and that 'younger people now have a greater appetite for investment'.

There has been a rise of 'meme stocks' such as GameStop and AMC, which have been popular among young investors

It helped to grow the firm's total assets under management from £104billion to £135.5billion. Annual revenues grew from £550.9million to £631million, while profits dipped slightly from £378.3million to £366million.

Last week a BBC documentary delved into the foreign exchange craze on social media, where slick accounts point to forex trading - betting on the value of a currency going up or down - as a route to earning extra cash.

BBC Three's Instatraders heard from a woman who claimed she failed to make any money while working for a 'multi-level marketing' firm and 'fed people lies' to recruit them in order to dodge the hefty membership fees.

A reporter signed up to IM Academy, an American multi-level marketing company that sells foreign exchange education packages with educational webinars and mentoring, and eventually trading platforms.

But despite generating a small profit from his £100 trade, he needed to cover a £202 membership fee, £240 sign-up fee and ongoing education. To take home £1,000 a month, he would need to have been trading with £13,000.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Debra Winger has revealed that she quit the 1992 hit movie A League of Their Own after learning the director had hired Madonna to star alongside her.

The Oscar-nominated actress also claimed that she was still paid for it, having trained for months in the baseball-themed project, after being replaced by A-List star Geena Davis in the lead role.

Winger, 66, who trained with the Chicago Cubs for three months in preparation, told The Telegraph in a new interview that she felt director Penny Marshall was making 'an Elvis film' after casting Madge, 62.

Not winging it: Debra Winger has revealed that quit the 1992 hit movie A League of Their Own after learning the director had hired Madonna, despite training for three months (Pic, 2019)

'The studio agreed with me because it was the only time I ever collected a pay-or-play on my contract. In other words, I collected my pay even though I did not play, and that’s very hard to get in a court,' Winger explained.

The well-reviewed film that also starred Tom Hanks, went on to make $132.4million at the box office against a $40million budget, making it a resounding success.

Still, Winger has no regrets.

'As entertaining as [the finished film] was, you don't walk away going "Wow, those women did that." You kind of go "Is that true?"' she explained, stating her case.

Big success: The movie - also starring Rosie O'Donnell - went on to make $132.4million at the box office against a $40million budget. Still, Winger says she has no regrets.

Replacement: Winger's role was recast with A-List star Geena Davis instead

Winger also said that although the other stars didn't train as hard as she did, her replacement Davis, 65, 'did OK.'

'I certainly don't begrudge any of them,' Winger added. But when asked about Madonna's performance, Winger is said to have replied: 'I think [her] acting career has spoken for itself.'

Madonna has certainly had a very mixed career in the movie business, having won plaudits for her role in the 1996 Alan Parker film Evita, and been torn to shreds by critics in turkeys such as Guy Ritchie's Swept Away in 2002.

Mixed bag: Madonna - pictured with co-star O'Donnell at the premiere in '92 - is not known for being the best actress out there in Hollywood

Meanwhile, Winger notched up Academy Award nominations for her roles in critically-acclaimed films, An Officer and a Gentleman (1982), Terms of Endearment (1983), and Shadowlands (1993).

But the actress became the subject of a documentary in 2002 about her career taking a nosedive in later years, in Rosanna Arquette's Searching for Debra Winger.

In 1995 Winger claimed that she decided to take a hiatus from acting.

In the documentary she explained: 'I wanted out for years. I got sick of hearing myself say I wanted to quit.'

Elsewhere in her interview with The Telegraph, Winger said she felt the #MeToo movement has 'gone ridiculously too far in some ways'.

Winger told how she was encouraged to take water retention tablets to lose weight on the set of An Officer and a Gentleman because she looked 'puffy'. Pictured, with co-star Richard Gere

The American actress explained did not feel the situation had 'settled' yet following the upheaval in the film industry.

Now appearing in Apple TV+ series Mr Corman alongside Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Winger said she views the #MeToo movement at least partly through the eyes of her three grown-up sons.

'I don't feel like it’s settled yet. [The industry] is still in upheaval,' she said.

'The plates are shifting. In some ways, it's pulled ridiculously too far. Part of it is that I’m the mother of three young white males, so I'm looking at things that they're experiencing, and things that my girlfriends of all different backgrounds are experiencing [and] it hasn't quite found its steady point yet where there's room for everybody.'

She added: 'I'm a bad one to ask. I always found my way. Is that privilege? It didn't feel like it at the time, because I felt like I was in very abusive situations, but it was my responsibility to buck up, get strong.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The gulf between private and state schools has widened during the pandemic causing a 'national disaster' for Britain's poorest students with fee-paying institutions accused of gaming the A-level system that handed teachers the power to grade their pupils with barely any moderation.

Today it was revealed that 70.1 per cent of teenagers at fee-paying schools received an A or A* in a subject in 2021 - compared to around 35 per cent in council-run comprehensives.

Education campaigners have said the pandemic has 'compounded' inequality in schools, especially for those in poorer areas, and there are also signs that middle class children in sixth-form colleges and grammar schools are falling further behind private school counterparts.

It came as rampant grade inflation fuelled by the pandemic today led to almost half of all A-level students gaining an A* or A grade from their teachers - a new record. And only one in five of any of today's A-level results were scrutinised by exam boards this year, it emerged today, with even fewer disputed by Ofqual who said they was happy to 'trust teachers'.

In total 44.8 per cent of UK entries to a subject were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 per cent on 2020 when 38.5% achieved it - and one in five of all results was an A* this year, another record. It means that the number of top grades handed out has almost doubled in the two years since students last sat exams in 2019, when 25.2% got an A or an A*.

As private schools pulled further away from state counterparts, Conservative MP Robert Halfon, chair of the Commons Education Committee, warned the last year 'has been nothing short of a national disaster for our disadvantaged pupils'.

He told BBC Radio 4's World at One programme: 'I do worry about the fact that we seem to have, in essence, baked a hard rock cake of grade inflation into our exam results. I would have preferred a system which had some kind of standardised assessment - and we wrote to the secretary of state, our education committee, in March urging that this would be done.'

He added: 'Every effort from the Government should be to focus on reducing that attainment gap, I'd like to see the Prime Minister announce a serious long-term plan for education - the last year has been nothing short of a national disaster for our disadvantaged pupils.'

The number of teenagers getting top grades in A-Levels has risen across the board but private schools are pulling further ahead of state schools, almost doubling the number of As and A*s in the past two years since exams were postponed. Traditional schools are classed as secondary comprehensives, secondary modern, sixth form colleges and tertiary colleges. Selective grammar schools also appear to be edging away from state rivals

The Sutton Trust says that the pandemic has 'compounded existing inequalities' in the schools system

70% of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 35% for a non-selective comprehensive school

East London school gets more children into Oxbridge than Eton Pupils at an inner city state school are celebrating after 55 teenagers got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge, which is more than the offers made to Eton College students. The majority of pupils at Brampton Manor Academy (pictured today) in Newham, east London, are from ethnic minority backgrounds, in receipt of free school meals (FSMs), or will be the first in their family to attend university. Sam Dobin, Brampton's sixth form director, said he is 'delighted' that 55 of its students are now set to study at Oxford or Cambridge University this year, which is more than leading independent schools. At Eton, where Boris Johnson studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers, a fall from 69 last year. After a bout of excited screaming, hugs and hyperventilating, Nyat Aron-Yohannes said there was 'black excellence in this building' after hearing about how many of her classmates are now heading to Oxford or Cambridge. The 18-year-old of Purfleet, Essex, who got three A*s and is going to Oxford to study philosophy, politics and economics, said 'the struggle was real'. She added: 'We woke up early to come into school and sometimes it did not even seem like it was worth it at those times when the grades were not matching up to your work ethic. 'Then lockdown happened and you had to persevere on your own because you did not have your classmates or teachers physically nearby to push you'. She said she was happy for her relatives, particularly her father Abraham, adding: 'I am the first in my family to go to Oxford. 'My father told me this could be possible. His words were of motivation.' Advertisement

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust and chair of the Education Endowment Foundation, said: 'Since March 2020, our research has consistently shown how much harder state schools – particularly those in less affluent areas – have been hit by the pandemic.

'The pandemic has compounded existing inequalities and today's results are a reflection of that. We're seeing growing gaps between independent and state schools at the top grades'.

He added that university admissions should be weighted in favour of 'lower income youngsters' and 'disadvantaged students'.

Experts have claimed that private schools tend to overestimate a student's predicted grades and have taken advantage of the fact that these are unlikely to be challenged because of the pandemic.

Exams watchdog Ofqual signed off on the results saying that private school children in those schools tend to be 'clustered' around those top grades anyway.

MailOnline analysis of today's results shows the number of children gaining top grades at all schools has exploded since they last sat exams in 2019.

Fee-paying independent schools appear to have benefitted the most, almost doubling in the past 24 months.

Two years ago, when there were last A-level exams, 44% of private school students gained an A or A*, growing to 60.8% last year and to 70.1% this year - an overall increase of 26.1% since 2019.

The Covid classroom divide: State school pupils less likely to receive home support One of the most shocking developments to come out of A-level results day has been the growing disparity between the success of private and state school pupils. While children at independent schools gained A or A* grades in 70.1% of subjects this year, just 35.3% of state sixth-formers got the same grades. Both groups saw a sizeable increase in the number hitting the top grades, but it was weighted favourably towards fee-paying students. It comes after one-and-a-half years of disrupted learning, most of which saw students stuck at home on laptops, only seeing their classmates and teachers on Zoom, if at all. And it appears this is where the disparity lies. Figures from the London School of Economics show private school pupils were twice as likely to receive a full day of online lessons during lockdown than children attending state schools. They were also four times more likely to have spent more than five hours a day on schoolwork. The report also revealed that 2.5million children across the country received no teaching whatsoever for the first six months of lockdown. The Mail previously reported that some schools had simply decided against online lessons because they believed many children have only limited internet access. Astonishingly, one head teacher said teachers might feel 'embarrassed' about teaching on screen. The full extent of the nation's classroom divide is exposed in a survey of primary and secondary heads and governors. It shows that more than ten per cent of secondary schools have not been giving pupils any work during last year's summer tern and do not intend to do so, while 8.2 per cent are offering just 'one learning activity per day'. The Campaign for Real Education said it was 'outrageous and immoral' that disadvantaged children risked being 'thrown on the scrap heap'. Advertisement

Secondary modern and high school students, which are generally in working class and poorer areas have seen the number of As and A*s head upwards from 17.3% in 2019 to 29.9% in 2020 and then 35.3% this year. This is a 18% rise in that time.

And often middle class children at often urban and semi-rural sixth forms have had the lowest rises in top grades of 13.4% since 2019.

In 2019 these students achieved 21.9% As and A*s, rising to 31.5% last year and 35.3% this year - the exact level of an average secondary modern that was previously lagging behind.

Today's unprecedented results revealed:

The number of students achieving an A or A* has increased to 44.8% - up from from 38.5%;

Students achieving an A* is now at one in five, while the proportion receiving three A*s has also trebled to 6%;

70% of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39% for a non-selective comprehensive school;

Girls have outperformed boys in terms of high grades and overtaken them in maths for the first time. Last year, girls led boys by 3.2 percentage points (39.9% girls, 36.7% boys). Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018, following a long period in which girls had been ahead;

The overall pass rate (grades A* to E) was 99.5%. This is down very slightly from 99.7% in 2020. Some 88.5% received a C or above, up from 88.0% in 2020 and the highest since at least 2000

The most popular subject this year was maths. It was taken by 97,690 entrants, up 3.6% on 2020. Psychology remains the second most popular subject. It was taken by 71,235 entrants, up 9.2% on 2020. Biology was once again the third most popular subject, taken by 70,055 entrants, a rise of 7.6%.

Geography saw the biggest percentage jump in candidates of any subject with more than 1,000 entrants, rising by 16.8% from 30,203 to 35,268. Chinese had the largest fall in candidates from around 1,600 to 1,300;

There were 824,718 A-levels awarded, up 5.1% on last year's total (784,959);

The proportion of A-level entries awarded an A grade or higher has risen to an all-time high after exams were cancelled for the second year in a row due to Covid-19.

In total, more than two in five (44.8%) of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer, up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5% achieved the top grades.

In 2019, when exams were last run before the pandemic, just 25.5% of entries achieved an A or above.

Justifying the light touch regulation of results, Ofqual interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said: 'I don't think it's very meaningful to compare this year's results with 2019.'

Asked if he was comfortable with the results, he told BBC Radio 4's World at One programme: 'Yes, I am. The approach this year was to trust teachers and to ask teachers to make the judgments on which we are going to base grades and that was based on the reality that there's been significant disruption to learning.

'It's been uneven and we wanted to make sure that students had the opportunity to show what they were capable of and teachers are in the best position to make those judgments.

'In particular, we wanted to make sure that students were treated fairly and that meant ensuring that they weren't being tested or assessed on material that they hadn't learnt.'

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1%, compared with 14.3% in 2020 and 7.8% in 2019.

On Tuesday, Ucas said a record number of students have secured a place on their first-choice university course following the bumper year for results.

Girls increase attainment gap with boys in battle of the genders and even overtake male students in maths for the first time in A-level history as experts warn pandemic may have hurt young men more Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades in this year's A-level results, with female students overtaking their male counterparts for the first time in maths. The proportion of girls who achieved an A grade or higher was 46.9% - 4.8 percentage points higher than boys at 42.1%, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show. This widens the gap between the genders since last year when female students led their male peers by 3.2 points. Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018 after a long period in which girls had been ahead. In maths, female students overtook their male counterparts for the first time this year in the number of A*s - with 29.1% of girls achieving the top grade, compared with 28.5% of boys. Hundreds of thousands of students have been awarded grades determined by their teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic. Exam regulators said that while it is difficult to know why female pupils have performed better than their male peers overall, there is evidence that girls often perform better in continuous assessment such as coursework. Jill Duffy, chief executive of awarding body OCR, told a briefing with journalists that it was 'very early to say exactly what the reasons are'. She added: 'Previous research has shown that girls tend to perform better in more continuous assessment, boys tend to pull it out of the bag, if you like, when they come to an exam. But we also know the pandemic has had wider impacts not just on education but also on mental health, and recent reports have suggested that has hit young men more than females.' She added that the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) does not publish data for students who identify as non-binary but 'it is something the exam boards are continuing to work to support in the future'. Advertisement

But youngsters who missed out on the grades required to meet their offers are likely to face greater competition for a place at top institutions as there could be fewer courses on offer in clearing.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

The Scottish Highers results were also released on Tuesday.

School results in Scotland are consistently lower than last year but have shown a sharp rise since 2019, before the pandemic.

For Highers, the rate of students receiving between and A and a C, known as the attainment rate, fell from 89.3% to 87.3%, while the attainment rate for Advanced Higher dropped to 90.2% from 93.1%.

But the figure for Higher qualifications is significantly above the 2018-19 level, which was just 75%, while the Advanced Higher rate increased from 80%.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year, compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has defended this year's results amid concerns over grade inflation, as he called on people to celebrate young people's success during a difficult year.

Jill Duffy, chief executive of OCR exam board, said that the higher grades reflected the fact that pupils had 'multiple chances' to show their knowledge and they were less likely to have a 'bad day' in an exam.

She told a media briefing: 'Teachers will have used their experience to assess all students in 2021 against the same standards that would apply when exams take place.

'However, in this unusual year, fewer students are likely to have had a bad day when taking assessments, and they have multiple chances to show what they know and can do.

'And so a greater proportion than usual will have achieved higher grades.'

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England, around one in five schools and colleges, was scrutinised by exam boards.

In a stark graph, it shows how the proportion of students getting an A or an A* has gone from 17.8% in 2000 to 44.8% this year

Universities that refuse to offer face-to-face learning should NOT charge full £9,250 fees, say Gavin Williamson - as 91% of students are accepted on first-choice of degree while numbers heading for further education rises 5% Universities should not be charging students full fees if they are not giving face-to-face teaching, Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has said. The minister, speaking on the morning of A-Level results being released, he said the Government expected all of them to be moving back to in person lectures and tutorials. It came as the number of students accepted on degree courses rose by five per cent on last year after more pandemic learning. And Mr Williamson warned the Office for Students would target and punish universities who were offering sub-standard course. He said: 'Universities are autonomous institutions. Our guidance is clear, our direction is clear and we do expect all universities, unless there's unprecedented reasons, to be moving back to the situation of actually delivering lessons, lectures, face-to-face. 'I think if universities are not delivering, not delivering what students expect, then actually they shouldn't be charging the full fees. 'I think universities have got to sort of stand up their offer to their own students. 'I think that they have the flexibility and the ability to deliver face-to-face lectures, and expect them to be delivering face-to-face lectures.' Advertisement

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.

For the remaining 15%, professional discussions took place between teachers and curriculum leads in schools and colleges with external subject experts and, where necessary, centres reviewed and revised their grades.

This represented less than 1% of all the grades issued on Tuesday, according to the exams regulator.

But Ofqual said that, at the time of writing its report, exam boards were in continuing discussions with 'a small number of centres' and grades would be withheld for these schools should concerns remain unresolved on results day.

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, the Education Secretary said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

Asked about concerns about grade inflation, he told ITV's Good Morning Britain: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the NAHT school leaders' union, said: 'Our advice is to ignore the chat about grade inflation.

The grades awarded in 2021 are a holistic judgment based on work which students have produced.

'These evidence-based decisions are very different to the normal way grades are awarded through exams.

'Students should be confident that they are getting the grades they deserve and that reflect the standard of achievement they have demonstrated.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), said: 'It is important to understand that the system used to assess students this year is different from both formal exams and the approach that was used last year too, when an attempt to use an algorithm to standardise grades nationally went wrong and had to be abandoned.

'It is therefore invidious to make direct comparisons with other years and vital that we celebrate the achievements of this year's cohort who have had to endure so much over the past 18 months.'

Record results for class of Covid: 45% of A-level pupils got A or A* in teacher-assessed grades today - nearly DOUBLE the number when they last sat exams in 2019 - as gap between private and state schools reaches all-time high

Rampant grade inflation fuelled by the pandemic today led to almost half of all A-level students gaining an A* or A grade from their teachers today - a new record - after exams were abandoned for the second year in a row with 2022 now looking increasingly likely to be the same.

In total 44.8 per cent of UK entries to a subject were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 per cent on 2020 when 38.5% achieved it - and one in five of all results was an A* this year, another record.

It means that the number of top grades handed out has almost doubled in the two years since students last sat exams in 2019, when 25.2% got an A or an A*.

And there are growing concerns about the record gap in results between private and state schools, with 70.1% of fee-paying students gaining an A or above in their exams - compared to around 35% in a comprehensive.

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust and chair of the Education Endowment Foundation for social mobility, said: 'The pandemic has compounded existing inequalities and today's results are a reflection of that. We're seeing growing gaps between independent and state schools at the top grades'.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the increase in top grades as 'deserved' after teenagers forced to stay at home in lockdown but admitted there will have to be a 'glide path' back to 'a more normal state of affairs'.

Will pupils ever sit exams again? Gavin Williamson says teacher-assessments could continue next year Gavin Williamson (pictured today) defended this year's record high A-level grades and said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has said that, while the Government wants to return to an exam-based system, pupils will continue to need extra support into 2022. 'We also recognise that those students who will be taking exams in 2022 will have also had their education disrupted,' he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. He said however that he hopes it will be possible to return to a more normal system before 2024. 'I would hope that we would be able to move to a normal system of exams much more rapidly than that, but we are making sure that we are getting the support in place for students again who have seen disruption to their education,' he said. 'For me that is incredibly important. The impact of the pandemic isn't just one year.' Advertisement

He also admitted that because of the disruption in schools there may not be exams next year, allowing teachers to decide on grades.

They were allowed to submit their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Only one in five of those results were scrutinised by exam boards, according to regulator Ofqual, who also barely disputed any of the grades, it emerged today.

Mr Williamson, who repeatedly refuses to reveal his A-level grades claiming he'd forgotten them, said: 'This is an exceptional year. It is unlike any other year, and hopefully will be unlike any other year in the future, but I believe this is the right thing for children.

'I do expect to see youngsters getting better grades this year than maybe they have in previous years, but they have worked incredibly hard for those grades, wherever they have been, right across the country, and I think we should be celebrating that, and it gives them the opportunity to take that next step.'

Today around 250,000 students received their A-level results today - and they achieved higher grades than any cohort in British history.

And according to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019, the last time they sat exams, as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1% - the highest proportion since the top grade was first introduced in 2010.

And private schools managed to more than double the number of children gaining As or A*s, breaking the 70 per cent barrier for the first time, while the level at comprehensives was at 39 per cent.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show, but on the most popular courses up to a third of students may be rejected or have to go through clearing due to the number of people getting the required grades.

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their record-breaking A-Level results

Shalayna Morton reacts with joy as she finds out her A-level results at the London Academy of Excellence, Tottenham

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results on a record day where teachers decided on grades because of covid

Leila Jarvis hugs her mother after receiving her grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London while students in Nottingham celebrate their success, including one young man seen looking like he couldn't believe his results. Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool (right)

Record breaking results for children at fee-paying schools The number of top grades at private schools has never been higher than today. Today of the students getting A-level results at independent schools, 39.5% gained the top A* grade, compared with 27.4% in 2020 and 16% in 2019. 70% of entries at private schools received A grades or higher, compared with 39% at comprehensives and 42% at academies. Watchdog Ofqual signed off on the results and hitting back at claims at private school children are getting unfairly helped they said the children in those schools tend to be 'clustered' around those top grades anyway. Advertisement

Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades - but the Tory minister admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers allowed to decide the results again.

The Education Secretary said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption as teachers decided marks for a second year following the cancellation of exams, and said: 'We do expect students to get better grades this year'.

He said: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step. But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

And hinting at more teacher-decided grades next year he said: 'We also recognise that those students who will be looking at taking exams in 2022 will also have had their education disrupted as part of that; that's why, as part of that extensive consultation that we did in the last academic year, we set out some mitigations in order to be able to support those children.'

Ofqual interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said: 'I don't think it's very meaningful to compare this year's results with 2019.'

Asked if he was comfortable with the results, he told BBC Radio 4's World at One programme: 'Yes, I am. The approach this year was to trust teachers and to ask teachers to make the judgments on which we are going to base grades and that was based on the reality that there's been significant disruption to learning.

'It's been uneven and we wanted to make sure that students had the opportunity to show what they were capable of and teachers are in the best position to make those judgments.

'In particular, we wanted to make sure that students were treated fairly and that meant ensuring that they weren't being tested or assessed on material that they hadn't learnt.'

Universities that refuse to offer face-to-face learning should NOT charge full £9,250 fees, say Gavin Williamson - as 91% of students are accepted on first-choice of degree while numbers heading for further education rises 5% Universities should not be charging students full fees if they are not giving face-to-face teaching, Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has said. The minister, speaking on the morning of A-Level results being released, he said the Government expected all of them to be moving back to in person lectures and tutorials. It came as the number of students accepted on degree courses rose by five per cent on last year after more pandemic learning. And Mr Williamson warned the Office for Students would target and punish universities who were offering sub-standard course. He said: 'Universities are autonomous institutions. Our guidance is clear, our direction is clear and we do expect all universities, unless there's unprecedented reasons, to be moving back to the situation of actually delivering lessons, lectures, face-to-face. 'I think if universities are not delivering, not delivering what students expect, then actually they shouldn't be charging the full fees. 'I think universities have got to sort of stand up their offer to their own students. 'I think that they have the flexibility and the ability to deliver face-to-face lectures, and expect them to be delivering face-to-face lectures.' Advertisement

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by their schools and sixth-forms, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England - around one in five schools and colleges - was scrutinised by exam boards.

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.

The Education Secretary said: 'This year is a year we can't compare to other years. No other cohort of students have experienced this before, being kept from the classroom not once just twice'.

Mr Williamson has said the Government will consult on a contingency plan 'largely based around' teacher-assessed grades for next year, but with a hope to move back to an examination system.

Despite criticism about grade inflation, Mr Williamson insisted that 'we must support these students in looking to the future' and insisted universities and employers can have 'confidence' in the grades awarded today.

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

The Scottish Highers results were also released on Tuesday.

School results in Scotland are consistently lower than last year but have shown a sharp rise since 2019, before the pandemic.

For Highers, the rate of students receiving between and A and a C, known as the attainment rate, fell from 89.3% to 87.3%, while the attainment rate for Advanced Higher dropped to 90.2% from 93.1%.

But the figure for Higher qualifications is significantly above the 2018-19 level, which was just 75%, while the Advanced Higher rate increased from 80%.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year, compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Gavin Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, he said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

He said: 'We do have a rigorous system of grading and awarding. People have been awarded this grade on the basis of evidence.

'We took a difficult decision, and that decision was children were to be assessed on what they had been taught. We have seen various amounts of disruption around the country and children's experiences have been different.

'But still, you have a very clear grading system, you still see children who are achieving A*s, As, Bs, Cs, have really achieved so very, very much, and I think employers can have real confidence in the grades that they get. Let's not forget this is an unprecedented year.'

Writing in The Daily Telegraph he said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year – it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Last night, Ofqual's interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said that traditional tests only provided a 'snapshot' of a pupil's ability and the new system allowed a fairer assessment gauged over a longer time period.

A-Levels and Scottish Higher results this year will be based on the in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Speaking to the BBC Mr Lebus admitted that grades may be slightly higher this year, adding: 'I think a good way to think of it is exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph - you capture an instant, it's a form of sampling.

'Whereas teacher assessment, it allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment.

'I think, from that point of view, we can feel satisfied that it's likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.'

Meanwhile Mary Bousted of the NEU told the Times: 'I think there was a political decision to put teachers in the firing line.

'We think there will be a rise in the top grades but I've been assured by government that they won't say teachers have been too generous.'

On average students receiving results today will achieve almost a grade higher than they would have in 2019, a source said.

It comes as Tory peer Lord Lucas predicted that private school pupils will get short shrift in admissions because universities are prioritising the disadvantaged.

Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades in this year's A-level results, with female students overtaking their male counterparts for the first time in maths.

The proportion of girls who achieved an A grade or higher was 46.9% - 4.8 percentage points higher than boys at 42.1%, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

This widens the gap between the genders since last year when female students led their male peers by 3.2 points. Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018 after a long period in which girls had been ahead.

In maths, female students overtook their male counterparts for the first time this year in the number of A*s - with 29.1% of girls achieving the top grade, compared with 28.5% of boys.

Hundreds of thousands of students have been awarded grades determined by their teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

Exam boards said that while it is difficult to know why female pupils have performed better than their male peers overall, there is evidence that girls often perform better in continuous assessment such as coursework.

Jill Duffy, chief executive of awarding body OCR, told a briefing with journalists that it was 'very early to say exactly what the reasons are'.

She added: 'Previous research has shown that girls tend to perform better in more continuous assessment, boys tend to pull it out of the bag, if you like, when they come to an exam.

'But we also know the pandemic has had wider impacts not just on education but also on mental health, and recent reports have suggested that has hit young men more than females.'

She added that the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) does not publish data for students who identify as non-binary but 'it is something the exam boards are continuing to work to support in the future'.

The editor of the Good Schools Guide said yesterday that institutes will be 'pretty cautious' about giving places to fee-paying youngsters who missed their grades as they had 'all the chances' to succeed.

Instead, they will give leg-ups to pupils who experienced 'challenges' such as having 'nowhere to work' during lockdown.

But despite alleged grade inflation, individual pupils could lose out and there is likely to be variability between schools.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

London and south-east schools get the highest rate of top grades while the north-east has the lowest The percentage of A-level entries awarded the top grades (A* or A) by nation and region: North-east England 39.2% (up from 35.6% in 2020) North-west England 41.4% (35.8%) Yorkshire & the Humber 41.1% (35.0%) West Midlands 40.9% (35.0%) East Midlands 41.3% (34.5%) Eastern England 44.8% (38.3%) South-west England 44.7% (38.8%) South-east England 47.1% (41.2%) London 47.9% (40.7%) England 44.3% (up from 38.1%) Wales 48.3% (41.8%) Northern Ireland 50.8% (43.3%) All 44.8% (up from 38.5%) Advertisement

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England, around one in five schools and colleges, was scrutinised by exam boards.

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.

For the remaining 15%, professional discussions took place between teachers and curriculum leads in schools and colleges with external subject experts and, where necessary, centres reviewed and revised their grades.

This represented less than 1% of all the grades issued on Tuesday, according to the exams regulator.

But Ofqual said that, at the time of writing its report, exam boards were in continuing discussions with 'a small number of centres' and grades would be withheld for these schools should concerns remain unresolved on results day.

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, the Education Secretary said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

Asked about concerns about grade inflation, he told ITV's Good Morning Britain: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the NAHT school leaders' union, said: 'Our advice is to ignore the chat about grade inflation.

The grades awarded in 2021 are a holistic judgment based on work which students have produced.

'These evidence-based decisions are very different to the normal way grades are awarded through exams.

'Students should be confident that they are getting the grades they deserve and that reflect the standard of achievement they have demonstrated.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), said: 'It is important to understand that the system used to assess students this year is different from both formal exams and the approach that was used last year too, when an attempt to use an algorithm to standardise grades nationally went wrong and had to be abandoned.

'It is therefore invidious to make direct comparisons with other years and vital that we celebrate the achievements of this year's cohort who have had to endure so much over the past 18 months.'

Last night, regulator Ofqual defended the system, claiming the results are 'more accurate' than if exams had been held mid-pandemic.

The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time. We know exams are the fairest form of assessment but in their absence this year there is no one better placed to judge their abilities than their teachers.'

Suggestions that almost half of today's grades will be an A or A* were reported in The Times.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson wrote to all teachers, thanking them for their 'hard work' on grading. The Association of School and College Leaders stressed that qualifications had not been 'devalued'.

Lord Lucas said anyone not getting the grades they need for university should call the admissions tutor.

But he added that 'tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well'.

Today's grades have been based on coursework, mini-assessments and classroom performance.

Most pupils will benefit from it but research by Ofqual shows teachers sometimes show bias.

Thanks Miss!': Moment A-level pupil opens her teacher-assessed grades then turns to thank her headteacher - as students find out results today A happy A-level student at a West Midlands school thanked her teacher for her two As and A* grades today after opening her results live on television as thousands of anxious teenagers find out their marks. Students Erin, Drew and Keehan opened their results live on GB News next to Balvinder Sidhu, the channel's West Midlands Reporter in front of their peers and headteacher Nikki Clifton this morning. Erin was visibly delighted as she found that Kinver High School in Stourbridge had awarded her two A grades and an A* as she laughed, said 'wow, I am very happy' and turned to her teacher to say: 'Thank you'. Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half to be given A* and A grades. Appearing on GB News, Keehan said he got an A*, A and a B, and Drew - who was expecting to receive two Bs - got an A and a B, telling Ms Sidhu: 'I'm really chuffed with it, really really happy'. Erin and Keehan said they had received the grades required to get to their universities of choice, while Drew said he planned on joining the Royal Air Force and doing an apprenticeship in intelligence. Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades. Headteacher Nikki Clifton said of the three students on GB News: 'They're so brave, but they're a credit to each and every youngster up and down, around the country and I couldn't be happier for them. 'Today's a fabulous day, it's one of my favourite days of the year and I think coming after the two years of disruption, I think I'm really looking forward to having a great day of fun and celebration with the students.' Asked how she was feeling, Ms Clifton said: 'I'm excited, a little bit nervous as I always am on these days because it is a nervous day and students are nervous. But I'm hopeful that our students will open a set of results that will give (sic) them where they want to go and I hope that is replicated up and down the country.' She added: 'It has been a very different and rigorous set of processes, and it's very different to any other year. You can't compare this set of year's results with last year, we've got a completely different set of assessment parameters, a whole new policy, a whole different way of working for our students and our staff, and I couldn't be prouder of them.' Advertisement

Moment Gavin Williamson repeatedly refuses to reveal his A-level grades and claims he's 'FORGOTTEN' them... after fondly reminiscing his 'walk up to college and absolute delight at opening envelope'

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson failed history this morning as he claimed he could not remember the results of his own A-levels.

As hundreds of thousands of students received their own grades, Mr Williamson vividly recalled the day 27 years ago and painted a detailed picture of how he received his results.

But pressed on what they actually were, he insisted that his memory failed him, although he acknowledged he did not get top marks.

'I didn't get three A*s, it's fair to say,' he said

'I have forgotten, it is so long ago. It is 27 years ago.

'You probably can't remember what was happening last weekend,' he added to LBC's Nick Ferrari.

Ferrari quizzed: 'Why won't you tell me? Is it a state secret?'

Mr Williamson aged 17 the year before he would take his mysteriously-graded A-levels

Earlier Mr Williamson was able to remember how he went to his sixth form college in Scarborough to pick up the envelope with his grades.

He recalled his 'absolute delight' when he saw the results and realised 'all my dreams of doing social science at Bradford University' had been achieved.

'For a lad growing up in Scarborough, Bradford was the most exotic and exciting place in the whole world,' he said.

'It opened up the pathway to those next steps and I was absolutely delighted.'

Listeners seemed unconvinced he was unable to recall his grades, given his role in Government.

Colin Holmes said: 'I'm the same age as Gavin Williamson. My memory is generally pretty poor.

Students react receiving their A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

John Ryder did not mince his words appraising Mr Williamson's recall skills over his A-levels

Colin Holmes was similarly unimpressed with the Education Secretary's memory powers

Nursing students leap after pandemic heroics The professionalism shown by nurses during the coronavirus pandemic could be behind a leap in the number of students, leading nurses have said. Ucas figures show the number of students accepted onto nursing courses has increased by 8% from last year, to 26,730. The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) said that the increase is 'encouraging' but warned of significant staff shortages. It said the newest cohort of undergraduate students will not qualify until 2024 at the earliest. RCN director for England, Patricia Marquis, said: 'This latest increase in acceptances to nursing courses is encouraging and is no doubt a result of the high profile and professionalism of nursing staff during the pandemic. 'But record numbers of acceptances does not equate to record numbers of nurses entering the workforce, as many of these students won't qualify until 2024 and beyond. 'There are already significant staff shortages in nursing and it is clear acceptance numbers are not keeping pace with vacancies. 'Pressures of the pandemic have also left nursing staff exhausted. 'This not only puts patient care at risk but means students risk not completing their studies and entering the workforce. 'Ministers must reverse the 3% pay deal if we are to discourage many from abandoning the profession, leaving future nurses without the expert teaching they need.' Advertisement

'I can remember what I got. I can also remember that A* wasn't a thing back then.

John Ryder said: 'How can the Education Secretary forget the answer to such an obvious question to an Education Secretary? Gavin Williamson is incompetent and should be nowhere near education.'

Speaking on Tuesday morning before the results were officially announced, Gavin Williamson defended an increase in the proportion of higher grades, describing an 'exceptional year' and saying students have worked 'incredibly hard' and the results should be 'celebrated'.

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic, following a second year in a row when exams were cancelled due to Covid-19.

The proportion of A-level entries awarded an A grade or higher has risen to an all-time high. In total, more than two in five (44.8%) of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5% achieved the top grades.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Mr Williamson told Sky News 'we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year'.

He told ITV's Good Morning Britain that as the pandemic ends there will have to be a 'glide path back to a more normal state of affairs'.

He said students 'have worked incredibly hard for those grades, wherever they have been, right across the country, and I think we should be celebrating that'.

Asked about concerns over grade inflation for A-levels, Mr Williamson said: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

'This year is a year that we can't truly compare to any other year,' Mr Williamson told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

'No other cohort of students have experienced a situation where they haven't been able to go into the classroom for a sustained period of time, not just once, but actually twice, and we have seen people having different experiences.'

What can students do if unhappy with grades, can they still sit an exam and how does clearing work? Vital Q&A as teacher-assessed A-level grades are released TODAY

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers.

Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half are to be graded at A* or A.

It is hoped the school-based assessments system will be a major improvement on last year's computer algorithm fiasco which saw a massive public outcry over some unfairly low marks.

However, it is feared that there could be fierce competition for places at leading institutions among students who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers, as there could be fewer selective courses available in clearing.

Unions representing school leaders and teachers have even urged parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results - and appealing against grades just 'for the sake of appealing'.

Here, MailOnline breaks down what students should do if they are unhappy with their final grades, and what to expect today.

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers (stock image)

What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades?

Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made.

Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade.

If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf.

In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed.

Unions have urged parents and students against hiring lawyers to appeal the grades.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.

'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet. Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.

'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

Youngsters who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers are likely to face greater competition for a place at leading institutions as there could be fewer selective courses on offer in clearing (stock image)

How does clearing work?

Ucas, the university applications body, has said competition for places is tougher than ever thanks to inflated grades and a lack of courses.

It warned students going through clearing - which helps people find courses with places remaining - are likely to find it harder to get onto the courses they want as a greater proportion of people receive the top grades.

Clearing is a way for universities to fill any places they still have empty, while applicants who did not receive an offer have another chance at getting into higher education.

Around 90,000 students will be aiming to join different courses, with many trying to switch.

Applications chief Clare ­Marchant said a record number of students will take up places through clearing. She warned that 'for those most selective courses at the most selective institutions, it is likely to be more competitive'.

Ms Marchant has urged students to make a decision about courses 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks as she expects the system to be 'active'.

Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results?

Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn.

AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December.

The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam.

When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results?

Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week.

A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12.

Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead.

The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended this year's grade inflation, saying students 'deserve to be rewarded' after another year of disruption due to the Covid crisis

How have the grades been decided this year?

All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment.

Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate.

Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022?

In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams.

But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic.

The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term.

'Time to BREAKDANCE!': Hundreds of A-level pupils share their delight after record numbers achieve top grades and are set for university in September

Ecstatic teenagers across the UK have revealed their delight at receiving top A-level results today, with thousands of students set for university in September as teachers set grades for a second year following the cancellation of exams due to Covid restrictions.

Hundreds of thrilled students shared funny GIFs of celebrating footballers, break-dancers, a skit from Family Guy and even a cheering Jeremy Clarkson on Twitter today as they revealed that they received the grades necessary to meet their first-choice university offers.

Teenagers had spread good luck messages as they suffered a sleepless night yesterday ahead of results day, with one writing: 'Funny how I said I wasn't nervous but here I am awake at 5.45am #alevels2021'. Another said: 'Me laughing to cover the fact I can't sleep because I know I'm not gonna get into my dream university and am too nervous'.

Ecstatic teenagers across the UK have revealed their delight at receiving top A-level results today, with thousands of students set for university in September as teachers set grades for a second year following the cancellation of exams due to Covid restrictions

Students awaiting the grades which will get them to universities across the UK from this autumn said they 'didn't sleep a wink' last night, with nearly half of today's results expected to be graded at A* or A

Lottie Olive wiping away tears with mother Kate after she managed to get an A* at Peter Symonds College, Winchester

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

A student at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) finds out his A-Level results in north London

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Lanre Dada poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level resultS

'If the teachers didn't give you the A-level results you were hoping for...': Jeremy Clarkson posts annual exam tweet boasting he got a C and 2Us and 'ended up happy...with a Bentley'

Jeremy Clarkson has boasted he has 'loads of friends' despite failing his A-Levels in his annual results day tweet.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams.

Today he wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager.

Students were today handed their results based on in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Mr Clarkson wrote: 'If the teachers didn't give you the A level results you were hoping for, don't worry. I got a C and 2Us and I've ended up happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley.'

His 7.4million followers reacted with hilarity at the latest results day tweet, with one saying 'it's that time of year again lads' while another added 'makes me smile every year…University of life, the best university and woke free'.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams

Today Mr Clarkson (pictured) wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds.'

He added: 'And I didn't even get the chance to insist the government gave me three As instead.'

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning.

One wrote: 'The world is alright by me as long as this tweet appears each year.'

Another said: 'It's that time of the year again...'

One said: 'I like this annual tweet, I pop back during the day to see just how many people have zero sense of humour....which is humorous in itself.'

'Thank you for reminding kids again that exams aren't the only thing that can drive someone to success, Jeremy. It's such a valuable lesson,' said another.

Another added: 'I was really expecting you to say that you have a slightly bigger than average Lamborghini tractor, this is somewhat disappointing Clarkson..'

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it's a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades? It just makes it sound like we plucked it out of thin air when in fact we have to judge certain criteria to award grades.'

Anxious teenagers across the UK have today described suffering a sleepless night ahead of their A-level results being published at 8am.

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds'

Clarkson posts the tweet to his 7.4 million followers on A-level results day every year

Students awaiting the grades which will get them to universities from this autumn said they 'didn't sleep a wink' last night, with nearly half of today's results expected to be graded at A* or A after a year of disruption amid school closures during the pandemic.

Among the hundreds of thousands of students and their parents unable to sleep last night, many took to Twitter to share their feelings and spread good luck messages, with one writing: 'Funny how I said I wasn't nervous but here I am awake at 5.45am #alevels2021'.

Another nervous teenager posted: 'Me laughing to cover the fact I can't sleep because I know I'm not gonna get into my dream university and am too nervous'. One tweeted: 'It's results day and after a night of absolutely no sleep I wish the best of luck to everyone, we'll smash it'.

Around 30 per cent of the qualifications are expected to receive an A with 19 per cent getting an A*, it was reported last night. If more students gain top grades then it will be more difficult for top universities to differentiate between applicants, it has been suggested.

It comes after 38.6 per cent of A-levels were graded A or A* last year when exams were first cancelled.

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it's a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades'

A 'don't panic' guide for parents on A-Levels results day: Education experts reveal what YOU can do to help your child - from finding a back up option to deferring for a gap year

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous 18 months that has seen their education disrupted due to Covid-19.

Rather than formal exams, which were cancelled due to the pandemic, grades have been decided by teachers' estimates based on previous pieces of work and mock exams over the last year.

While some students will be looking forward to starting at university this autumn after securing their required results, there will be disappointment for others who fail to hit the mark.

But no matter what grades your child receives, it is important to be ready to give them the best advice possible.

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous year that saw their education disrupted due to Covid-19. Here, experts share their advice. Stock image

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education and exam experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm concerned parents and guardians with everything they need to know.

Offering words of encouragement to students receiving their results, Ms Marchant said: 'Great opportunities for next year will be available to you, whatever situation you are in now, and any of them could be the beginning of a great story.

'You might be soon studying an undergraduate degree in your original chosen subject, looking for a new course in Clearing, or exploring apprenticeships to get you set for a stellar career.

'Whether your grades are higher, lower, or different to what you were anticipating, there is a route for you and we're here to help navigate through your choices through straightforward, personalised information and advice.'

Remember: Don't panic

Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College, explained the most important thing is to keep the results in perspective - no matter what they are.

'The most important thing to remember is that the grades a student gets at A Level doesn't determine how successful they will be in the future,' she said.

'If you've done well, that's amazing, but don't be disheartened if you didn't get the grades you were hoping for.

'I've met so many incredible people who either didn't get the grades they wanted first time round so tried again and succeeded, or who took a completely different path and achieved great things.

'Whatever happens, there are so many opportunities to take advantage of, so help them stay positive, move forward and keep going.'

Before your child checks their results...

Find a back up option

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm parents and guardians with everything they need to know. Stock image

Dr Lisette Johnston, ex BBC World News Editor and Head of School at ScreenSpace, said it is worth your child spending some time considering and researching a 'Plan B' before receiving their results - just in case they aren't quite what they are expecting.

'Have a look for similar courses to their chosen one, they might find one with lower entry requirements,' she said.

'For example, if you've applied to do Film or Media Studies why not look at other courses that focus on film or media, such as Film and Screen Business, or for some courses check the requirements comparing a BA with a BSc - this works with courses such as Economics.'

If their heart is set on a particular university then consider getting a head start and registering through clearing to save time if he or she does need to go through the Clearing process.

Be prepared for phone calls

Make sure your child is ready to make Clearing calls today, advised Amy Smith, Associate Director of Admissions and Applicant Experience at Nottingham Trent University.

For parents or guardians, this involves taking a step back.

'It is the student that universities want to speak to, and not their parents or advisers, so ensure they are ready to make the call themselves and have everything to hand that they might need – results, UCAS login, and a pen and paper to note down next steps and make sure they don't miss any important information.'

If they haven't achieved the grades they need...

Still check UCAS Track - you might have been accepted

Ms Smith said: 'First thing to do when a student receives their results is to log on to UCAS Track.

'Even if they have not done as well as they expected in their A levels or other qualifications, the university that they have applied to may have been able to accept them anyway, or made an alternative offer for a related course with lower entry requirements.

'Students shouldn't make any assumptions about the outcomes of their applications until they have logged on to UCAS to find out.'

Find a course through Clearing or Clearing Plus

Clearing

Clearing is how universities and colleges fill any places they still have on their courses. A student can apply for a course using Clearing if they are not already holding an offer from a university or college, and the course still has places.

There are around 30,000 courses to search in Clearing on UCAS.

A student can use Clearing if:

they're applying after 30 June

they didn't receive any offers (or none they wanted to accept)

they didn't meet the conditions of their offers

they've declined their firm place using the 'decline my place' button in Track

The most important thing is to reassure your child that there is no need to feel unsettled or anxious if they find themselves in Clearing.

Last year, a record 58,000 people secured their place in Clearing after applying earlier in the year, and a further 25,000 applied directly into Clearing.

Combined, that means that almost 15 per cent of everyone accepted last autumn took this route.

Clearing Plus

If your child finds themselves in Clearing this year, the UCAS team will personally match them to courses they may be interested in, using what they have shared in their application, and what universities and colleges are looking for in a student.

This information will be fed to the student when they log in to UCAS Track. They will be able to see a personalised list of courses available to you.

If they see a course they are interested in, they can express and interest using Track and the university will be in touch.

Last year, over 20,000 people found their course by using the Clearing Plus service.

Defer a year and take a leap

Jo Caine, MD and specialist HR recruiter for Cathedral Appointments, said: 'Just because your child thought they were going to go to university in 2021 doesn't mean they have to go to university in 2021.

'If their results didn't quite hit the mark this year, they may be able to strike a deal with the university of choice and defer the place for a year. This scenario is more common than you may expect and may be the best decision.'

With a year out, your child can take the time to do something completely different.

'Perhaps travelling the world could be on the agenda or volunteering with a charity – maybe work experience in their chosen field to give them an early step up on the career ladder,' Ms Caine continued. 'The list is endless.'

If their grades are better than expected...

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September. Stock image

'First of all, they should be very proud of themselves,' said Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College.

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September.

There is also the chance to reconsider where and what they study through UCAS Adjustment.

Ms Marchant explained: 'Adjustment is a straightforward process and each year several hundred students use it to secure their place on a different course.

'Follow the instructions within Track, and a student can hold only their confirmed place, while searching for a new one if they've achieved all the grades their conditional firm choice asked for, and at least one higher.

'If they don't find anything new that's suitable, that's ok. They will still have their place at their original firm choice.'

If they've had second thoughts on their original choice...

'Clearing is also available if you've changed your mind on your original choices,' explained Ms Marchant.

If your child had been planning to go to university and isn't sure about what they want to do now, it's important to think about the reasons why they wanted to apply to higher education originally, because they will still be valid in the future.

'This year is clearly different to previous years, but I encourage students to progress as they originally planned. Universities and colleges continue to be incredibly flexible in response to the pandemic and are sharing stories of how they've supported their current students over the past 18 months.'

Ms Smith added: 'Contact the university that they are interested in, to see if there are any spaces available.

'Usually this is done over the phone, and students can look on university websites now to find the clearing hotline numbers that they might want to use on results day.'

It might also be possible to defer for a year to give them more time to consider.

If they are not sure they want to go to university...

Alternate routes

Ms Caine said: 'Nowadays, university isn't the be all and end all of higher education. Holding A-Levels gives you the opportunity to explore numerous pathways into further learning and careers and, more often than not, for a lot less money.

'Apprenticeships, vocational studies, or alternate exam-based qualifications (such as the ACCA qualification for budding Accountants) are all options available.

'Not only are they much more accessible than university, many of these choices will allow students to 'earn while you learn', giving valuable experience and allowing them to have financial independence – a luxury not many students have.'

Interim roles

'It may be that when your child opens their results, university simply isn't on the cards anymore - and that's okay,' said Ms Caine. 'Some of the brightest minds of past generations have been those without a degree.

'But this complete u-turn may mean they're a little unsure of where to go in terms of getting their foot in the door with a career. This is where interim or temporary roles are invaluable. Working for a specific sector for a short period of time will give key industry experience and well as transferrable skills, but without the worry of being tied down for a long time.

'Through short bursts of employment, a student can work out where their passions lie and what career path is perfect for them while also garnering brilliant knowledge and skillsets for their CV.

'And, more often than not, once they've found that perfect role – an interim job has the opportunity to become a permanent placement.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Recalled how he looked 'genuinely furious and shocked' by her actions in club

A woman who revealed she 'smacked' a male stranger who groped her at a nightclub has sparked a debate after urging others to 'normalise girls standing up for themselves.'

Harriet, 21, from Sheffield, South Yorkshire, took to Twitter and explained: 'I smacked a lad last night who sexually assaulted me in the club, and he looked genuinely furious and shocked? Normalise girls standing up for themselves when they get groped wtf.'

She continued: 'So it's absolutely fine for you, as a stranger, to touch me up without consent but not ok for me to touch you in self defence. Okkkk...

'Also the best part about this is I was literally wearing a massive jumper round my waist so wasn't wearing anything 'revealing' at all. Before any idiots start to try justify groping strangers in clubs.'

It wasn't long before the post received over 24,000 likes and 1,500 retweets, but while many were shocked by her horrifying ordeal and branded her 'superwoman', others suggested violence wasn't the answer.

Harriet (pictured), 21, from Sheffield, South Yorkshire, has sparked a debate online after revealing how she 'smacked' a male stranger who groped her in a night club

The 21-year-old (pictured) added how she was also wearing a 'massive jumper' round her waist so wasn't wearing anything 'revealing' at all

Harriet went on to explain how the man looked 'genuinely furious and shocked' when she 'smacked' him after sexually assaulting her in a club

'Doesn't matter if she looks great, is or is not in a revealing outfit; you don't touch someone without their permission. It is a *REALLY* simple concept. You have to be incredibly dense not to get it,' commented one.

A second penned: 'How hard is it to understand that what women decide to wear doesn't mean people can touch them without consent.'

Elsewhere, others proved that Harriet was not alone and shared their own experiences of being touched inappropriately while on a night out.

'I dislocated a guy's thumb because he kept touching my legs every time I walked past and just wouldn't stop.... he stopped after that though,' wrote one.

In a second post, Harriett continued: 'So it's absolutely fine for you, as a stranger, to touch me up without consent but not ok for me to touch you in self defence. Okkkk...'

A second recalled: 'Guy grabbed my bum once, I turned round and yelled at him and he started squaring up to me, I was like wtf is your problem you assaulted me and now you wanna beat me up for calling you on it?!' while a third added:

'A very similar thing happened to me last weekend. I walked past the bar and someone slapped my a**ese, one of the bar ladies saw it and told the bouncer and they kicked him out and he put up a huge fight. I just don't understand what they get out of it!???'

Meanwhile, a fourth penned: 'Can't believe how guys still find it acceptable. Went to a club with my pals at the weekend, had about 8 girls out with us all with fellas and this one bloke thought it was okay to try grab each one of them. Needless to say he was dispatched.'

Another told how she 'headbutted a guy in a chip shop' when he tried to undo her dress.

Others proved that Harriet was not alone and shared their own experiences of being touched inappropriately while on a night out (pictured)

She continued: 'Stunned silence all round and he still had the audacity to ask 'what was that for? WHAT DO U THINK??????'

However, in response to Harriet's initial post, one man responded: 'Orrrr normalise contacting the police after a sexual assault instead.'

Another argued: 'If you maybe get dressed a little more. Instead of walking around all naked.'

Jumping to defend Harriet, one frustrated person wrote: ''They won't do much, it's hard to charge someone on a singular offence especially if there's no witnesses. normalise women giving it back twice as hard, then they won't do it again.'

Another justified: 'I highly doubt she was naked, and even if she was it wouldn't be an excuse. If men aren't able to control themselves and keep their hands off women without consent then they have no place being anywhere near society.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A four-year-old boy was allegedly attacked by a dog outside a Sainsbury's supermarket yesterday.

The youngster was savaged by the hulking XL American Bully outside the store in Wolverhampton, according to shocked witnesses.

Onlookers told how the boy ran past the dog towards his father when it suddenly leapt at him yesterday morning.

The dog is said to be an 11-month-old called Donnie owned by a homeless man, who has apologised but denied that it had bitten the boy, saying it was a 'graze'.

A supermarket worker said: 'There's a homeless man who always sits by the supermarket with his dog. It just went for the kid as he ran past.

West Midlands Police at the Sainsbury's store in Wolverhampton yesterday after the incident

The homeless man outside the store apologised yesterday but denied that the dog bit the boy

'There were a couple of police cars, a paramedic and an ambulance here. It looked nasty. He was just a little lad and the dog was much bigger than him. He got bitten on his upper leg from what I understand.'

The dog was seized by police from outside the store just before 11.30am, and the boy was taken to hospital but his injuries were not thought to be life-changing.

Sergeant Robert Pritchard, from Wolverhampton Police, said: 'The child was taken to hospital for treatment but his physical injuries are not believed to be life-changing and we wish him well for a speedy recovery. He must have been very frightened.

'The dog, thought to be an American Bully XL, was seized by officers at the scene and is now being looked after in our kennels. Its breed will be confirmed as part of our investigation.

Police are investigating what happened outside the Sainsbury's store in Wolverhampton

West Midlands Ambulance Service said it was called to the store to reports of a dog bite

'We have the owner's details and have already spoken to them. We will we will be in regular contact with them and the boy's family.'

The dog's owner, who remained sitting outside the supermarket, denied the animal had bitten the youngster. He insisted his dog 'never misbehaves'.

The man said: 'The kid has come running down and startled Donnie. Donnie jumped up and knocked him over. It wasn't a bite - it's a graze.

'The police have got my dog. They have said I'll get him back in a couple of weeks if he behaves himself. I couldn't be any more apologetic.'

The dog involved in the alleged attack yesterday was an XL American Bully (file picture)

The American bully breed is divided into four categories - Pocket, Standard, Classic and XL. The largest are heavily muscled and weigh 8st.

West Midlands Ambulance Service said it was called to reports of a dog bite.

A spokesman said: 'One ambulance and a paramedic officer attended the scene and treated the patients, a boy, for injuries not believed to be serious.

'The child was conveyed to hospital for further treatment.'

Anyone with information can contact West Midlands Police on 101, or live chat, quoting investigation number 20/1520549/21
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the horrifying moment a man is run over by a car in South London.

Video filmed by a passerby in Royal Arsenal, Greenwich on Sunday shows a man running and trying to jump on the back of a moving car, but falling off.

As he falls to the ground, he is run over by a second, black BMW and becomes trapped under the wheels as locals scream in terror.

Video filmed by a passerby in Royal Arsenal, Greenwich shows the man running and trying to jump on the back of a moving car, but falling off. As he falls to the ground, he is run over by a second, black BMW and becomes trapped under the wheels as locals scream in terror

A fight then ensues among the group of men, with one seen punching through the driver-side window of the car before he is pulled away

A fight then ensues among the group of men, with one seen punching through the driver-side window of the car before he is pulled away.

Amidst the chaos, the black car and a third, white vehicle drive away while two men can be seen tending to the injured man.

A Metropolitan Police spokesman told MailOnline: 'Police were called to Duke of Wellington Avenue, Woolwich, shortly before 06.30hrs on Sunday, 8 August to reports of a fight between a group of males.

'Officers attended along with paramedics from London Ambulance Service (LAS).

Amidst the chaos, the black car and a third, white vehicle drive away while two men can be seen tending to the injured man

A fight then ensues among the group of men, with one seen punching through the driver-side window of the car before he is pulled away

'A man in his 20s was found seriously injured. He was treated at the scene before being taken to hospital. His injuries have been assessed as non life-threatening.

'It was reported that the man had been run over by a car, which had then left a scene. Police are aware of video footage posted on social media of this incident.

'There have been no arrests, but enquiries are ongoing.'

A London Ambulance Service spokesman told MailOnline: 'We were called at 6.27am on Sunday 8 August to reports of an incident on Duke of Wellington Avenue, SE18.

'We sent an ambulance crew, who treated a man at the scene and took him to a major trauma centre as a priority.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Did you know Davison? Did you witness the incident in Plymouth? Email Jacob.Thorburn@mailonline.co.uk

Advertisement

Police are tonight facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago.

Gunman Jake Davison, 22, murdered his mother Maxine, 51, in her Plymouth home with a pump-action shotgun before going out into the street and killer a further four innocent people.

The bodybuilder, who had posted rambling videos about being 'beaten down' on social media, said nothing during the 12-minute rampage through a quiet residential street before turning the gun on himself.

Tonight the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said they would investigate Devon and Cornwall Police over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate.

The legally held weapon had been taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault last September.

It was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot shotgun.

Confirming a mandatory referral from Devon and Cornwall Police this morning, IOPC regional director David Ford said announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'.

This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing, he said.

Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12.

'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun.

'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered.

'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings.

'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.'

Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.'

Davison had claimed that he had the shotgun for sports use and had the licence reinstated after he attended an anger management course.

Davison, a self-described 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and bodybuilder first murdered his mother Maxine, 51, after bursting into her home with a pump-action shotgun last night.

Police are tonight facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago. Pictured: Killer Jake Davison

Plymouth residents last night came together for a candlelight vigil at North Down Crescent Park after the local community was rocked by the shooting spree

Devon and Cornwall Police made a mandatory referral to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate. Pictured: Chief Constable Shaun Sawyer

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade

The vigil was organised by the local neighbourhood watch and chairman Kevin Sproston who led attendees in a minute's silence

As it grew darker, mourners stood with candles in their hands, many given to them by a group of people at a table, while others shone the torches on their phones

Davison's shooting spree left five people dead apart from himself and was Britain’s first ‘incel’ mass shooting, named after a violent online subculture of ‘involuntary celibates’, whose members define themselves by their inability to find a sexual partner.

Davison murdered his own cancer survivor mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing three-year-old Sophie Martyn and her father Lee, 43.

Sophie was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee who was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One witness said: 'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

Davison then aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Davison then walked out of the cul-de-sac down a path, telling a stunned resident: 'Nothing to worry about mate,' before shooting dog walker Stephen Washington, 59.

One witness said: 'I went up there to see if I could help and there was a bloke lying on the grass face down. He was obviously dead, and his two dogs were running free.'

Davison walked past a house and crosses the road in the direction of Blush hair salon, where he fatally shot Kate Shepherd, 66, his fifth victim.

A witness to Ms Shepherd's murder said she was shot 'without a word' from Davison as she was smoking a cigarette outside the salon.

Shortly after shooting dead Sophie Martyn, three, her father Lee, 43, and Stephen Washington, 59, Davison is seen sauntering across a road, shotgun in hand, before he reaches a hair salon where he fatally shoots pensioner Kate Shepherd

Sophie Martyn, 3, and her father Lee, 43, (pictured above) were shot at random as Plymouth incel gunman Jake Davison entered Biddick Drive and fatally killed the pair who were walking up the road

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife Becky works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts

Jake Davison's mother Maxine was the first to be killed. She and other relatives are claimed to have begged the police and NHS to help him with mental health problems

66-year-old Kate Shepherd was Davison's final victim, and was gunned down by Blush hair salon in Plymouth

Davison first murdered his own mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing schoolgirl Sophie Martyn, her father Lee, 43, and dog walker Stephen Washington. He then crossed a road to a hair salon where he shot and fatally injured Kate Shepherd, 66

Jake Davison then moved on towards a nearby wooded area where he shot and murdered dog walker Stephen Washington, 59, (above)

'Police gave shotgun back to gunman after "anger management class" one month before rampage' Police are tonight facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago. Gunman Jake Davison, 22, murdered his mother Maxine, 51, in her Plymouth home with a pump-action shotgun before going out into the street and killer a further four innocent people. The bodybuilder, who had posted rambling videos about being 'beaten down' on social media, said nothing during the 12-minute rampage through a quiet residential street before turning the gun on himself. Tonight the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said they would investigate Devon and Cornwall Police over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate. The legally held weapon had been taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault last September. It was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot shotgun. Confirming a mandatory referral from Devon and Cornwall Police this morning, IOPC regional director David Ford said announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'. This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing, he said. Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12. 'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun. 'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered. 'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings. 'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.' Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.' According to The Telegraph, Davison had claimed that he had the shotgun for sports use and had the licence reinstated after he attended an anger management course. Advertisement

A 16-year-old boy, who was walking to a supermarket when he saw the murder, said: 'She fell to the floor and he just carried on walking. He didn't say anything to her. I don't know if she worked at the salon or not. A man in a hoodie arrived and held his hands over her stomach wounds. I couldn't believe what I saw.'

Seconds later, Davison turned the gun on himself before armed police can reach him.

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts.

In other developments:

Friends claimed Davison’s mother had begged the NHS and police to give him urgent mental health treatment during lockdown, but failed to get the help he needed;

Neighbours also said his father Mark had previously told the police his son’s gun should be taken away from him;

The police watchdog is also investigating what information Devon and Cornwall Police had about Davison’s mental health, and if it was considered

Boris Johnson said the issue of how the killer came to legally own a gun should be ‘properly investigated’ as he described the mass shooting in Plymouth on Thursday night as an ‘absolutely appalling’ incident

Plymouth residents held a candlelit vigil for the five victims killed in the shooting spree on Thursday;

Tributes have flooded in for the Martins who lost their lives during a six-minute scene of carnage, as it was revealed Sophie was adopted by Lee and his partner two years earlier.

One friend said in tribute: 'You were such a kind selfless gentleman who put everyone else before yourself we have shared many memories together, I will never forget the things in life you have done for me.'

Another wrote: 'I am totally distraught that a good friend's brother and niece have been taken in such an horrific way, my heart is breaking for my friend & his family at this very very sad news.

'Deepest and sincerest condolences to all the deceased & hope those injured make a speedy recovery.'

Neighbours said penultimate victim Mr Washington was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path close to the Davison family home when he was shot by the killer.

Mike Moore, who lives near by said: ‘Both the dogs ran back to Stephen’s home and that’s when the family became concerned.

‘Stephen was well known around here because he was always out with his beautiful dogs. He wasn’t friends with Jake and there’s nothing connecting them so we think it was completely random.’

Within six minutes, officers, some armed only with Tasers, had raced to the scene of the carnage. But they were too late to save the victims, whose bloodied bodies lay in the street.

Davison's body was found 12 minutes after the shooting began.

Yesterday police and social services were facing questions about whether Britain’s worst mass shooting for more than a decade could have been prevented.

Last night the Independent Office for Police Conduct launched an investigation into ‘Devon and Cornwall Police’s decision-making in relation to Davison’s possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate’.

IOPC regional director David Ford said the probe will look at ‘what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed’. The killer’s shotgun and certificate were removed by police in December some three months after an allegation of assault in September 2020.

He is said to have had a row with two youths which was reported to police, to whom he was already known. A family friend also claimed yesterday that Davison had assaulted his own father.

His weapon, which is legal in the UK for sports such as clay pigeon shooting if a licence is obtained, was then returned in early July.

Within hours of the carnage, a disturbing series of YouTube videos emerged in which Davison, under the user name Professor Waffle, fantasised about being the ‘Terminator’ from the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.

He also spoke of his belief in the ‘blackpill’ philosophy of the ‘incel’ community, a fatalistic and misogynistic world view that your position in life cannot change.

The chilling parallels between the shooting in Plymouth and the Sandy Hook and Hungerford massacres In December 2012, 20-year-old Adam Lanza gunned down 27 people, including his mother, before turning his weapon himself at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Connecticut. Lanza murdered 20 elementary school children, six adults and shot his own mother, Nancy, 52, four times in the head with a rifle while she slept in bed. A 2014 report found Lanza was a deeply troubled young man who obsessed over mass killings as he fell deeper into a pit of mental illness while his mother ignored his struggles. FBI files revealed he had an 'obsession' with historic mass shootings and a 'paedophilia-like' interest in children before he committed the fourth deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States. Documents also showed Lanza had meticulously created a spreadsheet documenting previous mass shootings, including the 1999 Columbine High School shooting. He had acquired National Rifle Association safety permits after attending shooting ranges with his mother, Nancy Lanza. Details on the pair's relationship remain unclear, but one a medical professional said Nancy was never allowed into Adam's room. It was on August 19, 1987 that loner and gun fanatic Michael Ryan went on a shooting rampage in Hungerford, a market town in Berkshire. Armed with an automatic rifle, a pistol and at least one hand grenade he shot 16 people dead, including his mother, before killing himself. His victims included a police officer who tried to tackle him. At least another 15 people were also injured. His first victim was a woman who was picnicking with her two children in Savernake Forest, 10 miles from the Berkshire town. Less than 10 minutes later, firefighters were called to a house in Hungerford where they found the body of Ryan's mother. Ryan, dressed in combat gear, then made his way, shooting at people as he went on foot, to the town's main shopping area where he indiscriminately shot and killed 12 people. He then managed to evade a massive manhunt by armed police and helicopters until he was tracked down to the empty John O'Gaunt Community Technology College where he barricaded himself in. Negotiators made contact with Ryan after he had fired at circling helicopters. At one point Ryan waved an unpinned grenade at police through a window. He is reported to have told negotiators: 'Hungerford must be a bit of a mess. I wish I had stayed in bed.' The body of the 27-year-old, who had shot himself, was later found inside. Ryan was described by the press as a gun fanatic who had an 'unhealthy' relationship with his mother. The incident led to tighter restrictions on gun ownership with the introduction of the Firearms (Amendment) Act of 1988 but critics said the legislation did not go far enough. On March 13 1996, former Scout leader Thomas Hamilton entered the gymnasium at Dunblane Primary School and opened fire on a class of five and six-year-olds, killing 16 children and their teacher. In a shooting spree which lasted less than three minutes, Hamilton, who was armed with two pistols and two revolvers, fired a total of 109 rounds. A public inquiry into the Dunblane massacre found that Hamilton, a former shopkeeper, had been investigated by police following complaints about his behaviour towards young boys. The incident led to further tightening of gun controls with a ban on owning handguns. Advertisement

His family had desperately applied for professional help with Davison's ADHD according to a close family friend, with the gunman being described as 'introverted' and a 'troubled soul'.

The friend told the Telegraph: 'Jake was always very quiet growing up, almost introverted. He was a troubled soul. He got into guns and he knew everything there was to know about them.

'Maxine and Jake used to be close. You’d always see him helping her with the shopping at Lidl up the road, but then his views changed and he went against women and he became misogynist. They clashed a lot about that.'

Self-described 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and bodybuilder Jake Davison was described as having a 'pump action shotgun'. The weapons are legal in the UK - but only as long as they have a fixed magazine capacity of no more than three cartridges and a valid Shotgun certificate.

The murders came 22 days after he was bragging online about the UK 'having more guns you think' in a post about US-style mass shootings.

Davison also described his fascination with previous atrocities including the Hungerford massacre in 1987 - one of the worst UK gun attacks in history - where an unemployed former labourer shot dead 16 people with semi-automatic rifles and a handgun.

In a chilling Reddit post written just over three weeks ago about the evolution of gun attacks over the past 80 years, Davison wrote: 'There are lot more guns in Europe and the UK then people think'.

MailOnline yesterday revealed the killer was a nihilistic YouTuber who fantasised about being The Terminator, ranted about being a 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and described his affinity with the 'incel' movement linked to mass murder by misogynists in the US and Canada.

Only today did YouTube and Facebook delete his hate-filled accounts.

And one friend of the family wrote on Facebook last night that his relatives, including his mother Maxine, had begged for mental health support for Davison, adding: 'The NHS basically said they are short staffed and that was it.

'The family even asked the police to come out to see him as he was talking acting and acting strange - they didn't do a welfare check. And now six people are dead'.

Devon and Cornwall police chief constable Shawn Sawyer said his social media and claims his family went to the police and the NHS about his mental health would form part of their investigation.

Speaking at a press conference outside Crownhill police station in Plymouth, the senior police officer said the weapon used in the Plymouth shooting was described as a 'pump action shotgun' and confirmed a firearm had been recovered from the scene.

Mr Sawyer said police would look at Davison's social media output as part of the investigation.

He said: 'This is an extraordinarily unusual response by a fellow human being.

'Whether there were mental health issues I cannot say at this time.' He said most witnesses were 'shocked at what was unfolding before them,' but said there was no evidence to suggest Davison was saying anything as he carried out his atrocity.

Police investigating the Plymouth shootings raided the gunmen's father's flat on Thursday.

Armed officers forced their way into the home of Mark Davison, about a mile from where his son Jake killed five people before turning the gun on himself.

Mr Davison was not in at the time - according to a neighbour - but returned later in the evening and spoke to detectives.

He was being comforted by one of his other sons this afternoon and declined to comment about the tragedy.

Plymouth has two gun shops in the centre of the city, Pull The Trigger and Peter's Fishing and Sports, which are both near the city's market.

A member of staff at Peter's Fishing and Sports recalled how Davison had been in last year.

He said: 'I remember the gunman came in just before the first lockdown and was interested in an air rifle we had up on the wall.

'He didn't buy it in the end but spent a few minutes examining it. He didn't have the bushy beard back then and seemed fairly normal, nothing that would trigger any kind of alarm.

'Apparently he was seen walking through the market on Monday. I've seen him around a few times.

'But how he managed to get a license to own a shotgun is a mystery because in order to have a license you have every part of your background scrutinised down to the most minute details. Or at least you're supposed to.'

Mr Washington (pictured above) had been out walking with his 'beautiful' huskies, who rushed back home to raise the alarm with concerned family members

On a Reddit thread, under the question 'What do incels think of their mother', Davison replied: 'Can't stand her'

Davison wrote this post about mass shootings and more guns being in the UK 'than people think' just 22 days before the Plymouth massacre

Davison shot multiple people and then himself last night in the worst shooting atrocity in Britain for 11 years

In rambling and unsettling films made in the weeks before his rampage, he described an obsession with The Terminator and repeatedly mentions to 'incel' movement linked to mass shootings in the US

MailOnline has revealed Davison he was an active YouTuber calling himself 'Professor Waffle', who posted videos of himself working out and most recently ten-minute rants about life being 'rigged against you', humanity being on the 'brink of extinction' and being repulsive to the opposite sex.

He also shared clips from ultra-violent video games and just two days ago 'liked' videos of a M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle being shot.

In his most recent online rant from his bedroom he said: 'You wake up and you stare at the wall and you're thinking um nothing's changed but I'm still in the same position, same period in life, still a f***ing this, that virgin f***ing fat ugly, what'. He added: 'I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something. And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission'.

A fortnight ago, the 23-year-old also spoke of his affinity with the 'incel' movement, which has been linked to a number of mass shootings in the US. The most notorious was by misogynist killer Elliot Rodger, who killed six people in California in May 2014 before he turned the gun on himself. In Canada in 2018 Alek Minassian posted a Facebook message showing his support for Incels before ploughing a van into crowds, killing ten.

'Incel' stands for 'involuntary celibate' and those referring to themselves as such believe their unattractiveness to women is predetermined by his genetics. Some extremist followers believe they are owed sex by women. Davison says repeatedly in his videos that he is repulsive to women, overweight and so is all his family.

He also talks about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Davison also 'liked' a series of videos about guns, and shared posts on Facebook quoting former American president Donald Trump as well pictures of a statue holding a rifle with the US flag in the background.

His Facebook profile suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

He said on July 28: 'People like similar to me, they've had nothing but themselves. And then they've socially had it tough, probably grew up in a s*** background, like, like… How can you have drive and willpower, you know, when you've been defeated a million times? It's you wake up and you're like 'what the f***?', you know, when you've when you've worked so f***ing hard – so f***ing hard – and you see mother***ers who work nowhere near as hard as you.

'For the most part it's just been me against the world. It's just been me fighting an uphill battle with a big f***ing rock on my back, you know, while I'm seeing mother***ers that don't deserve half of anything, now they're getting a free road to the top'.

He added: 'I think any as long as you're breathing air… It's like in the Terminator, right, you know, fate is nothing, you know, the whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything's rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction, you know, these machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted.

'But yet humanity still tries to fight to the end! And I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something.

'And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission, you know'.

Obsessions of a maniac who called himself the Terminator: Plymouth gunman posted videos on YouTube of himself pumping iron and ranting about his life before going on murder spree

Staring intensely into the camera, Jake Davison signed off his final video on YouTube with the chilling words: 'I am a Terminator.'

Within weeks, the 22-year-old virgin would enact his bloody fantasies with appalling consequences.

In a 12-minute rampage, the gunman murdered his own mother and four strangers, including a three-year-old girl.

The gun massacre – the worst in a decade in the UK – left Plymouth residents questioning how a loner with seemingly serious mental health problems was allowed to have a firearms licence.

Shockingly, it emerged yesterday that the behaviour of the apprentice crane operator had been of concern for some time to those close to him, including his mother Maxine and father Mark – who had reportedly begged the NHS for help and even allegedly contacted the police saying he should not be allowed to keep a gun.

Within hours of the shootings, disturbing videos emerged online in which the 17-stone weightlifter moaned about being 'defeated in life' and talked about the violent sci-fi films starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Jake Davison who shot multiple people and then himself last night was a YouTuber who ranted about being a 'fat ugly virgin'

He said: 'The whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything is rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction.

'These machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted, but yet humanity still tries to fight to the end.

'I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes I'm a Terminator or something and despite reaching almost total system failure, he keeps trying to accomplish his mission.'

Recording his final video on July 28, Davison said: 'I'm beaten down and defeated by f****** life. That drive I once had, that's gone.'

The loner had described himself as an 'incel' – a reference to the 'involuntary celibate' movement, a radical group of misogynistic young males who spend their lives ranting online about women and are of growing concern to police.

Recording videos in a small bedroom he likened to a 'prison cell', Davison spent his days agonising over why he had never had a girlfriend or even been kissed.

Obsessed with sex, he fired off scores of messages to incel groups asking why he was constantly rejected on dating sites and bemoaning his lack of experience of love as a teenager.

Incels and 'black pill' links to Plymouth gunman: Misogynist movement who believe they are 'owed sex' and have been behind several mass shootings in the US including 2020 machete attack classed as terrorism An incel, which is an abbreviation of an involuntary celibate, refers to a group of men who advocated for violence against women because they believe they are unjustly denied sexual or romantic attention. Essentially, they blame women for refusing to have sex with them and believe in responding with rape and violence. Those who identify as an incel interact with each other on online forums where they discuss their hatred of women, hatred of feminism, how to get away with rape, and specific women to target. In 2014, self-proclaimed Incel Elliot Rodger (pictured) declared a 'War on Women' and went on a killing spree near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Since then, Incels have been linked to a number of violent attacks, and are increasingly described as a terrorism threat. In February 2020, a machete attack in a Toronto massage parlor became the first incident of alleged Incel violence to be prosecuted as an act of terrorism. Jake Davison talked about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Dr Joseph Downing, a fellow in nationalism at LSE who studies security and terrorism, told MailOnline: 'The incel attacks and jihadi attacks share many commonality. In all cases it's the chicken and egg problem. 'Is it somebody who acts like this because of their predisposition to violence who found the incel movement, or is it the incel movement that gave that individual the idea to go and commit violence? 'Many think it's about extremist propaganda and the ability to access it and be radicalised, but I'm on the side of that it doesn't really matter. 'These people go and seek extremist ideologies because they're predisposed to do that kind of thing. So whether it's Andre Breivik or jihadis or the incel movement it doesn't matter. 'The incel movement is pretty nuts. When you go down the rabbit hole they say stuff like women are forcing me to be celibate and should cater it upon themselves as their feminine duties to give sexual favours to men. 'But it doesn't really say much about acts of violence. It's not really an ideology that goes as far as say radical Islam. 'They're more of an abstract nihilistic, misogynistic kind of group. So there is a commonality with other forms of extremist violence. 'It's more the person is predisposed to to that kind of behaviour and they go and seek out some kind of extremist ideology. 'The individual is just not interested in the other information out there, they want to find the radical ideology.' He added: 'I don't think people like him will encourage similar acts of violence - in this case we lose the fact that what he's done is really mysterious. 'The majority of people you could just never sway to do that kind of thing. But there may well be other individuals who will go out and commit acts of violence and say it's inspired by him, for example. 'Some may say yes I was inspired by him and incel and stuff like that, but I don't think people are swayed, some just have that psychopathic tendency to extreme violence or they don't.' Advertisement

Revealing he had not spoken to a girl since he was 17, Davison considered himself a virgin loser with nothing to live for.

He wrote of his loneliness and despair, saying he had been 'forgotten about'.

'I used to be OK with being a virgin too, but when you get older and the inferiority complex kicks in and the feeling of despair and missing out occurs,' he said.

'Try being an unemployed, autistic, poor, sexually frustrated male with tons of health issues, no social circle and being stuck in government housing with my mother for years on end, having missed out on so much in life.

'Not being able to do the hobbies and things I enjoy as I don't have a car, I am socially isolated and a black sheep who barely interacts with anyone other than a few people at work.

'It's not just sex and teen romance I feel I missed out on, I feel I missed out on the entire teenage experience. Since leaving school I don't have any friends.'

Born in Plymouth, he was raised with his older brother and sister by their single mother Maxine, with whom he had a difficult relationship, writing online: 'Feel my mother has played a role in [me] being a male virgin.'

Diagnosed with autism as a child, Davison was sent to Mount Tamar special school in Plymouth, where he was said to have been a 'disruptive' influence on his peers.

Jess Wallace recalled: 'My boyfriend went to school with him and said he was pretty shy and quiet and would talk about how cool Americans are, and the idea of having a gun collection.'

Another woman related to a former classmate said: 'He was well-known for his anger issues.'

After leaving school, Davison described feeling positive as he embarked on a career working in construction scaffolding before an ankle injury sent him spiralling into depression. He admitted online that his 'mental, physical and emotional health' had been deteriorating for two years.

He wrote of his frustration at being unable to get a doctor's appointment and revealed he tried a cocktail of supplements and steroids and even considered drugs like cocaine.

Consumed by self-loathing, the recluse posted regular questions such as 'Should being ugly be considered a disability?' and recorded scores of videos and selfies discussing his weight issues and fear of being too fat to get a girlfriend.

Lonely and bored, he described himself as a 'computer addict with nothing else to do for many years'.

He wrote: 'When you have been a recluse for as long as I have, you search up and go on pretty much every subject on the internet. I can't think of a subject I haven't dabbled in on the internet – technology, politics, space, exploration, astronomy, LGBT transgender movies, comics, video games, military, special forces guns, weapons, tanks, jets, nuclear power, futurism, transhumanism, drugs, biology, history.'

In a desperate search for like-minded individuals, he signed up for IncelTV on YouTube.

Spurred on by others in the community, Davison said he had 'overdosed' on 'black pill' – an incel philosophy centred on the belief that success with the opposite sex is determined by genetics.

He wrote: 'Inferiority complex of being a virgin for almost 23 years and the panic of getting older is crippling.' Incel culture has been associated with killings and acts of violence, particularly in the US, where Davison had fantasised about living.

Elliot Rodger became a spiritual figurehead of the incel movement when he murdered six people in Isla Vista, California, in 2014 aged 22 – the same age as Davison.

Before his rampage, Rodger had posted a video on YouTube saying he wanted to take revenge on women for rejecting him.

Within hours of Davison's killings, other incel internet users had built what was described as an online 'shrine' to him yesterday.

Shortly before the attacks, Davison called for a 'Government-funded incel social programme or rehab centre' to get them to do group activities 'to build confidence and self-esteem and getting them out of their depressed mindset'.

Among his ideas were group therapy, activities such as rock climbing and 'taking away computers, phones, internet to detox from social media and the internet'.

But trapped in his bedroom during lockdown, Davison's despair only grew.

Yesterday it emerged that he had liked nearly 800 videos on YouTube pointing to an obsession with US gun culture, violent video games and weightlifting.

He boasted to followers that he held a shotgun licence, writing: 'It would be good if there were more [shooting] ranges and clubs too.

'I have a section SGC (shotgun certificate) but would properly have a FAC (firearms certificate) as well if there were more ranges... as soon as I get a car, which should not take too long, I will apply for my FAC.'

Within recent weeks, Davison's thoughts had turned to death and knives. He wrote online: 'Machetes are awful weapons... most are cheaply made and lack the cutting power to do any real damage like actual swords do.

'If you actually look at machete attacks, videos and news reports, more often than not they only manage to cut and lacerate skin.

'They rarely have the weight and sharpness to cut through bone and skull. They are good for cutting through bush, not cutting limbs and heads... best sword for zombie would be a two-handed great sword which would cut limbs clean off and penetrate skull easily.'

In another post on 'mass shootings' he referred to the Texas clock tower shooting in America in 1966 and the Hungerford massacre in Berkshire in 1987.

Davison wrote: 'There are a lot more guns in Europe and the UK than people think.'

Yesterday, neighbours revealed the Davison family's desperate pleas for help.

Donna Croft said: 'His poor mum has only just got cleared of cancer. His sister was a harmless soul, she was in the same class as my son.

'The dad even begged the mental health team to assess him but they basically said they couldn't be bothered and said they were too short of staff to come out.

'So not have only the mental services on this country let these poor families down, they could [have] prevented this to happen.

'People like that need 24/7 help. How he got a gun to kill these people is crazy.'

His Facebook profile and logo'd T-shirts suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

Six minutes of utter carnage: How the Plymouth gunman's sickening rampage unfolded and left five innocent people dead

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a Plymouth suburb on Thursday is Britain's worst for more than a decade

It began shortly before 6.11pm on Thursday when Davidson kicked down the door to his own home and launched into an argument with his mother, Maxine, who he then shot

Witnesses described watching in terror as Davidson, 22, went out into the street and began shooting indiscriminately at unsuspecting passersby and those who tried to help the injured

Davidson killed Maxine, 51, Sophie Martyn, three, her father Lee, 43, Stephen Washington, 53, and Kate Shepherd, 66, before turning the gun on himself. Mother and son Michelle and Ben Parsonage survived

The rampage lasted for just six minutes – 12 until the gunman's body was found - but it left five innocent people and their killer dead and the whole nation in shock.

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade.

The first warning residents had in the cul-de-sac of Biddick Drive was when Davison, 22, burst into the house he shared with his mother and began shouting on Thursday evening.

However, the heated argument quickly became murderous.

His killing spree began shortly before 6.11pm, when terrified neighbours made a flurry of 999 calls to Devon and Cornwall Police's control room.

They told operators they could hear gunfire and there was a man with a pump-action shotgun killing people at random.

One witness, Sharron Turner, 57, who lives nearby, said Davison kicked in the door of a property – now known to be his own home – where he turned the gun on his 51-year-old mother, Maxine, who had cancer.

'Firstly, there was shouting, followed by gunshots – three, possibly four to begin with,' she said. 'This was when the shooter kicked in the door of a house and randomly started shooting. He ran from the house shooting as he ran.'

Some in his line of fire had lucky escapes.

On his way out, still clutching the weapon, Davison, who was dressed in black and grey, told a stunned passer-by: 'Nothing to worry about, mate.'

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade

But an instant later he gunned down a girl of three, Sophie Martyn, who was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee, 43.

Mr Martyn was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One retired resident who lives opposite and watched the murders from his kitchen window, said he 'couldn't believe what I was seeing'.

The shocked local added: 'We were sat in our kitchen when we heard shots in the street, so we looked outside.

'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

'This is on the pavement across the road from my house. You don't witness a murder, two people killed right in front of you, every day. He was just shooting indiscriminately.'

By now armed police were on their way. But Davison, a crane driver whom relatives claimed had mental health problems but was unable to get help in lockdown, had not finished.

Still on Biddick Drive, he aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Ben's brother, Jordan, confirmed his brother and mother had been caught up in the carnage.

In a message posted on social media later, he said: 'Just a little update... Ben is now home and going to make a full recovery.

'My mum has to have an operation on her arm and is expected to make a full recovery.'

Peggy Holliday, an intern at the National Marine Aquarium in Plymouth, was walking to a shop when she heard screaming. There were also gunshots, which she thought initially were fireworks.

She said: 'A couple of the gunshots went off and I ran opposite a pub and the owner came out and he shouted at me, 'Get in here, get in here now!'

'I forward-rolled into the pub and I literally clung underneath one of the pool tables for dear life and I froze.

'I said, 'There's shooting, it's violent, it's terrifying'. It literally felt like a living nightmare. It felt like I was being hunted.'

Davison, who held a licence for the shotgun, entered a nearby strip of open land known to locals in the Keyham area of Plymouth as the 'dog park', where he shot Stephen Washington, 59, who was walking his two husky dogs. He died at the scene.

His friend Caitlin Greyling, 19, added: 'Paramedics were working on the woman. I could see them moving up and down as they did compressions on her chest.

'After a while they stopped and I thought maybe she has been saved, but she hadn't.' Police later confirmed Mrs Shepherd had died at Plymouth's Derriford Hospital.

Davison then doubled back to garages at the back of the hairdressers, where he put the gun to his own head and killed himself.

Another witness said: 'He just looked around, turned the gun on himself and fired it. I couldn't believe what I was seeing. It was like a horror movie.'

By then, police including armed officers from the nearby naval base had arrived in Biddick Drive, where they discovered a scene of carnage.

They quickly traced Davison's steps and found his body. He was pronounced dead at 6.23pm.

Survivor Bert Pinkerton told the BBC he had walked past the gunman, who had a 'vacant stare', adding: 'The bloke was walking towards me. I could smell the gunfire. It could have been me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Carrie Johnson yesterday urged pregnant women to have the Covid jab as fears grow over the soaring numbers being admitted to hospital with the virus.

The Prime Minister's wife, who announced two weeks ago that she is expecting her second child, yesterday posted a snap of herself on Instagram with the caption: 'Just had my second jab and feeling great!'

Carrie, who is three months pregnant, is now appealing to others to follow her lead and get their vaccine. Concerns are increasing after figures revealed that fewer than one in 12 pregnant women have come forward to be inoculated.

Posting on her Instagram page, Carrie, 33, said evidence shows that the jab causes no higher risk of miscarriage. Her intervention comes after the Royal College of Midwives warned that pregnant women are more likely to become seriously ill if they get Covid.

Alongside a selfie photograph displaying a sticker to show she had been jabbed, Carrie wrote: 'I know there are lots of pregnant women who are anxious about getting their Covid vaccine but the evidence is incredibly reassuring.

Carrie Johnson yesterday urged pregnant women to have the Covid jab as fears grow over the soaring numbers being admitted to hospital with the virus. The Prime Minister's wife, who announced two weeks ago that she is expecting her second child, yesterday posted a snap of herself on Instagram with the caption: 'Just had my second jab and feeling great!'

Carrie's maternity wardrobe By KATIE HIND for the Mail on Sunday Carrie Johnson has given a hint of her stylish maternity wardrobe in a photograph she posted after having the Covid jab. The Prime Minister's wife was wearing a pair of blue dungarees by London-based ethical fashion brand Clary & Peg which are currently in their sale. Mrs Johnson, 33, showed off the strap of the company's Doris Dungarees in Bright Blue Linen which are currently reduced from £165 to £135. The outfit is also described on Clary & Peg's website as being 'Breastfeeding friendly' - like many of their range. The company, which has a studio on Columbia Road in Hackey, is co-owned by Edwina Gieve - the cousin of model Cara Delevingne. And in 2014, the star posed with a fake pregnancy bump to show off a pair of her relative's denim dungarees on Instagram for her previous company, In Pig. Ms Gieve co-founded Clary & Peg in 2014 with Johanna Kociejowski, who she met at ante-natal classes. Actress Rosamund Pike and theatre director Sophie Hunter - wife of Benedict Cumberbatch - have also worn Clary & Peg's clothes. On its website Clary & Peg say they offer a range of 'beautiful, vintage-inspired clothes that are maternity friendly' but are also suitable for non-pregnant women too. They say that their items 'marry vintage nostalgia with contemporary design' and that they have 'drawn on inspiration from the 1950s, 60s, 70s and 80s to create unique collections of stylish, versatile and trans-seasonal clothing' and that all clothes have been designed to appeal to pregnant and non-pregnant women alike. Mrs Johnson is a huge fan of sustainable fashion and even rents her clothes rather than buying them. She regularly uses London company Wardrobe HQ and was recently seen at the G7 Summit at Carbis Bay, Cornwall in a pink Roksanda dress which she hired from them. And she even rented her wedding dress from the company. Her stunning bell-sleeved, embellished tulle gown by Greek designer Christos Costarellos which bought new would cost £2,830 but instead she loaned it for £45 per day. Carrie also showed off a beautiful silver chain with the initials 'W' for son Wilfred and a 'B' for Boris, with a heart between the letters. Advertisement

'Most importantly, the data shows there is no increased risk of miscarriage, something I was definitely concerned about.

'Nearly 200,000 pregnant women across the UK and US have received the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines recommended during pregnancy, without safety concerns.

'The Royal College of Midwives has said that expectant mothers are at greater risk of serious illness if they get Covid so being vaccinated really is the best way to keep you and your baby safe.'

It is believed expectant mothers have been fearful of having the jab because pregnant women were excluded from initial vaccine trials as a precautionary measure. It meant there was no safety data available for the group at the time the vaccine rollout began.

The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation instead decided to wait for data from the United States to come in before making a recommendation.

Two weeks ago, Carrie told how she had suffered a miscarriage at the beginning of the year but is now pregnant with what she described as her 'rainbow baby' – a term used to describe a child born after a miscarriage, stillborn, or neonatal death.

While pregnant with her son Wilfred in April last year, she caught coronavirus, although her symptoms weren't severe.

At the same time, however, Mr Johnson was suffering from the virus so badly that he spent time in intensive care at St Thomas' Hospital in London.

Carrie's appeal comes after figures showed the number of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid has jumped ten-fold since May and 98 per cent of those are unvaccinated.

Analysis of NHS data shows that while there were 28 expectant mothers admitted per week four months ago, the number is now closer to 300.

Meanwhile, the number of pregnant women in intensive care has risen sharply. Figures from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre show that 66 pregnant women in England, Wales and Northern Ireland went into intensive care last month – the highest number since the pandemic began and three times as many as April last year.

While less than one per cent of pregnant women who are hospitalised die, the risks are severe and the virus increases the chances of babies being born prematurely or stillborn by three times.

Pregnant women who contract Covid are also 76 per cent more likely to develop pre-eclampsia, a serious condition which can cause strokes, organ failure, and even deformities in a newborn.

Intensive care doctors say emergency C-sections are commonplace with these patients because the mothers are so ill.

The Mail on Sunday revealed earlier this month that scores of pregnant women had been advised by their midwives to avoid the vaccine because it could be 'another thalidomide' – the now-banned morning sickness drug that caused disability in children in the 1960s. Others have been told it could increase the chance of miscarriage.

Experts have blamed misinformation and confused messaging for the lack of take-up of the vaccine by pregnant women.

As recently as April, Public Health England leaflets said expectant women 'should not be vaccinated'. But the NHS recently launched a social media campaign to encourage them to get their jabs.

England's chief midwife, Jacqueline Dunkley-Bent, has also written to maternity staff stressing the need to encourage mums-to-be to come forwards.

Meanwhile, Carrie yesterday gave a hint of her maternity wardrobe as she showed the strap of a pair of blue dungarees from an ethical London-based range.

The outfit, designed to be breastfeeding-friendly, is from Clary & Peg, which has a studio in Hackney.

She also wore a silver chain with the initials 'W' for her 16-month- old son Wilfred and a 'B' for husband Boris. The letters were separated with a heart.

She took to social media on Saturday to reassure other pregnant women who may be anxious about getting the vaccine that she is 'feeling great'

I was vaccinated three weeks ago and haven't had any side effects WHY I HAD IT Alison Towler is 35 weeks pregnant with her third child. In March, the 38-year-old teacher was adamant that she didn't want the Covid vaccine, but she changed her mind after seeing an increase in the number of pregnant women requiring hospital treatment due to the virus. Mrs Towler, from St Albans, told The Mail on Sunday: 'I have been on a rollercoaster of a journey with my thoughts on the vaccine. 'In March, I was very much anti-vaccine while being pregnant. Alison Towler is 35 weeks pregnant with her third child. In March, the 38-year-old teacher was adamant that she didn't want the Covid vaccine, but she changed her mind after seeing an increase in the number of pregnant women requiring hospital treatment due to the virus 'My community midwife told me that I should have it, given my job and mixing with different people all the time. 'But I also have friends who are doctors and midwives who said that there wasn't enough evidence to say it was safe. Then I rapidly changed my mind a few weeks ago. I started to feel funny coming up to Freedom Day and I kept seeing the daily rates going up and up. 'The number of pregnant women becoming hospitalised and needing ventilators started to terrify me. 'I had my first Pfizer jab three weeks ago and I have my second in a few weeks. I didn't have one side effect either. 'The main thing for me is if I caught Covid now, me, my kids and my baby would be safe.' Advertisement

I couldn't live with myself if it harmed my unborn baby WHY I DIDN'T Katie Garnett, 37, has chosen not to have the vaccine. The marketing executive, from Guildford in Surrey, is 17 weeks pregnant with her second child. She said there wasn't enough evidence to suggest the vaccine is safe for mums-to-be and she isn't sure whether she will have it even after giving birth. She said: 'From the beginning I was in two minds about it. I looked online and read up about it and tried to collect a balanced view. Katie Garnett, 37, has chosen not to have the vaccine. The marketing executive, from Guildford in Surrey, is 17 weeks pregnant with her second child 'I spoke to my midwife at my first appointment when I was eight weeks pregnant and her recommendation was if it was her, she wouldn't have it, especially in my first trimester because the chances of things going wrong are heightened. She couldn't give me a definitive answer at the time. 'I don't know if I will change my mind further down the line, but I am taking it a day at a time. 'I do have a lot of friends who have had the vaccine and have gone on to have weird menstrual bleeding. And I looked into it and there are thousands of women who are reporting odd symptoms. 'If these women are having odd effects to their periods and reproductive system, then what may it be doing to a foetus? Being a guinea pig doesn't sit well with me.' Miss Garnett, pictured left, said her friends and family were not on board with her decision not to get the vaccine. She added: 'I keep wondering if I could live with myself if my baby was born with an awful disability or something worse. I'd have to carry that around with me for the rest of my life. 'My partner has admitted that he is scared for me and the impact Covid could have on our family. This new trial sounds like the thing that we need but it isn't helpful to the women who are pregnant now.' Advertisement

Boris shows solidarity with Carrie - by giving up booze until the birth

By GLEN OWEN for the Mail on Sunday

Boris Johnson has made a personal sacrifice to show solidarity with his pregnant wife – he's giving up alcohol until the baby is born.

The Prime Minister, who has been on a health kick since contracting Covid last year, has vowed that he will not touch a drop until Christmas, when the couple's second child is due.

Boris Johnson has made a personal sacrifice to show solidarity with his pregnant wife – he's giving up alcohol until the baby is born

Friends say his abstinence has also been spurred by the challenges he faces in this autumn, when he will set out a series of flagship policies.

They include a new £10 billion- a-year 'health tax' to tackle the NHS backlog and reform social care, drawing up environmental policies ahead of the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow, devising a winter plan for Covid-proofing the economy, announcing a crackdown on crime, and thrashing out a spending review with Chancellor Rishi Sunak.

Carrie Johnson, who has one-year-old son Wilfred with Boris, said she was looking forward to welcoming a 'rainbow baby' – a healthy child born after a miscarriage – in December.

Mr Johnson, who was 16st 7 lb when he caught Covid, has shed nearly 2st through a combination of diet and exercise since recovering from the illness.

His wife has played a key role in ensuring that he eats healthily and moderates his alcohol intake.

The Prime Minister has cut out 'late-night cheese', eats less chocolate and runs regularly – forcing him to splash out on a new wardrobe of suits.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One in nine patients in hospital with Covid during the first wave caught it after being admitted for something else, a damning study reveals.

Researchers partially blame the tragic toll on early shortages of testing and PPE and a lack of understanding back then of how the virus spread.

But some hospitals had rates up to 25 times higher than others of a similar type, suggesting localised failings of infection control.

Professor Calum Semple, who worked on the study at the University of Liverpool, said: ‘There will be tragedies behind the story. We do know of people that came into hospital for one problem, caught Covid and sadly died’

Experts analysed data on 72,157 patients in 314 UK hospitals who developed symptomatic Covid before August 1 last year

Experts analysed data on 72,157 patients in 314 UK hospitals who developed symptomatic Covid before August 1 last year.

They estimate 11.3 per cent of these infections were acquired in hospital, given the time it takes for an infected person to show symptoms. It means 5,699 to 11,862 patients may have been infected during their hospital stay in the first wave, according to findings published in The Lancet journal.

But the authors write: ‘This is, unfortunately, likely to be an underestimate, as we did not include patients who may have been infected but discharged before they could be diagnosed.’ Professor Calum Semple, who worked on the study at the University of Liverpool, said: ‘There will be tragedies behind the story.

‘We do know of people that came into hospital for one problem, caught Covid and sadly died.’

The proportion of hospital cases that were acquired after admission peaked at 15.8 per cent – one in six cases – in May last year.

It is now believed to have dropped to between 2 and 5 per cent as availability of testing and PPE has increased and the NHS has learned more about how to contain the spread of the virus. There were also ‘substantial’ differences in rates. The proportion of cases acquired in hospital was as low as 1 per cent in the best performing acute hospital but as high as 74 per cent in the worst.

Professor Semple called for an ‘urgent investigation’ to identify best infection control practice.

He said: ‘What’s more concerning to me isn’t so much the average, it’s the variation.

Professor Semple refused to name the hospitals that had performed well or badly, saying: ‘This is about quality improvement, not a blame game’

‘There were some outstanding examples of good infection prevention control practice and there were some examples of where that was not good. There are clearly some hospitals that are big, busy and have really nailed infection prevention control.

‘So there are lessons to be learned from what they doing so well, that a smaller, quieter hospital should probably have been able to do.’ He said rates have improved during more recent waves despite the emergence of more infectious variants, indicating the NHS has ‘learned the lessons’.

Professor Semple refused to name the hospitals that had performed well or badly, saying: ‘This is about quality improvement, not a blame game.’

Dr Annemarie Docherty, from the University of Edinburgh, stressed: ‘Rates are considerably lower a year on, and people should not be deterred from attending hospital if they are unwell.’

An NHS spokesman said: ‘Outbreaks in hospitals are less common than in other settings. Hospital infection rates account for less than 1 per cent of all Covid cases since the pandemic began.’

Data from the ZOE symptom study shows daily cases rose slightly in people who have had both vaccine doses in the week ending August 7, from 10,751 to 11,043 — 2.72 per cent. They also rose in people who have had one dose — 6,534 to 7,168 (up 9.7 per cent) — and only fell in unvaccinated people — 29,620 to 27,700 (down 6.5 per cent) — but this could be caused by the fact more people were given jabs across the weeks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ghislaine Maxwell has sold the London home where Prince Andrew allegedly had sex with his accuser.

The Mail on Sunday has learned the British socialite’s mews house in Belgravia was bought by a property developer for £1.75 million.

It is said to be where the Duke of York was photographed with his arm around the bare waist of then 17-year-old Virginia Roberts, one of convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein’s victims, now known as Virginia Giuffre.

The property is said to be where the Duke of York was photographed with his arm around the bare waist of then 17-year-old Virginia Roberts. In the background, Ghislaine Maxwell

The Mail on Sunday has learned the British socialite’s mews house in Belgravia was bought by a property developer for £1.75 million

Last week Ms Giuffre filed a bombshell lawsuit in a US court claiming Andrew had sexually abused her when she was 17.

She alleges she was forced to have sex with Andrew three times – once at the Belgravia address in 2001 – on the orders of Epstein, Ms Maxwell’s former boyfriend.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed that he has never even met Ms Giuffre, now a mother-of-three living in Australia.

Ms Maxwell, 59, sold the house, a short walk from Hyde Park, to fund legal fees for her own court battle in the States. She remains in a New York jail facing allegations she procured girls for the disgraced financier, which she denies. Her spokesman said she would be sad about the sale because the house – which he called her London ‘refuge’ – held happy memories.

Land Registry documents show it was bought by Hampshire-based property developer Stuart Robinson. Disgraced solicitor Malcolm Grumbridge’s name also appears in the documents.

A long-time friend of the Maxwell family, he was granted power of attorney by the socialite several months before the sale.

Earlier this month it was revealed Mr Grumbridge, who agreed to quit the legal profession last year after admitting ‘reckless’ conduct, set up multiple companies for the Maxwell family from a health club in Chiswick, West London. Many of the businesses showed little or no trading activity. Several are linked to Ms Maxwell’s brothers Kevin and Ian.

Mr Grumbridge agreed to have his name removed from the roll of solicitors in December after admitting failings, including breaches of anti-money-laundering and terrorism-financing rules.

The house sale reportedly ran into complications with Ms Maxwell’s bank after it closed her account in February, the day after lawyers deposited £130,000 as an initial payment from the buyer.

Ms Maxwell’s family has insisted she is innocent of all charges, branding the US legal system ‘bizarre and cruel’.

Ian Maxwell said his sister was being subjected to ‘brutal and degrading’ treatment and called for her release from jail while she awaited trial on child sex trafficking charges.

‘On evidence that can be shown to be false, given just a little exploration and digging, Ghislaine has been accused of being a procurer and a heartless woman and far more beside,’ said Mr Maxwell. ‘In fact, she is none of these things.’

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed that he has never even met Ms Giuffre, now a mother-of-three living in Australia

Last month, reports surfaced that Ms Maxwell had been ‘physically abused’ by prison guards, was losing her hair and was ‘withering to a shell of her former self’.

There have been repeated attempts to get her released on bail, with most revolving around claims of mistreatment at the Metropolitan Detention Centre in Brooklyn.

Court documents allege that Ms Maxwell ordered a ‘room full of underage girls’ to dance, sexually, in front of Epstein.

It was alleged that 100 ‘massage therapists’ had visited Epstein’s mansion while Ms Maxwell was present and that she stole a 15-year-old’s passport when the girl refused to have sex with him.

Epstein was found dead in his jail cell on August 10, 2019, having killed himself after being charged with sex trafficking

Ms Maxwell denies helping to recruit and groom girls for sex with Epstein.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The death toll from a devastating earthquake in Haiti rose to 1,297 on Sunday as neighboring countries rushed to send aid and rescuers scrambled to find survivors buried beneath the rubble before a tropical storm hits.

The 7.2 magnitude quake on Saturday destroyed thousands of homes and buildings in a Caribbean nation which is still clawing its way back from another major temblor 11 years ago and is reeling from the assassination of its president last month.

Southwestern Haiti bore the brunt of the blow, especially in the region in and around the town of Les Cayes. Haiti's Civil Protection Agency said the toll from the disaster had climbed to 1,297 and the hospitals that were still functioning were struggling to cope with some 5,700 injured people registered so far.

Hundreds of homes and buildings were flattened in the country, which is still clawing its way back from another major tremor, 11 years ago and reeling from the assassination of its president Jovenel Moise just last month.

People look for survivors amongst the rubble in the neighborhood of Dexia 6, Les Cayes, Haiti

A destroyed building is seen in Les Cayes on August 15, 2021, after a 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck the southwest peninsula of the country

A statute of the virgin of the church 'Sacre coeur des Cayes' is seen under the rubble in Les Cayes

People look for survivors amongst the rubble. Hunched sheltered on benches, curled up in chairs or even lay on the floor

An injured woman has her neck braced by a doctor at a hospital in Les Cayes

An earthquake victim who was airlifted from the city of Les Cayes, is moved to an ambulance by health workers, at the local terminal of the Toussaint Louverture airport in Port-au-Prince

Injured patients rest at a hospital in Les Cayes after a 7.2-magnitude earthquake

Rescue workers search through destroyed buildings in Les Caye

Members of a rescue and protection team carry the body of a person as they clean debris from a house

Members of a rescue and protection team clean debris from a house

Rescue teams were on site on Sunday looking for survivors

Personnel carry out debris removal, search and rescue work, in Les Cayes, Haiti

The United States sent an urban search and rescue team to Haiti

Two search and rescue units from the US are now in the country searching for survivors

A view of the damage caused by the earthquake, in Les Cayes, Haiti on Sunday

Locals search for victims in a home destroyed by an earthquake in Camp-Perrin, Les Cayes

Locals recover their belongings from their homes destroyed in the earthquake in Camp-Perrin

People drive past the remains of the Sacre coeur des Cayes church in Les Cayes

A policeman secures the site of the Le Maguier hotel in Les Cayes

The body of a woman is seen under the rubble in the neighborhood of Dexia 6, Les Cayes

Multiple houses across the island nation, including this one in Les Cayes, were destroyed in Saturday's quake

A group of survivors tried to clear the wreckage made by the 7.2 magnitude quake

Some tried to look for survivors at a house in Les Cayes, but rescuers are said to be struggling to find anyone who is still alive

As of Sunday, the death toll from the earthquake reached 724 people. It more than doubled from the previous update of 304 fatalities shared by officials on Saturday

Queen's message to Hati following quake The Queen has shared her sadness at the devastation caused by the Haiti earthquake in a message to the prime minister of the Caribbean nation. The Queen’s message to Haiti’s premier Ariel Henry said: ‘I am deeply saddened by the tragic loss of life and destruction caused by the earthquake in Haiti. ‘My thoughts and prayers are with those who have lost their lives, loved ones and homes, as well as the emergency services working in the recovery effort.’ The devastation could worsen with Tropical Depression Grace, which was predicted would reach Haiti yesterday. Advertisement

The challenge facing Haiti has been exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic, a severe economic downturn aggravated by fierce gang violence, and a political crisis that has engulfed the troubled nation after the assassination of President Jovenel Moise on July 7.

Churches, hotels, hospitals and schools were badly damaged or destroyed, while the walls of a prison were rent open by the violent shudders that convulsed Haiti.

In Les Cayes, a seafront town of some 90,000 people, rescuers in red hard hats and blue overalls pulled bodies from the tangled wreckage of one building, as a yellow mechanical excavator nearby helped to shift the rubble.

In a news conference Sunday morning, Prime Minister Ariel Henry said: 'The most important this is to recover as many survivors as possible under the rubble.'

He added: 'We have learned that the local hospitals, in particular that of Les Cayes, are overwhelmed with wounded, fractured people.

'We must work together to provide rapid and effective responses to this extremely serious situation,' he said.

Officials in the city estimate that there are only about 30 doctors for one million residents.

Henry said officials have started 'to send medications and medical personnel to the facilities that are affected,' and 'for the people who need urgent special care, we have evacuated a certain number of them and we will evacuate some more today and tomorrow.'

And to help, former Senator Herve Foucand was using his small propeller plane to ferry people to Haiti's capital, which was not as severely damages as Les Cayes.

'I have 30 people in serious condition waiting for me,' Foucand told the Times, 'but I only have seven seats.'

Nearby countries, including the Dominican Republic and Mexico, rushed to send desperately needed food and medicines by air and across Haiti's land border.

A firefighter crawled through a hole in the debris to search for survivors in a damaged building

Firefighters risked their lives Sunday to continue to search through rubble

A mother carried her child as she walked through the remains of her home in Les Cayes

The United States dispatched vital supplies and deployed a 65-person urban search-and-rescue team with specialized equipment, said Samantha Power, the administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).

The quake destroyed at least 2,800 homes and damaged another 5,400, according to Haiti's civil protection agency, CNN reports.

Meanwhile, the main supermarket and smaller food and supply markets in Les Cayes collapsed, leaving about half a million people with dwindling supplies, and worrying that some may start looting over basic needs like water, according to the Times.

The quake snapped the town's underground pipes, causing flooding, triggering some landslides and blocking the main road into Jeremie, complicating relief efforts there.

On Sunday morning, the Associated Press reports, people in the town tried to line up to buy what little was available, including bananas, avocados and water.

Some Haitians said they spent Saturday night sleeping in the open, traumatized by memories of the magnitude 7 quake in 2010 that struck far closer to the sprawling capital, Port-au-Prince, and killed tens of thousands of people.

Footage of Saturday's aftermath posted on social media showed residents reaching into narrow openings in piles of fallen masonry to pull shocked and distraught people from the debris of walls and roofs that had crumbled around them.

Access to the worst-hit areas was complicated by a deterioration in law and order that has left key access roads in parts of Haiti in the hands of gangs, although unconfirmed reports on social media suggested they would let aid pass.

Les Cayes locals sat around the debris Sunday morning to eat breakfast

Some spent the night outside out of fear their roofs could collapse on them

Thousands of buildings were destroyed in the earthquake

For some, the wreckage of Saturday's earthquake harkened images of a January 2010 earthquake that left hundreds of thousands of people dead.

'The neighbors, I saw them running and running,' Lydie Jean-Baptiste said of the earthquake over the weekend. 'I said 'What's wrong?' They said 'Earthquake!' and I rushed to the front door.'

'All of a sudden , I had all of those images of January 12 coming to my mind and I felt really, really scared.'

Estimates of the death toll from that hurricane vary from below 100,000 to as high as the government's 316,000.

'People had their heads cut off, corpses, everything,' she said. 'For 48 hours, I just felt like 'Am I alive? Did I awaken somewhere else?'

Iconic buildings in the nation were destroyed by that earthquake, including the Notre Dame l'Assomption Cathedral, and tens of thousands of Haitians are still living in provisional housing as a result of the quake.

Efforts to rebuild have been hampered by a flawed international aid system, corruption and political turmoil.

Jean-Baptiste said it took her nearly a year before she felt comfortable sleeping under her own roof, without fearing that it would collapse on her, but now, she said, 'the trauma is coming back.'

Some have said they would feel more comfortable sleeping outside in the aftermath of Saturday's quake.

Meanwhile, the country is facing a tropical storm that is expected to hit the area on Monday

As of Sunday, the entire coast of Haiti was under a tropical storm watch

Many Haitians spent Saturday night sleeping in the open, traumatized by memories of that magnitude 7 quake 11 years ago that struck far closer to the sprawling capital, Port-au-Prince.

At Port-au-Prince airport, international aid workers, doctors and rescue workers waited to board flights to Les Cayes. A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter ferried the wounded.

The rescue and aid efforts will be complicated by Tropical Storm Grace, which is expected to lash Haiti with heavy rainfall on Monday. Some parts of Haiti are also at risk of flash floods, the U.S. National Hurricane Center (NHC) said.

'We are bracing for Tropical Storm Grace,' the Civil Protection Agency's Chandler told Reuters.

The earthquake came at a time of political turmoil for the island nation, just one month after the assassination of President Jovenel Moise on July 7.

'We're concerned that this earthquake is just one more crisis on top of what the country is already facing - including the worsening political stalemate after the president's assassination, COVID and food insecurity, Jean-Wickens Merone, a spokesman for World Vision Haiti said in a statement to CNN.

The rescue efforts are set to be made more complicated by the arrival of Tropical Storm Grace, which is set to lash Haiti with heavy rainfall on Monday. There was also the possibility of flash flooding, the U.S. National Hurricane Center said.

As of Sunday, the entire coast of Haiti was under a tropical storm watch.

At the Vatican, Pope Francis urged nations to send quick aid.

'May solidarity from everyone lighten the consequences of the tragedy,' he told pilgrims and tourists at his Sunday blessing in St. Peter's Square.

The United States sent vital supplies and deployed a 65-person urban search-and-rescue team with specialized equipment, said Samantha Power, the administrator of the United States Agency for International Development.

A woman sits in front of a destroyed house after the earthquake in Camp-Perrin, Les Cayes

A family eats breakfast in front of homes destroyed by a 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes

A firefighter searches for survivors inside a damaged building

People rest after spending the night at a soccer field following Saturday´s 7.2 magnitude earthquake in Les Cayes, Haiti

Firefighters search for survivors inside a collapsed building

A woman carries her child as she walks in the remains of her home

People displaced by Saturday´s 7.2 magnitude earthquake collect water after sleeping in the streets

Greogory Andre shows a photo of his brother Remossa Andre, who died during the earthquake

A couple sleeps after spending the night at a soccer field following Saturday´s 7.2 magnitude earthquake

A girl washes her face after spending the night at a soccer field

A family wakes inside a mosquito net outside a tent after spending the night at a soccer field

Firefighters search for survivors inside a collapsed building after the quake

Locals begin to wake up after spending the night outside after Saturday´s quake

Locals eat after spending the night in the middle of a street

Men carry a mattress as people sleep on the streets

People displaced from their destroyed houses by the earthquake spend the night outdoors in a hospital garden

People leave the earthquake-affected area in a pickup truck, in Camp-Perrin, Les Cayes

A road is seen damaged by the earthquake in Camp-Perrin, Les Cayes, Haiti on Sunday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Madonna turned 63-years-old on Monday and seemed to already be celebrating her big day the night before.

The Queen Of Pop shared several images to her Instagram account that documented another year around the sun as she seemed to be in good spirits with her nearest and dearest.

The blonde beauty was dressed in a pale blue silk print dress as she wore her hair down in soft waves while posing with her kids, including eldest children Lourdes, 24, and Rocco, 21, as well as her boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams, 27.

Here we go: Madonna turned 63-years-old on Monday and seemed to already be celebrating her big day the night before

Also seen was GoodFellas actress, Debi Mazar, 57, who has been pals with Madonna since the 1980s.

'Let the Birthday Games Begin,' said the Truth Or Dare star as she added a blue and purple heart emoji.

The beauty, who has been married twice - Guy Ritchie (2000–2008), Sean Penn (1985–1989) - also has kids David Banda, 15, Mercy James, 15, and twins Estere and Stella Ciccone, eight.

The Borderline singer was also seen licking an ice cream cone as she stared at the camera seductively while her beau put his tongue out while closing his eyes. His hand rested on Madonna's thigh.

A little lick: The musician shared an ice cream waffle cone with her boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams, 27. The Borderline singer stared at the camera seductively while her beau put his tongue out while closing his eyes. His hand rested on Madonna's thigh

A little selfie from Madame X: She also licked the cone herself as she wore rings that spelled MDNA, which is the name of one of her albums

The Like A Prayer crooner also had a deep blue purse over her shoulder as she held hands with her beau while waking down a path.

And she had on layers of necklaces as she was seen holding a glass of rose wine while posing by a stone building.

Lourdes opted for a black bikini top with short skirt and a sequined purse on her lap. Her dark hair was worn down in braids. Her modeling career is growing: she is on the September cover of Vogue with Kaia Gerber.

Madonna also had her arm around Rocco as he modeled a blue-and-white striped shirt with plaid slacks.

A look at this May/December couple: Madonna and her beau have almost 40 years between them but it does not get in their way as they savor their sweet moments together like this one as they holds hands

Her celeb pals wished Madge well. Kelly Ripa said, 'Happy Birthday, iconic,' adding a heart emoji. Donatella Versace said, 'Happy birthday to the one and only!!! You look AMAZING!!!!'

This post comes after news of her new partnership with Warner Music Group will see her entire catalogue reissued over the next few years.

The pop icon is set to celebrate her 40th year in the recording industry in 2022 and she is now poised to personally curate deluxe editions for many of her landmark albums as part of the agreement with Warner.

The family: The Queen Of Pop shared several images to her Instagram account that documented another year around the sun as she seemed to be in good spirits with her nearest and dearest; here she is with Rocco and Lourdes with Debi Mazar behind her

Budding model: Lourdes opted for a black bikini top with short skirt and a sequined purse on her lap. Her dark hair was worn down in braids. She is on the cover of Vogue this month

Sharing sugar with her friends: Seen here with Nicolas Huchard and Daniele Sibilli

Madonna - who released her debut single with Warner in 1982 - said: 'Since the very beginning, Warner Music Group has helped bring my music and vision to all my fans around the world with the utmost care and consideration.

'They have been amazing partners, and I am delighted to be embarking on this next chapter with them to celebrate my catalogue from the last 40 years.'

The new partnership will include Madonna's entire Sire/Maverick/Warner catalogue, which includes some of her best-known work such as 'Like a Virgin' and 'Like a Prayer', as well as some of her more recent albums, such as 'MDNA' and 'Rebel Heart'.

The little ones: The beauty, who has been married twice - Guy Ritchie (2000–2008), Sean Penn (1985–1989) - also has kids David Banda, 15, Mercy James, 15, and twins Estere and Stella Ciccone, eight. The twins seen here with pals

He loves to have fun: David seen with a daisy in his mouth and a pearl necklace on his neck

So much red power: A bouquet of red peppers were seen in a clay vase

Guy Oseary, Madonna's long-time manager, helped to seal the landmark deal and has promised to bring 'new life' to her records.

He explained: 'Over the past 30 years, I've been fortunate enough to meet and spend time with many of Madonna's incredible fans, and this new partnership will bring to fruition what so many of them have been patiently waiting for: a celebration of her ground-breaking catalogue.

'My partner Sara Zambreno and I are working closely with Warner Music Group to bring new life to these iconic works.'

So chic: The Like A Prayer crooner also had a deep blue purse over her shoulder as she held on to a glass of rose wine

Such a beautiful place to celebrate: She wrote 'Mambo's Birthday!' on this image

Max Lousada, the CEO of Recorded Music at Warner Music Group, hailed Madonna as an 'incomparable superstar'.

He added: 'Madonna has changed the course of pop and dance music, while taking live performance to new heights of drama and invention. At the same time, she uses her fame to amplify some of the most important social issues and movements of our time.

'Constantly and fearlessly challenging convention, her four decades of music are not only an extraordinary body of work, but a playbook for creative and cultural evolution.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A young woman's worrying cancer symptom was dismissed by a doctor who inexplicably thought her yellow jaundice eyes looked off-white simply because she was wearing a bright Ikea uniform.

Chelsey La Frentz, 25, went to a local GP in Adelaide after noticing her eyes looked different, as well as suffering from itching and feeling sick after eating.

The doctor ordered further testing to be safe, but assured Ms La Frentz her ailments were most likely innocuous.

Months later, her cancer has become terminal and the positive young Australian is hoping a 'miracle' will save her life.

'She didn't think they were yellow, because I was wearing my uniform. She thought it was just my uniform,' she told 9News about her initial appointment at the doctor.

Chelsey La Frentz, 25, (pictured) from Adelaide, has been diagnosed with bile cancer, a rare liver cancer - but was dismissed by her GP

Her doctor initially dismissed her 'yellow eyes' as an optical illusion because she was wearing a bright yellow Ikea top (pictured, a jaundice eye)

'She said ''this is not going to be cancer - at your age it just doesn't add up''.'

While still undergoing tests, Miss La Frentz fell so ill she went to the emergency department after her whole body turned yellow and broke out in rashes.

There, doctors performed an MRI scan and gave her the devastating news that the then-24-year-old had bile cancer, a cancer of the liver.

Ms La Frentz underwent surgery and chemotherapy, which initially worked, but the cancer has since returned.

The illness is now terminal and the retail worker is continuing chemotherapy to try and prolong her life, hoping she may still beat the disease.

The 25-year-old is now urging people to see their doctors if they have any concerning symptoms as part of a cancer awareness campaign.

Cancer charities have been appealing for people to continue regular screenings and get check-ups amid fears Aussies are putting off going to the doctor because of the pandemic.

Ms La Frentz (pictured with her boyfriend) is now urging Australians to continue getting regular screenings despite the pandemic

Ms La Frentz, an employee of Swedish furniture chain Ikea (pictured), was told by her doctor her yellow work top was probably the reason her eyes seemed that colour

Early screening is vital in saving lives, and Ms La Frentz said people should not forget that cancer remains a threat because of the focus on Covid.

'You think you're young and you're going to be fine but it can affect anyone,' she said.

The New Normal, Same Cancer Conversation campaign is calling on Australians to return to using cancer services to reduce delays in diagnoses.

Symptoms of cancer could include unexplained weight loss, fatigue, tiredness, unexplained aches or pains, fever, or an unusual lump or swelling.

During the start of the pandemic in March 2020, there were between 27 per cent and 50 per cent fewer cancer diagnostic procedures.

The campaign, which is backed by drug company AstraZeneca, is a collaboration by 13 healthcare organisations across Australia.

They include Cancer Australia, Bowel Cancer Australia, Leukaemia Foundation GI Cancer Institute, Ovarian Cancer Australia, Pancare, Pankind, Pink Hope, Prostate Cancer Australia, Rare Cancers Australia, Lymphoma Australia, Lung Foundation Australia, Neuroendocrine Cancer Australia, and So Brave.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Union firebrand Len McCluskey has launched a blistering attack on Sir Keir Starmer – claiming Labour could ‘go under’ with him at the helm.

In a bombshell memoir – to be published on the same day as Sir Keir’s Labour conference speech – the union baron will accuse him of an ‘anti-democratic crackdown on the Left’.

The Unite general secretary, nicknamed ‘Red Len’, will also finally confirm his relationship with Jeremy Corbyn’s former chief-of-staff Karie Murphy. Among a number of revelations in the book, he will suggest Sir Keir is unable to win back the ‘Red Wall’ seats Labour lost in 2019, accusing the party leader of failing to inspire public confidence.

Union firebrand Len McCluskey has launched a blistering attack on Sir Keir Starmer – claiming Labour could ‘go under’ with him at the helm. He is set to launch a memoir on the date of Sir Keir's conference speech. Mr McCluskey will use his book to announce his relationship with Jeremy Corbyn's former chief of staff Karie Murphy

Sir Keir, pictured, faces a tough conference with supporters of former leader Jeremy Corbyn seeking his readmission into the party

And he will include details about private conversations with Sir Keir and his deputy Angela Rayner about Mr Corbyn’s suspension last year.

Former nurse Miss Murphy was at the centre of a row over Labour’s selection of an election candidate in Falkirk in 2013 amid claims of vote-rigging by Unite.

She was temporarily suspended from the party but was later cleared of any wrongdoing.

Mr McCluskey, 71, has always strongly denied claims about their relationship. In January 2019, Unite threatened legal action after the Guido Fawkes news website reported they had shared a room together after a New Year’s Eve party.

When the Mail approached the union for comment at the time, Unite’s assistant general secretary Howard Beckett dismissed the claims as ‘untrue, vexatious and malicious’. But in his book, titled Always Red, Mr McCluskey boasts about how they kept the relationship secret.

‘As Karie become more high profile, rumours abounded about our personal connection,’ he writes. ‘The media, desperate for a way to undermine Corbyn, constantly threatened to expose that we were involved.

‘We had no intention of providing them with that ammunition. So we engaged the press in a game of cat and mouse, getting Howard Beckett to use his legal genius to knock out gossipy stories.

‘We wanted our relationship to be kept private, away from the public gaze.’

Details of the book were made public yesterday after a leaked preview copy was obtained by Sky News.

But sections about Mr McCluskey’s conversations with Sir Keir and Mrs Rayner about Mr Corbyn’s suspension have been redacted and are expected to cause turmoil in the party when they are published next month.

Sir Keir yesterday dismissed Mr McCluskey’s warning that Labour could ‘go under’ with him as leader.

He said: ‘I’ve a lot of respect for Len McCluskey but I don’t agree with him on everything and this is one where I don’t agree with him.’

Asked why he did not agree with the union boss’s assessment, he replied: ‘Because I think he’s wrong.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Girls extend lead over boys in top grades: Key statistics in GCSE results Here are the main figures in this year's GCSE results: The proportion of entries receiving the top grades is the highest on record. A total of 28.9% of entries were awarded 7/A or above, up from 26.2% in 2020.

Some 77.1% of entries received a 4/C grade or above - another record high, and up from 76.3% in 2020.

The overall rate for grades 1/G or above is 99.0%, down slightly from 99.6% in 2020.

Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades. The proportion of female entries awarded 7/A or above was 33.4%, 9.0 percentage points higher than male entries (24.4%). Last year, girls led boys by 8.0 percentage points (30.2% girls, 22.2% boys). This year's figures are the highest on record for both girls and boys.

The gap at grade 4/C has narrowed for the fourth year in a row. A total of 80.6% of female entries were awarded 4/C or higher, compared with 73.6% for boys, a lead of 7.0 points. Last year the gap was 7.9 points.

The most popular subject this year in terms of entries was science double award, with a total of 896,138 entries, up 2.0% on 2020.

Maths remains the second most popular subject, with 811,135 entries, up 0.3% on 2020.

English was the third most popular choice, but also saw the biggest percentage fall in entries of any major subject, down by 2.4% from 799,473 to 780,231.

Spanish saw the biggest percentage rise in entries of any major subject, jumping by 4.7% from 109,594 to 114,795.

Overall there were 5,745,945 GCSE entries, up slightly (0.9%) on last year's figure of 5,692,464.

A total of 3,606 16-year-olds in England taking at least seven GCSEs achieved a grade 9 in all their 9-to-1 graded subjects. This is up from 2,645 in 2020. Advertisement

Grammar schools should be brought back after 'significantly' outperforming secondary schools in this year's GCSE results, the boss of a selective school group today claimed.

Robert McCartney, chairman of the National Grammar Schools Association, has called on the Government to repeal the 1998 Education Act - which banned the opening of new selective schools in England and Wales.

Mr McCartney says that the act, which he described as 'criminal' , was harming the chance of children, who he said would 'benefit' from a grammar school education.

It comes after 68.4 per cent of entries at grammar schools got at least a grade 7, up from 65.6 per cent in 2020, while traditional state schools - including secondary modern, comprehensive or middle - had an average of 23.3 per cent of entries getting at least a grade 7 this year, up from 20.9 per cent in 2020.

Asked about the excellent performance of grammar schools in this year’s GCSE results, Robert McCartney, chairman of the National Grammar Schools Association, told MailOnline: ‘It's not really a surprise in that - with the exception of a selected number of comprehensives or academies in affluent areas - we have always done significantly better than the secondary schools.’

He said the Butler legislation in 1944 for the first time said that entry to secondary education would be on the basis of merit, and from then on grammar schools multiplied and there were about 3,500.

However Education Secretary Anthony Crosland then led Labour’s campaign to replace grammar schools with comprehensives in the mid-1960s, famously saying that he would ‘destroy every f***ing grammar school in England and Wales and Northern Ireland’.

Mr McCartney said: ‘At that stage they were becoming a real threat to all but the super public schools. The smaller private schools were really under the hammer, and of course when the grammar schools - there are only 163 now in England - what it has done is reversed the effect of the education in a grammar school on merit, because of course the middle-classes who realised what a good thing they are and public school fees soaring, resorting to everything from really intense coaching to get their children in to the grammar schools because of the reduction in numbers, the opportunity for children from deprived areas to get into grammar schools has been reversed.

‘It's just educational madness. During the Blair years, the grammar school cohort – the number of children who have been educated in grammar schools, rose by 30,000.

Traditional A*-G grades were scrapped and replaced with a 9-1 system amid reforms, with 9 the highest and a C now a 4

'That would have been 30 new grammars with 1,000 pupils each. And the Conservatives had not repealed the 1998 Education Act by Tony Blair which had prohibited the opening of new grammar schools.

'The Tories tried to circumvent that by saying that a new building of an alleged grammar school ten miles from its parent was not a new grammar school but an extension.

‘Indeed, particularly in the Home Counties area, every grammar school almost without exception has an application rate of eight to ten applicants to every place. They keep ignoring what the people want.

'The National Grammar Schools Association doesn't advocate a return to compulsory 11+ but what they are saying is that it's positively criminal to prohibit parental choice for a form of post-primary education that has proved its efficiencies.

‘The quality of the education, the fact that the principle should be availability in democracy of parental choice for a form of education.

Centres were classified into ten types in Ofqual's analysis of GCSE results released today. They were: Acad (academy), Free (free school), FurE (further education establishment), Indp (independent school [including city training college]), SecComp (secondary comprehensive or middle school), SecMod (secondary modern or high school), SecSel (secondary selective school), Sixth (sixth form college), Tert (tertiary college), Other (covering college of higher education, university department, tutorial college, language school, special school, pupil referral unit, HM Young Offender Institute, HM Prison, training centre)

The regional breakdown shows the best performing area for GCSEs of 4/C and above is London, followed by the South East

Why were new grammar schools banned by Tony Blair's Labour in 1998? The School Standards and Framework Act 1998 enabled Tony Blair's new Labour government to ban the creation of new grammar schools across the country. That legislation meant no new maintained grammar schools could be opened, and any existing institutions were barred from introduction selection by ability. The controversial ban was brought in as the culminating exclamation mark on Labour's attempts to phase out selective education, which began in the 1960s. To that conclusion, there are just 163 grammar schools left in England, with comprehensive schools now dominating the education landscape. Advertisement

'So the first thing they could do is to repeal the 1998 education act or the section of it that prohibited the opening of new grammar schools.

'They should also address the problem that in three-quarters of England there are no grammar schools available and most of those areas have a significant degree of deprivation.

'So you can't write off that in three-quarters of the country there are not very large numbers of children who would benefit from the grammar schools offer.

‘I have a grandson, but this particular boy will be doing his GCSEs next year and he’s a very bright lad, but the problem is with the presents assessment of who is A* or what not, 50% of the entrants are getting As.

'And this means the whole function of that staggered grading was to suss out who were the really bright kids and would benefit from academic education.

'That has now gone. The whole idea of an A or A* grade has been devalued.’

It comes as Conservative MP Andrew Bridgen slammed the 'many failings of the state system' today as the education gap between rich and poor was laid bare in this year's GCSE results.

Mr Bridgen called for 'major reform of education at all levels' after three in five GCSE entries from private schools in England received one of the top three grades - more than double the level at state secondaries.

Some 61.2 per cent of GCSE entries from private schools received a grade 7, 8 or 9 this year, compared with 57.2 per cent in 2020 and 46.6 per cent in 2019, according to analysis by exams regulator Ofqual.

Independent schools also saw the largest absolute rise in the top grades compared with other types of schools and colleges - up four percentage points in a year.

Traditional state schools - including secondary modern, comprehensive or middle - had an average of 23.3 per cent of entries getting at least a grade 7 this year, up from 20.9 per cent in 2020.

Robert McCartney, chairman of the National Grammar Schools Association, has called on the Government to repeal the 1998 Education Act - which banned the opening of new selective schools in England and Wales

And 28.1 per cent of entries at academies got at least a grade 7 this year up from 2020, when 25.9 per cent were awarded top grades.

As for selective grammar schools, 68.4 per cent of entries got at least a grade 7, up from 65.6 per cent in 2020.

While these schools are not fee-paying, property prices in their catchment areas such as in Essex or Kent often rule out many poorer children from attending.

Mr Bridgen told MailOnline today: 'Was anyone expecting anything different following the A-Levels? I don't think so.

'It's more of the same. It's clear we need a major reform of education at all levels in the UK.

'The stresses placed on the education system during the lockdown has only exacerbated the many failings of our young people and brought into sharp focus the many failings of the state system compared to the private sector alternative.'

A second MP lambasted Education Secretary Gavin Williamson's softly-softly handling of union opposition during lockdown, saying he 'just couldn't handle them'.

And Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said many poorer pupils would have been affected during the lockdowns by a lack of digital technology at home.

Schools Minister Nick Gibb said the attainment gap between privileged and poorer children is 'not acceptable' and admitted the pandemic had 'amplified those inequalities', while former schools' catch-up tsar Sir Kevan Collins told of a 'huge risk' that the 'education legacy of Covid could be growing inequality'.

'More parents turn to preparatory schools' More parents are turning to preparatory schools, according to new figures. Data from the Independent Association of Preparatory Schools, shows nine out of ten growing prep schools received an increasing number of inquiries this year. Of those reporting rising demand, nine out of were getting applications from parents wishing to switch their children from public to private schools, according to the figures, first reported in the Times. More than half of all prep schools also received a rise in admission and inquires to enroll according to the IAPS, which represents more than 660 preparatory schools. It comes as figures released earlier this week show 70 per cent of all courses taken in private school were graded A or A*. Advertisement

During lockdown, where children had to stay at home for months at a time, most private school pupils had up to six hours of online learning per day, when many state schools would get one hour or even none at all. An estimated 700,000 state pupils had no home lessons.

Mr Barton said: 'Any increase in gaps between students and institutions is obviously worrying but it isn't easy to identify exactly why this has happened. The most likely explanation is that pupils at independent schools have in general been less affected by the pandemic than those at state schools.

'They are more likely to come from wealthy homes where digital technology will have been readily available and they are generally taught in smaller groups because independent schools are much better funded than state schools. This does emphasise the need for a much more substantial education recovery package for the state sector than ministers have so far provided.'

Traditional A*-G grades were replaced with a 9-1 system amid reforms which happened in three stages between 2017 and 2019, with 9 now the highest. A 4 is roughly a C grade, and a 7 broadly equivalent to an A.

It comes as the overall proportion of GCSE entries given top grades across England, Wales and Northern Ireland surged to an all-time high after exams were cancelled for the second year in a row due to Covid-19.

Hundreds of thousands of youngsters got results to help them progress to sixth form, college or training which were determined by teachers, with pupils only assessed on what they were taught in the pandemic.

Pupils react as they receive their results at Merchant Taylors Girls School in Crosby, Merseyside, this morning

Pupils react as they receive their results at Merchant Taylors Girls School in Crosby, Merseyside, this morning

Jessica Harding, 16, receives her GCSE results by email at her home in Littleport, Cambridgeshire, this morning. Her grades were 7A*s and 3A's with one more result still to come

Pupils achieving a 'clean sweep' of the highest GCSE grades rises again The number of pupils in England scoring a clean sweep of the highest grade in their GCSEs this summer has increased by more than a third in a year, with more girls achieving straight top grades than boys. Overall the proportion of GCSE entries awarded the top grades has surged to a record high after exams were cancelled due to Covid-19. Hundreds of thousands of youngsters received results determined by their teachers, and nearly three in 10 (28.9%) of UK GCSE entries were awarded the top grades - at least a 7 or an A grade - this year, up from 26.2% last summer, according to data from the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ). In 2019, when exams were last held before the pandemic, only a fifth (20.8%) of entries received a 7/A grade or above. But separate figures, published by exams regulator Ofqual, showed the number of 16-year-olds in England taking at least seven GCSEs achieving a clean sweep of straight 9s - the highest grade available under the numerical grading system - in all subjects has risen by 36% in a year. Some 3,606 students in England achieved a clean sweep this summer, compared with 2,645 in 2020. Only 837 16-year-olds scored a clean sweep of straight 9s in 2019, but a small number of GCSE language subjects had not yet moved over to the reformed numbered grading system in England this year. Of the youngsters who achieved a clean sweep, 64% were girls and 36% were boys, according to Ofqual's analysis. Overall girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades. The proportion of female entries awarded 7/A or above was 33.4%, nine percentage points higher than male entries (24.4%). Last year, girls led boys by eight percentage points (30.2% girls, 22.2% boys). Addressing the widening gender gap at GCSE, Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), told the PA news agency: "It does seem to be the case that girls tend to fare better under a more holistic form of assessment - as has happened this year - whereas some boys have a tendency to cram at the last minute for exams. "It is a stereotype which obviously does not hold true for all girls and all boys but certainly enough to make a difference to overall outcomes." Independent schools in England saw the biggest absolute increase in the highest grades compared with other types of schools and colleges - up four percentage points on last year. An analysis from Ofqual found that 61.2% of GCSE entries from private schools in England were awarded a grade 7 or above this year, compared with 28.1% of entries from academies awarded a grade 7 or higher. The regulator also found that pupils in England eligible for free school meals (FSM) have fallen further behind their more privileged peers at GCSE. An analysis found there has been a slight widening of the "long-standing results gap" between students in receipt of FSM and those who are not, by around one-tenth of a grade compared with 2019 - and Ofqual suggested this could be a reflection of the "uneven impact" of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Labour party has warned that the GCSE results "present a stark warning that the Conservatives are letting down" the country. Overall, some 77.1% of UK entries received a 4/C grade or above. This is another record high and is up from 76.3% in 2020, according to JCQ data. In 2019, just over two in three (67.3%) entries achieved at least a 4 or C grade, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show. Traditional A*-G grades have been scrapped in England and replaced with a 9-1 system amid reforms, with 9 the highest. A 4 is broadly equivalent to a C grade, and a 7 broadly equivalent to an A. Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn. The proportion of GCSE entries awarded top grades rose to a record high last year after grades were allowed to be based on teachers' assessments, if they were higher than the moderated grades given, following the U-turn. This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' A-level and GCSE grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards. On Tuesday, the proportion of A-level entries awarded top grades reached a record high after exams were cancelled, with 44.8% achieving an A or above. No algorithm was used this year to moderate grades. Instead, schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks. Advertisement

Overall, 28.9 per cent of UK GCSE entries were awarded one of the three top grades this year, up by 2.7 percentage points on last year when 26.2 per cent achieved the top grades.

In 2019, when exams were last held, only a fifth (20.8 per cent) of entries achieved at least a 7 - the equivalent of an A grade.

Girls have pulled further ahead than boys - with the gap between the two sexes achieving one of the top three grades having risen from eight percentage points in 2020 to nine percentage points this year.

According to figures from Ofqual, the number of 16-year-old students in England who entered seven or more GCSEs and received a 9 - the highest grade under the numerical grading system - in all subjects has risen.

Some 3,606 students in England received straight 9s, compared with 2,645 in 2020 and 837 in 2019.

More than three in four (77.1 per cent) of UK entries were awarded at least a 4 last year, which is up by 0.8 percentage points on last year when 76.3 per cent achieved the grades.

In 2019, just over two in three (67.3 per cent) entries achieved at least a grade 4.

The figures from the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) also found 28.1 per cent of entries at academies achieved at least a grade 7 this year, a 2.2 percentage point increase from last year, when 25.9 per cent of entries were awarded top grades.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

The proportion of GCSE entries awarded top grades rose to a record high last year after grades were allowed to be based on teachers' assessments, if they were higher than the moderated grades given, following the U-turn.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' A-level and GCSE grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

It comes two days after the proportion of A-level entries awarded top grades reached a record high after exams were cancelled, with 44.8 per cent achieving an A or above.

No algorithm was used this year to moderate grades.

Mr Bridgen blamed 'heavily unionised' state schools for failing students as privately educated pupils gained almost double the proportion of As and A*s at A-level helped by Zoom classes 'throughout the day' during the pandemic.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

Mr Barton said: 'These results show a small increase in top grades compared to last year, but a more pronounced difference in the distribution of grades compared to 2019, when public exams were last held.

'It is important to emphasise that the system of teacher assessment under which these pupils have been assessed is different from public exams and is therefore not directly comparable.

'The GCSE grades awarded to these young people are a fair and accurate reflection of their performance under the robust system used this year, which will allow them to progress to post-16 courses and apprenticeships in the normal way.'

Rekha Shell-Macleod, head of school at CORE Education Trust's City Academy in Birmingham, said it has been 'a difficult year' for students and staff, but that pupils have 'really risen to the challenge'.

Turning to the teacher-assessed grading system which this year replaced the normal system of exams, she said it was 'a challenging process'.

'Our results haven't been inflated - they are broadly in line with what they were and have been in previous years as well, which is reassuring,' she said.

'It just goes to show that everything we have done has been completely robust and, most importantly, it's about the students - making sure that they get the results they deserve and are able to move on to the next place in their learning.'

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

The proportion of GCSE entries awarded top grades rose to a record high last year after grades were allowed to be based on teachers' assessments, if they were higher than the moderated grades given, following the U-turn.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' A-level and GCSE grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Speaking about scrutiny of results by the external exam boards, Ms Shell-Macleod, whose school has more than 900 pupils, many of them from disadvantaged backgrounds, said: 'We did have to submit samples.

'They (the exam boards) cross-checked our grades and they were happy with what we'd awarded, so there weren't any surprises from the exam board.

The Ofqual analysis of results based on poverty shows pupils with 'very low' deprivation tend to score the highest grades

Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades. The proportion of female entries awarded 7/A or above was 33.4%, 9.0 percentage points higher than male (24.4%). In 2020, girls led boys by 8.0 percentage points (30.2% girls, 22.2% boys)

GCSE grade percentages by nation and region Here are the percentage of GCSE entries awarded the top grades (7/A or above) by nation and region: North-east England 24.5% (up from 22.0% in 2020)

North-west England 25.9% (23.5%)

Yorkshire & the Humber 24.4% (22.3%)

West Midlands 25.3% (23.0%)

East Midlands 25.1% (23.0%)

Eastern England 28.5% (25.9%)

South-west England 29.1% (26.1%)

South-east England 31.9% (29.0%)

London 34.5% (31.4%)

England 28.5% (up from 25.9%)

Wales 28.7% (25.5%)

Northern Ireland 39.9% (36.3%)

All 28.9% (up from 26.2%) Here is the GCSE pass rate (entries awarded 4/C or above) by nation and region: North-east England 75.5% (up from 73.8%)

North-west England 75.0% (74.2%)

Yorkshire & the Humber 73.5% (72.6%)

West Midlands 74.3% (73.3%)

East Midlands 75.4% (74.9%)

Eastern England 77.1% (76.2%)

South-west England 78.6% (77.6%)

South-east England 79.3% (78.2%)

London 79.7% (79.0%)

England 76.9% (up from 75.9%)

Wales 73.6% (73.8%)

Northern Ireland 89.6% (89.8%)

All 77.1% (up from 76.3%) Advertisement

'But it was good to have that external scrutiny. It just reassured us that what grades we had put forward were in line with what they also thought.'

She also said that putting together the teacher-assessed grading system had been 'quite a challenging process' but they had put a 'robust' system in place.

'We have used a variety of evidence to make our judgments, including mock examinations, assessments, homework, book work, and we've used all of that information to give an accurate, as-best judgment as we can of what the children would have achieved should they have been sitting real examinations this year,' she said.

'As a school within CORE Education Trust we, along with all the other schools in the trust, made sure that we moderated internally but also, more importantly, schools outside of the trust.

'So we were certain that whatever grades we awarded within our schools was in line with other schools across the city.'

Dr Philip Wright, director-general of JCQ, said: 'On behalf of JCQ and the exam boards, I would like to congratulate all students receiving their results today.

'The impact of Covid has undoubtedly provided a difficult chapter in their education journey and their resilience is to be applauded. We wish them all the best as they take their next steps in life.'

He added: 'Teachers used their professional judgment and submitted the grades and evidence in good time for us to check and award grades today.

'Their efforts will allow students to swiftly progress on to the next stages of their education or training.'

Speaking before the results were announced, Mr Barton said he was expecting pressure to be placed on admissions teams at sixth forms colleges and schools if grades were inflated this summer.

Mr Barton warned that some young people could be 'turned away' from courses if centres cannot increase capacity due to limited space and staff.

He added: 'I think what we'll see admissions tutors doing on Thursday, and heads of sixth form, is doing their best to make sure that irrespective of grades a young person moves on to what they had wanted to do in terms of their course and the course best suited to them.

The major ethnic groups are split up as AOEG (Any Other Ethnic Group), ASIA (Asian), BLAC (Black), CHIN (Chinese), MIXD (Mixed Background), WHIT (White). The results show that students from the Chinese ethnic group tend to perform the best

Centres were grouped by geographical region. The nine regions are: EM (East Midlands), EA (East of England), LD (London), NE (North East), NW (North West), SE (South East), SW (South West), WM (West Midlands), Y&H (Yorkshire and the Humber)

Gavin Williamson shouldn't be sacked... says his junior minister Gavin Williamson was defended by one of his departmental ministers following calls for the Education Secretary to be sacked. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said Boris Johnson should fire Mr Williamson amid reports the Prime Minister is considering replacing him with equalities minister Kemi Badenoch at the next reshuffle. Schools minister Nick Gibb, asked on Sky News why Mr Williamson should keep his job, said: 'Because he is a very effective Education Secretary. 'I've worked with Gavin Williamson for the last two years and he is driven to make sure that no student will suffer long-term damage to their prospects as a consequence of the pandemic. 'He is driven to continue the reform programme in our education system where we saw, up until Covid, that attainment gap close in primary school and in secondary school. 'And he is driven to do more to make sure we continue to drive up standards in our education system so that background does not matter in terms of the opportunities available for young people.' Advertisement

'Because what we don't want is young people euphoric that they got higher grades than they had hoped for on results day, and then three or four weeks into a new term feeling out of their depth on a course which actually isn't the appropriate course for them.

'I think there'll be quite a lot of work going on behind the scenes, sometimes persuading young people and their parents to stick to what their course of action was.'

If more students achieve higher grades than anticipated - and they want to study A-levels rather than attend an further education (FE) college - it could cause logistical issues for sixth forms, he warned.

Mr Barton said: 'That will leave some courses struggling to be able to run and some courses oversubscribed and definitely a need for further resources.

'Or some young people just simply disappointed and turned away because there is no way you could increase capacity because of the accommodation and number of teachers you've got.'

Sixth-form colleges are calling for more funding from the Government to cope with another likely surge of pupils who will be able to meet entry requirements.

James Kewin, deputy chief executive of the Sixth Form Colleges Association, said: 'Our members certainly saw an increase in the number of students that met the entry criteria last year, and we expect a similar increase this year.

'The Government has provided some welcome additional capital funding to help sixth forms expand, but that was only for one year, so we would like to see that extended for the longer term in this year's spending review.'

He added: 'Additional in-year revenue funding to meet the anticipated surge in demand would also be very welcome, particularly as sixth forms are funded based on the number of students they recruited the previous year.'

Pupils celebrate with their results at Merchant Taylors Girls School in Crosby, Merseyside, this morning

Meher-Ali Khokhar celebrates his grades with his family at Manchester Grammar School this morning

Joy Israel Mbengo (left) celebrates with headteacher Rekha Shell-Macleod as he opens his GCSE results at CORE's City Academy in Birmingham today

Professor Alan Smithers, director of the Centre for Education and Employment Research (CEER) at the University of Buckingham, had already suggested more top grades could be awarded to GCSE pupils this year.

Grade 10 to beat GCSE inflation? Ministers consider overhaul of exams marking A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine. Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems. A government source said a new grade 10 was 'possible' and had not been 'ruled out'. They added: 'It's a discussion that's yet to be formally framed, but there will be conversations about changing the grading this autumn.' Teachers have decided the marks, meaning grading is the most generous in recent history – leading to accusations of the qualifications being devalued. Education expert Alan Smithers, of the University of Buckingham said: 'We have a scale that has lost its meaning as we have people continually being given 9. Adding a 10 isn't a bad idea as it would be a good new label for outstanding performance.' However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had 'value' despite the grade inflation. Advertisement

In a report, he had warned: 'Plentiful top grades make pupils and parents happy, but they are less helpful for those using the grades for admission to the next stage of education or recruitment to employment.'

Meanwhile, Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at the University of Exeter, is concerned that poorer pupils without 'sharp-elbowed parents' could be disadvantaged by a 'wild west' post-16 admissions system.

He said: 'I'm worried about those pupils who may have just missed out on GCSE grades, who will now see their options for a sixth-form place and the A-level subjects they can study limited.

'Sixth-form admissions are the wild west of the education system, with every sixth form determining its own selection criteria.

'Pupils will face a different fate depending on where they happen to be educated. These fine judgments at such a young age can have impacts that last a lifetime.

'A particular concern for me are the prospects of poorer pupils who will not necessarily be backed up by sharp-elbowed parents fighting their corner.'

Students receiving GCSE results in England will get numerical grades of 1-9 for all their subjects as all courses have moved over to the new grading system.

Addressing concerns about possible grade inflation, Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'Grades have been arrived at in a completely unique way, so it would not be sensible to compare this year's results with any other, and any talk of 'grade inflation' is unhelpful to students.'

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson said: 'Students should feel proud of their achievements and will now be looking forward to taking their next steps.

'I am also hugely grateful to teachers and school leaders for their hard work to ensure students get the grades they deserve and need to progress to the next stage of their lives.

'There have never been so many great options available for young people, whether that's going on to study A-levels, our pioneering T Levels, starting an apprenticeship or a traineeship.

Millie Ashton celebrates receiving ten GCSE grades between 7 and 9 at St Peter's School in Orrell near Wigan today

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson arrives at the Department for Education in Westminster today on GCSE results day

'Whatever option young people choose, they can do so with the confidence it will give them the skills and knowledge to get on in life.'

Pupils on free school meals fall further behind more privileged peers at GCSE Poorer pupils in England eligible for free school meals (FSM) have dropped further behind their more privileged peers at GCSE, according to analysis of this year's results. Ofqual said that there has been a slight widening of the 'long-standing results gap' between students in receipt of FSM and those who are not, by around one tenth of a grade compared with 2019. The exams regulator suggested the widening gap could be a reflection of the 'uneven impact' of the coronavirus crisis. Meanwhile, private schools have seen the biggest absolute increase in the highest grades compared with other types of schools and colleges - up 4 percentage points on last year. Hundreds of thousands of youngsters have been given results determined by their teachers after exams were cancelled for the second year in a row, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic. Analysis by Ofqual for results in England found that there were no notable changes in the gap between the grades received by white pupils and those received by most ethnic groups. However, the exams regulator said that Gypsy and Roma pupils have seen a decrease in outcomes compared with 2019 - the most recent year exams went ahead - when controlling for prior attainment. There has been a slight widening of the gap between this group and white students by nearly one fifth of a grade, according to the analysis on equalities. It said: 'It seems likely that many of these changes reflect the uneven impact of the pandemic and that the changes to the assessment arrangements may have lessened the unevenness in outcomes we may otherwise have seen.' A separate analysis by Ofqual found that 61.2% of GCSE entries from private schools in England were awarded a grade 7 or above this year, compared with 57.2% in 2020 and 46.6% in 2019. Grammar schools saw 68.4% of entries achieve a top grade this year, while in comparison, 28.1% of pupils at academies were awarded a grade 7 or higher. It comes after educational charity The Sutton Trust raised concerns on A-level results day that the pandemic had widened the gap between independent and state schools. Alissa Dhaliwal, head of skills at the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), said: 'Ensuring young people from all backgrounds can fulfil their potential in education is crucial to securing a more inclusive economy. 'We can't allow the pandemic to worsen existing inequalities. Employers want diverse workforces which reflect the talent they know exists in all corners of society.' Advertisement

Almost 40 per cent of GSCE entries in Northern Ireland were awarded A or A* grades.

The proportion of entries awarded top grades by teachers increased by 3.6 percentage points to 39.9 per cent.

There was little change in the number of entries achieving A-C grades, at 89.6 per cent, compared with 89.8 per cent last year.

It was the second year in a row grades issued in Northern Ireland were based on teacher assessments.

The system was used after formal examinations were cancelled for the second year in a row due to the coronavirus pandemic.

Northern Ireland's Education Minister Michelle McIlveen congratulated GCSE students across the country.

'I wish to congratulate all of the young people who have received their GCSE results today. They have worked incredibly hard to achieve success in their studies and this has been reflected in the grades they have deservedly achieved today.

'No other cohort of students have experienced a situation where they have been out of the classroom for a sustained period of time, not just once, but twice. Despite two years of disrupted learning, our young people have shown immense determination, resilience and tenacity in their studies.

'I also wish to pay tribute to teachers across Northern Ireland who have been at the heart of students' education throughout this important year. Without their enthusiasm, dedication and commitment, today's successes would not have been possible.

'I would like to offer my sincere thanks to all school staff, parents, governors and young people for their hard work, dedication, efforts and support during the current pandemic.

'Congratulations to all our students and my very best wishes to them for the future. I would encourage young people to remain in education or training post-16, following a course in a setting that best meets their needs and aspirations.'

In Scotland, the national results for the National 5 qualifications were published on Tuesday, which showed that the rate of students receiving between an A and a C - known as the attainment rate - fell.

Students in Scotland have known their individual grades since the end of June.

Schools minister Nick Gibb said pupils receiving their GCSEs had been through an 'exceptional year' because of the coronavirus pandemic.

Speaking to Sky News, Mr Gibb said: 'This is an exceptional year, designed to make sure that despite the pandemic, despite the fact we had to cancel exams, because it wouldn't have been fair for children, young people, to sit exams when they've had such different experiences of Covid - the different levels of self-isolation and so on - so a teacher-assessed system was the best alternative to make sure they can go on to the next phase of their education or careers.'

He said the Government wanted examinations to return next year, adding: 'We've already announced the adjustments to the exams - we expect all young people to be taking exams in 2022 but we will be making adjustments to those exams to reflect the fact that this cohort will have had disruption to their education as well.

'And the regulator Ofqual will be saying more about the grading standard that will be used for those exams in the autumn term.'

He said there will be a push to get back to pre-pandemic achievement levels in the 'longer term' following grade inflation during the pandemic.

The reforms to GCSE results were introduced in stages in 2017, 2018 and 2019, as shown in this graphic from Ofqual

Asked whether there would be changes to the grading system next year, Mr Gibb told Sky News: 'No, what I said was we will be talking about what the grading standard will be for the 2022 exams.

Overhauling A-level grading amid concerns over inflated marks is 'unfair', say unions Overhauling the grading system for A-levels amid concerns about grade inflation would be 'unnecessarily disruptive', 'unfair' and 'unrealistic', school leaders' unions have warned. Ministers are thought to be considering replacing the traditional A to E grades with a numerical system in an effort to shore up the credibility of A-levels after record numbers were awarded the top marks. But headteachers' unions are calling on the Government not to rush into introducing any radical reforms, amid concerns about grade inflation after nearly 45% were awarded an A or A* on Tuesday. For the second year in a row, students were given grades based on assessment by their teachers after exams were scrapped due to the pandemic. One union has suggested a 'staged' reduction of the proportion of students allowed the top grades over three years could ensure that next year's cohort are not unfairly disadvantaged. This year, 44.8% of UK A-level entries were awarded an A or A* - a record high - compared with just 25.5% of entries in 2019, the last year that exams were sat before the pandemic. Around 70.1% of all A-level entries from private schools were awarded an A grade or higher this year, which has prompted concerns that Covid-19 has widened the gap between private and state schools. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: 'There is a legitimate question about what grade distribution at A-level should look like next year following two years of upheaval. 'Returning to the pattern of distribution when exams last took place in 2019 would seem very harsh on next year's cohort because they have also been deeply affected by the disruption caused by the pandemic, and will be potentially competing for jobs with students from this year and last year when grade distribution was different. 'There may therefore be an argument for a staged adjustment or recalibration next year. 'It seems unnecessarily disruptive, however, to undertake an overhaul of the grading system itself to replace it with numbered grades or some other big change. 'A reform of this nature needs both a clear rationale and a lead-in period rather than landing it suddenly on students and teachers who are expecting A-levels to be graded in the fashion with which they are familiar. It would be very unfair and confusing to move the goalposts at this stage.' Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, added that suggestions of a move to a numerical system are 'unrealistic'. He said: 'When GCSE grading changed, there were new specifications introduced and it took four years from the first teaching of those to the point where all GCSEs received numerical results. There is an opportunity here for Government and Ofqual to review the current system's reliance on terminal exams and grading by comparable outcomes. This requires meaningful consultation to ensure the fairest system for students.' Private schools in England saw the largest absolute increase in the top grades compared with other types of schools and colleges - up 9.3 percentage points on last year, data from Ofqual on Tuesday suggest. Former catch-up tsar Sir Kevan Collins has said it is 'undeniable' that private schools have more resources than state schools, possibly leading to higher-than-average A-level grades this year. Sir Kevan was asked on BBC Radio 4's Today programme whether he thinks sending children to private school is an 'act of great privilege'. He said: 'I never criticise a parent for doing the best for their children. All parents are trying to do that. And all teachers I know believe in children and are pushing children to do the best they can. It is undeniable though that some parents and some children and some schools have more resources and more opportunity with their children than others.' Labour's shadow education secretary Kate Green said the difference in performance between state and private schools was in part the result of ministers' failure to outline a standardised process for assessing grades. She told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: 'The Government didn't set down a clear standardised process early on last year and schools, therefore, were really awarding grades in very different ways.' Ms Green called for far-reaching changes to ensure all students are given the support they need. She added: 'We shouldn't be just playing around with the grading system here, we should be thinking about the quality of teaching and learning that children are receiving.' Ms Green has suggested that in the longer term, there should be a move to a hybrid system based on a mix of coursework and exams. Her call comes amid speculation that Education Secretary Gavin Williamson could face the axe in a Cabinet reshuffle later this year. Mr Williamson was widely criticised over last year's A-levels fiasco when the Government used an algorithm to 'moderate' the results only to later back track in the face of widespread protests. According to The Times, Boris Johnson is considering replacing him with equalities minister Kemi Badenoch, who is popular in the Conservative Party for her attacks on 'woke' campaigners. A Department for Education spokeswoman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time and they deserve their qualifications. 'Exams are the best form of assessment and we are consulting on how to ensure they go ahead fairly next year. Ofqual will confirm the approach to grading for 2022 in the autumn term.' Advertisement

'We are also looking at, in the longer term... how to make sure we get back to the system we had before the pandemic broke where we had year-on-year no grade inflation.

'We want to get back to that system in the longer run but we have to make sure that when we do that, that we are fair between different years, different cohorts - the ones who took their exams in 2020 and 2021, and the students who take their exams in the future.

'It is fairness that lies at the heart of any decisions about grading.

'These are very difficult decisions to make and we will be doing so in conjunction with the regulator, with the exam boards and indeed with teachers and parents and students up and down the country before we come to a firm decision. The issue about the grading system is for the longer term.'

Meanwhile Mr Williamson was defended by Mr Gibb following calls for the Education Secretary to be sacked.

Sir Keir said Boris Johnson should fire Mr Williamson amid reports the Prime Minister is considering replacing him with equalities minister Kemi Badenoch at the next reshuffle.

Mr Gibb, asked on Sky News why Mr Williamson should keep his job, said: 'Because he is a very effective Education Secretary.

'I've worked with Gavin Williamson for the last two years and he is driven to make sure that no student will suffer long-term damage to their prospects as a consequence of the pandemic.

'He is driven to continue the reform programme in our education system where we saw, up until Covid, that attainment gap close in primary school and in secondary school.

'And he is driven to do more to make sure we continue to drive up standards in our education system so that background does not matter in terms of the opportunities available for young people.'

Mr Gibb also praised teachers for their efforts to ensure that teacher-assessed grades worked this year to deliver GCSE results, but said the system will not be used in the long term.

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'We should be congratulating those hundreds of thousands of young people getting their GCSE and other grades today, enabling them to go on to T-levels or A-levels or an apprenticeship.

'They have worked hard in very challenging circumstances over the last 18 months.

'And also to say thank you to the teachers who have administered the teacher-assessed grades system, with all the guidance they have received and the evidence they have needed to compile and send into the exam board, so thank you to those teachers for administering that difficult and challenging system this year.'

Asked whether the Government is ruling out using teacher-assessments for GCSEs in the long run, Mr Gibb replied: 'Yes. We did have controlled assessment, teacher assessment in GCSEs prior to 2010 and they took up a vast amount of teaching time that should be better spent on teaching young people.

'And, also, the regulator did not feel that they were a fair way of assessing young people's achievements.'

Meanwhile Labour is calling on the Government to do more to address lost learning during the pandemic, with the party estimating that more than half a million Year 11 students receiving their GCSE results will leave secondary school without receiving catch-up support.

On a visit to a school in Swindon to meet students receiving their GCSE results, Sir Keir Starmer is expected to say the current plans to catch up on lost learning 'risk holding back a generation of kids'.

Sir Kevan Collins, the former education catch-up commissioner, quit his role in June over the Government's proposal of a £1.4 billion fund to help children recover missed lessons, describing it as 'a bit feeble' - he had proposed a £15 billion recovery package.

The Labour Party says that face-to-face teaching lost this year amounts to more than eight weeks per pupil, in addition to an average of 14 weeks last year, with some groups such as pupils on free school meals and those in the north of England being disproportionately affected.

Labour estimates 560,000 year 11 students are leaving secondary school this summer without catch-up support, and says that is set to rise to 1.9 million children by 2024.

The party is calling on the Government to match Labour's children's recovery plan, which it says would provide a £15 billion package, including small group tutoring, breakfast clubs, mental heath support, more professional development for teachers, and extra investment to support the pupils who struggled the most with lockdown learning.

On his visit to a school in Swindon, the Labour leader, Sir Keir, is expected to say: 'These young people are excited for their futures and every one of them must be allowed to reach their potential.

'Yet the Conservatives are failing to give children the support they need to catch up on lost learning. They risk holding back a generation of kids.

'Labour's Children's Recovery Plan would give every child the support to learn, play and develop after this pandemic, delivering them a brighter future.

'It's time for the Conservatives to get behind Labour's plan and match our ambition for children's futures.'

Labour's shadow education secretary, Kate Green, said the Government's recovery plan for students is 'inadequate' and 'will leave millions of children without any additional support, showing a shocking lack of ambition their future ambitions and life chances'.

A Government spokesperson said: 'We have committed to an ambitious and long-term education recovery plan, including an investment to date of over £3 billion and a significant expansion of our tutoring programme, to support children and young people to make up for learning lost during the pandemic.'

Writing on Twitter, Sir Keir said pupils collecting their GCSE and BTEC results on Thursday should be proud after they faced learning in 'exceptional circumstances'.

He tweeted: 'Good luck to students receiving their GCSE and BTEC results today. Young people across our country are hugely talented and should be proud of all they've achieved in such exceptional circumstances. Thank you to their teachers and support staff who have worked so hard this year.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Police have released the first image of a two-year-old boy whose death is being treated as a murder after he was found critically injured at his home in Bridgend.

Reid Steele's family described him as a 'super happy, gorgeous, wonderful and intelligent child'.

The toddler died at University Hospital of Wales in Cardiff on Thursday afternoon. He was found in a critical condition at his home in the Broadlands area of Bridgend the previous evening.

South Wales Police said a 31-year-old woman who was arrested on suspicion of his murder has now been transferred into the care of health services and is currently detained under the Mental Health Act

She remains on police bail while the investigation continues.

Reid Steele's family described him as a 'super happy, gorgeous, wonderful and intelligent child'

In a tribute to Reid released via the police, the family said: 'He was a super, super-happy, gorgeous, wonderful and intelligent little boy who lit up everyone's lives.

'He loved the garden and the beach, picking raspberries and going for walks collecting shells. He was a very chatty little boy and would happily speak to anyone.'

Detective Chief Inspector Matt Davies, said: 'We are dealing with a very sad and tragic incident.

'The family continue to be supported by dedicated family liaison officers and once again, I would appeal for members of the public to refrain from speculating on social media at what is a very difficult time for all concerned. My thoughts remain with the family.'

The force said it is not looking for anyone else in connection with the incident.

South Wales Police said a 31-year-old woman who was arrested on suspicion of his murder has now been transferred into the care of health services and is currently detained under the Mental Health Act. Pictured: Police in Bridgend where Reid was found injured

Davies yesterday appealed to people not to speculate on social media about the situation during what is 'a very difficult time for all concerned'.

Liaison officers are working with the family.

Places of worship in Bridgend also opened their doors to anyone who would like to pay their respects.

Forensic teams were seen outside Reid's home where a police presence has remained since Wednesday evening.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Witnesses raced to help a woman in her 30s who was killed after a crash involving two buses outside Victoria Railway Station today.

Pictures showed two crashed buses by the London station, one of which is the 507 to Waterloo. The incident happened at 8.25am during the morning rush hour.

The pedestrian was pronounced dead at 9am, and two others have been treated for 'non-life threatening injuries' in hospital. A fourth person was also treated at the scene but not hospitalised.

One witness was travelling on another bus when she 'heard a bang' and saw a woman 'underneath' a bus.

She said: 'She had a dark floral skirt and blonde hair. Her hand was outstretched. There were a lot of people around her, one lady was holding her hand and a guy was trying to help. I honestly hoped she would be okay.'

The witness said the bus she was travelling on left moments later, adding that she and her fellow passengers were left feeling shocked and 'helpless'.

Big Issue seller Jacob Davidson, 36, described how passers-by 'swarmed' the scene following the crash in an attempt to help.

'It was just a loud bang, the bus smashed into the back of the one in front. The front of it was all smashed in,' he said.

'I didn't think much of it until two cab drivers stepped out of their cabs, jumped over the railing and started looking under the bus.

'There was a sound of panic... people shouting ''can we get help''.'

One of the pedestrians was pronounced dead at 9am, and two others have been treated for 'non-life threatening injuries' in hospital

Pictures show two crashed buses by the London station, one of which is the 507 to Waterloo. The incident happened at 8.25am during the morning rush hour

A woman in her 30s has died and two people were hospitalised after a crash involving two buses outside Victoria Railway Station

Mr Davidson said commuters rushed to the railing to see what was happening.

He added: 'There was a woman laying outside the bus driver's door being helped by two or three people.

'The I looked under the front of the bus and there was another man stuck under the bus.'

Another Big Issue seller, Danielle Cain, said she 'heard a woman scream' and saw 'a load of people gathered round'.

She continued: 'It was awful, I knew instantly something bad had happened. I was told later a woman had got trapped under a bus.'

And other person said one bus slammed on its brakes as pedestrians crossed in front, then the bus behind smashed into the back, throwing it forward into the victims.

Images from the scene, just by the busy station's coach depot, appear to show that the vehicles are still on the road, indicating they had not careered off into the pavement.

Following reports of the crash, commuters said that the crossing had been 'a nightmare for years' with 'buses rushing in and out', and the area 'needs desperate improvement now'.

The London Underground's Circle and District lines have also suspended sections of their routes this week, causing further chaos for those having the find alternate routes while commuting across London.

Police at the scene at Victoria bus station, central London, after a crash involving two buses in which a female pedestrian died

The scene at Victoria bus station, central London, after a crash involving two buses in which a female pedestrian

Fazian Raja, 27, from Ilford, east London, said: 'I saw some people run across the road in front of the bus and that's when I heard a very loud bang.

'So I think he must have slammed on the brakes and the bus behind him went straight into him.

'Some guy called the police and in five or 10 minutes they were here. I couldn't see what was going on because I was too far away.'

The bus had to be hoisted off the ground by a fire engine to free the victim who was trapped underneath, shocked passers-by said.

Recovery trucks arrived just before 4pm to remove the buses, one of which has a shattered windscreen.

Georgiana Mate, 29, who works nearby, said: 'I was having a cigarette outside and heard a loud bang. So I went over to the buses and I saw someone under the bus.

'The police arrived about 10 minutes later, but I went back inside and started work.'

Margarita Pal, who works nearby, said: 'I arrived around 9:25 and saw all the police cars and ambulances.

'I was thinking there must have been a fight or something like that.

'But then I asked someone outside Pret who said she thought someone had died and had heard the scream.

'I was really surprised with the buses, because I see them every day and normally they are very careful. I use the 507 as well and there's never been a problem.'

A Met Police spokesman told MailOnline: 'Police were called at 08:25hrs on Tuesday, 10 August to reports of a collision involving two buses and three pedestrians outside Victoria Railway Station'

The incident happened at 8.25am during the morning rush hour

A member of staff at the Shakespeare Pub said: 'We only heard the bang and I've never seen that many police cars and ambulances in my life. And there were two fire engines.

'I heard one of the buses went into the back of the other, which then hit the woman.

'That poor women has lost her life and she was only in her 30s.'

Police have now cordoned off the area around Terminus Place.

Andy Byford, Transport for London's Commissioner, said: 'We are extremely saddened that a woman has tragically died after a collision with a bus and our thoughts are with her family and friends.

'We are thinking of everyone affected by this incident and will support everyone however we can. We are working urgently with the operator of the two buses, Go Ahead London, and the police to investigate what happened.'

Met Police said in a statement: 'Officers from the Met's Serious Collision Investigation Unit are appealing for witnesses and footage following a fatal collision outside Victoria Railway Station.

'Police were called at 08:25hrs on Tuesday, 10 August to reports of a collision involving two buses and three pedestrians outside Victoria Railway Station.

'Emergency services attended and immediately provided first aid.

'A female pedestrian, believed to be aged in her 30s, was pronounced dead at the scene at 09:00hrs. Her next of kin have been informed and are being supported by specially trained officers.

'Two other people were treated for non-life threatening injuries.

'All parties remained at the scene. There have been no arrests.

'Terminus Place is currently closed to buses.

Police at the scene at Victoria bus station, central London, after a crash involving two buses in which a female pedestrian was killed

The scene at Victoria bus station, central London, after a crash involving two buses in which a female pedestrian was killed

'Anyone with information should call the Serious Collision Investigation Unit witness lines on 0208 543 5157, call 101 or tweet @MetCC quoting 1450/10AUG. Alternatively, contact Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111.'

A London Ambulance Service spokesperson said: 'We were called at 8.25am today (10 August) to reports of a road traffic collision at Victoria Bus Station.

'We sent three ambulance crews, two medics in cars, an advanced paramedic, an incident response officer, an advanced paramedic, and our hazardous area response team. We also dispatched London's Air Ambulance.

'We treated three people at the scene, and took two of them to hospital. Sadly, a fourth person died at the scene.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Britain's daily Covid cases rose just 2.8 per cent in a week today amid mounting evidence that the fall in infections was merely a temporary blip.

Department of Health bosses posted 32,700 positive tests, up from the 31,808 last Friday. Cases have been rising week-on-week for eight days now.

Deaths also increased slightly to 100, up 8.7 per cent on last week. The number of daily fatalities, which lags weeks behind cases because of how long it takes between getting infected and becoming seriously ill, has fluctuated all week.

But in a more promising sign, hospitalisations fell today after seeing a slight uptick in admissions over the past few days. The number of people admitted to hospital with Covid dropped 3.6 per cent to 750 on Monday — the latest date nationwide data is available for.

Meanwhile, No10's top scientific advisers claimed England's R rate has dipped below one for the first time in three months.

The UK Health Security Agency estimates the reproduction rate, which reflects how quickly the virus is spreading, is between 0.8 and 1.0. Last week's figure was thought to be as high as 1.1.

But it is a lagging indicator and reflects the situation the country faced three weeks ago, when Covid cases began to shrink naturally. Since then, however, the outbreak has started to tick upwards once again, which some experts have blamed on the delayed effects of 'Freedom Day'.

More proof England's third wave is no longer fizzling out came from a major Covid surveillance study today, which estimated infections levelled off last week.

The Office for National Statistics, which carries out tens of thousands of random swab tests, said one in 75 people were carrying the virus on any given day in the seven-day spell ending August 6.

This was the equivalent of 726,700 people and was up slightly on the week before, suggesting the dip in infections seen throughout the end of July was only a temporary blip.

While the proportion of people testing positive in England 'continued to be high' at around 1.32 per cent, the ONS estimates suggest an 'overall decreasing trend over the past two weeks'.

Is Spain heading for the red list? Surge in UK arrivals testing positive for Covid sparks fears tourist favourite could be put out of bounds to one million UK holidaymakers unless they quarantine afterwards Fears rose today that Spain could be forced on the the UK's quarantine red list, scuppering the holiday plans of more than a million UK holidaymakers. The number of people testing positive for Covid after returning from the Mediterranean hotspot has risen almost six-fold in the space of a month, figures released today show. Around one-in-35, or 2.9 per cent of those entering Britain from the amber list country in July tested positive, up from 0.9 per cent in June as the number of those tested doubled. That rate is almost double that of returnees from Greece and Portugal, which are also on the amber list. Advertisement

But the figures come amid fears that this weekend will pose one of the biggest 'tests' since last month's Freedom Day, with 1.7million people expected to attend mass gatherings to watch sporting events and music festivals - the largest number since the first lockdown last March.

Crowds will gather in the largest numbers for Premier League matches, England’s cricket match against India at Lord’s and the Edinburgh Fringe festival.

Public Health England officials warned those attending events to arrive early or late to avoid big crowds and wear a mask in crowded places.

UKHSA's estimate of the R rate suggested the figure may be as low as 0.8 in every region of the country.

But it may still be above one in the East of England and the South West, according to the weekly update.

If the figure — the average amount of people every infected patient passes the virus on to — is below one, it means infections are shrinking.

The R rate is, however, a lagging indicator and does not reflect the situation currently because it is based on a wide mix of data, including deaths - which reflect how quickly the virus was spreading weeks before.

Ministers once put the R rate at the heart of their Covid battle plan.

But it is now less crucial because scientists care more about both hospitalisation and death rates, given the country's massively successful vaccination roll-out.

Meanwhile, the gold-standard ONS data - which is used by ministers to track the state of the outbreak - showed infection levels in England had started to level off again.

Covid was most prevalent in Northern Ireland, with one in 55 people (1.88 per cent) infected on any given day last week.

Scotland saw a drop in people testing positive, with one in 190 people having the virus (0.53 per cent).

Infection levels stayed low in Wales, where just one in every 220 people were infected (0.46 per cent). But the ONS statisticians claimed it was unclear whether cases were going up or down.

Within England, prevalence rates fell in the North East, North West, West Midlands and London.

The proportion of people infected with Covid rose the fastest in 16 to 24-year-olds, where 3.2 per cent tested positive up to August 6, compared to 2.5 per cent the week before.

Cases also went up in children aged between 2 and 11, jumping from 1.8 to 2.1 per cent, and in 25 to 34-year-olds, where 1.4 per cent tested positive, compared to 1.3 per cent seven days earlier.

Meanwhile, infection levels plateaued in children aged 12 to 15 (3.4 per cent), and over-35s.

But the ONS figures are also a lagging indicator due to how the estimates are made. People can test positive for several weeks after getting infected.

Whereas official daily figures look at new cases, and offer the most up-to-date view of the true state of the outbreak.

Department of Health statistics show cases have been creeping upwards over the past week, with 33,074 positive tests recorded yesterday - a 9.5 per cent rise on the figure from seven days earlier (30,215).

Experts are confused over what will happen next, but believe cases will rise in September when children go back to school.

It comes as up to 1.7milllion Britons are set to gather this weekend to watch football matches and attend festivals, music concerts and the theatre.

And venues are not required to check whether people are jabbed or have taken a negative Covid test - a rule that doesn’t kick in until October.

Nearly 400,000 fans will be attending 10 Premier League matches in England and 85,000 more will be going to cup and league games in England, Scotland and Wales, the i reported.

Other events sure to draw a crowd include England’s test match against India at Lords and the Edinburgh Fringe festival. In addition to these events, around 300,000 people will be going to other arts and music festivals, the i says.

Dr Yvonne Doyle, medical director at Public Health England, said: 'The football season is back underway, and I know many people are excited to be back in a ground for the first time in 18 months.

'Everyone should be able to go to a sporting event, have fun and enjoy it safely.

'However, Covid has not gone away and there are a few things we can all do to reduce the risk. You might want to arrive early or late to help avoid large crowds and wear a mask particularly in enclosed and crowded spaces.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The policeman and his three-year-old son who were found dead at home had just returned early from a family holiday.

A neighbour said David Louden, 39, had been away on holiday with wife Samantha, their son Harrison and another relative but the trip was cut short.

It appears only father and son had returned to the house in Kidderminster, Worcestershire.

A neighbour said David Louden, 39, had been away on holiday with wife Samantha, their son Harrison and another relative but the trip was cut short

Concerns for their safety led to police finding the bodies in the semi-detached property in Cairndhu Drive shortly before 9.30am on Friday.

Door-to-door police inquiries have focused on events inside the house the previous evening.

West Mercia Police have released no further details of how the father and son died and have so far referred to both deaths as ‘unexplained’. It is not known if post-mortem examinations have yet been carried out.

Yesterday, police named the dead officer and his son and released a family photo alongside a tribute. Mrs Louden, who is also a police officer, and their wider family said in a statement: ‘David was a kind, loving, considerate, amazing father, husband, son, brother, uncle, friend and colleague. Harrison was a happy, well-loved little boy. They will both be forever missed and loved.’

West Mercia Police have released no further details of how the father and son died and have so far referred to both deaths as ‘unexplained’. It is not known if post-mortem examinations have yet been carried out

Mr Louden was a sergeant with West Mercia Police and is believed to have met his wife through work. Colleagues paid tribute to the dedicated officer on social media.

One wrote: ‘Such a tragic loss to those closest to you, the community you served. Rest easy now with your boy, your duty done.’

Helen Greybanks wrote: ‘SGT it was an honour and a pleasure to work alongside you.’ And Laura Davies said: ‘Rip Dave and baby Louden. You were so kind and caring. Be missed by all. My love is to you and your family.’

Many tributes have been laid at the scene in Cairndhu Drive including teddy bears and bouquets. One read: ‘Both lives gone too soon.’

Sharon Hyrons, who has lived in the area since she was a child, said: ‘I was so shocked about the news, I came back to lay some flowers… I have never seen anything like this before.’

Another bouquet read: ‘So sorry for your loss and we are thinking of you, my heart goes out to you all.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise taliban rule in neighbouring Afghanistan after the Islamist terror group seized the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday and the country's embattled president fled for Tajikistan.

Most global powers are reluctant to recognise the rule of the militant group overthrown by US-led coalition forces in 2001, with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warning that Afghanistan cannot be allowed to become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

But Beijing and Islamabad could break rank in order to form closer ties with the likely new government, with Chinese state media preparing its people to accept the likely scenario that the ruling Communist Party might have to recognise the Islamist group.

In China, a series of photos were published last month by state media showing Foreign Minister Wang Yi standing shoulder to shoulder with visiting Taliban officials decked out in traditional tunic and turban in Tianjin.

Meanwhile, the Kremlin said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, with Russian state media reporting that the Sunni Islamist group formed after the Soviet withdrawal of Afghanistan has promised to guarantee the safety of its diplomatic staff.

'The organisation has 'good relations with Russia' and a 'policy in general to ensure safe conditions for the functioning of the Russian and other embassies,' news agency AP quoted Suhail Shaheen, a spokesman for the Taliban's political office, as saying to Tass.

And Iran, which has long been wary of the Sunni Muslim Taliban, has moved to ensure the safety of its diplomats and staff after previously offering to help end the crisis during talks in July.

Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi meets with Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, political chief of Afghanistan's Taliban, in Tianjin, China July 28, 2021

The Taliban has said they will soon declare the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan from the presidential palace in Kabul as militants posed in the office

Left: Russian President Vladimir Putin. Right: Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan

Taliban militants were pictured inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul after the Afghan president fled the country

The militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman hours after taking control of Jalalabad, the most recent major Afghan city to fall to the insurgents as they make huge gains across Afghanistan

We'll get Britons out of Afghanistan ASAP says Boris Johnson as he finally breaks his silence on the chaos in the country hours after posing for pictures with Team GB Boris Johnson says the Government is getting Britons out of Afghanistan 'as fast as we can' after posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. Now, following meeting of Cobra, Mr Johnson said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' The Prime Minister today said that it is 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He told Sky News: 'I think it's very important that the West collectively should work together to get over to that new government, be it by the Taliban or anybody else, that nobody wants Afghanistan once again to be a breeding ground for terror.' He added: 'This has in many ways been a chronicle of an event foretold, I think we've known for some time this is the way things were going and as I said before, this is a mission whose military component really ended for the UK in 2014, what we're dealing with now is the very likely advent of a new regime in Kabul, we don't know exactly what kind of a regime that will be.' It comes as Dominic Raab flew back to Britain from his holiday amid the Afghanistan crisis. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Advertisement

Last month, Chinese officials posed with Taliban officials in Tianjin, in what was regarded as recognition of the likely resurgence of the terror group in Afghanistan after the US withdrawal from the country.

'Even if they can't control the whole country, they would still be a significant force to reckon with', an influential social media commentator known to be familiar with China's foreign policy thinking and who goes by the pen name Niutanqin, or 'Zither-Playing Cow' wrote on Thursday.

On Friday, the Global Times, a major state-backed tabloid, published an interview with the leader of an Afghan opposition party who said 'the transitional government must include the Taliban'.

The Taliban's momentum as US forces withdraw is awkward for China, which has blamed religious extremism as a destabilising force in its western Xinjiang region and has long worried that Taliban-controlled territory would be used to harbour separatist forces.

But China also hews to a policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. It has also drastically tightened security in Xinjiang, hardening its borders and putting what UN experts and rights groups estimate were at least a million ethnic Uyghurs and other Muslims in detention centres that China describes as vocational training facilities to help stamp out Islamist extremism and separatism.

Last month's meeting in the northern Chinese city of Tianjin followed a similar visit by a Taliban delegation in 2019, but comes as the group is much more powerful, with Wang saying he hoped Afghanistan can have a 'moderate Islamist policy'.

In dealing with the Taliban, an increasingly powerful China may be able to leverage the fact that, unlike Russia or the United States, it has never fought them.

When the Taliban were last in power between 1996-2001, China had already suspended relations with Afghanistan, having pulled out its diplomats in 1993 following the outbreak of civil war.

'This is us being pragmatic. How you want to rule your country is largely your own business, just don't let that affect China,' said Lin Minwang, a South Asia expert with Shanghai's Fudan University.

'When a major Asian power like China shows it recognizes Taliban's political legitimacy by meeting them so openly, it is giving the Taliban a big diplomatic win,' Lin said.

State media published at least two analytical stories this week highlighting that Afghanistan had been the 'graveyard of empires' and cautioning China not to be mired in the 'Great Game', reinforcing a message that China harbours neither the intentions of sending troops into Afghanistan nor the illusion that it can fill the power vacuum left by the United States.

After their meeting with Wang, the Taliban said they hope China can play a bigger economic role.

'This shows that China might have dangled promises of economic aid and investment to a post-war Afghanistan as a carrot to encourage both sides to stop fighting and reach a political settlement,' said Zhang Li, a professor of South Asian studies at Sichuan University.

'China's number one priority is for the fighting to stop, as chaos breeds religious extremism and terrorism,' Zhang said.

Zamir Kabulov, the Russian Presidential envoy to Afghanistan, told the Interfax news agency that the Russian Ambassador and his staff are 'calmly carrying out their duties.'

Moscow is working with other countries to hold an emergency UN Security Council meeting on Afghanistan. Russia is one of five permanent members of the UN Security Council, along with the United States, Britain, France, and China.

Pakistan, which has been accused of harbouring Taliban fighters, could also back the group after Imran Khan refused to condemn their recent atrocities. Their endorsement could worsen Pakistan's relations with India who have already been warned by the Taliban not to engage in any military action in Afghanistan.

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said his country will work for stability in Afghanistan along with Pakistan, in order to stem a growing migration wave amid the Taliban's countrywide offensive.

Mr Erdogan told a naval ceremony with Pakistan's president thatr Afghans were increasingly attempting to migrate to Turkey via Iran, urging an international effort to bring stability to the country and prevent mass migration.

He said Pakistan had a 'vital task' to bring peace and stability to Afghanistan, where clashes have intensified. Turkish-Pakistani cooperation would be needed for this, and Turkey would use all possibilities to do so, Mr Erdogan added.

Iran has reduced its diplomatic presence in Afghanistan, the foreign ministry said Sunday, leaving a skeleton staff at the embassy in Kabul as the city fell to the Taliban.

'There has been a reduction in staff at Iran's embassy in Kabul,' foreign ministry spokesman Saeed Khatibzadeh said in a statement, adding that some personnel remained to ensure the 'embassy's necessary activities' continue.

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

An image appearing to show Taliban militants at the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power'

Taliban patrol in Kandahar, Afghanistan, 15 August 2021

An Afghan soldier stands in a military vehicle on a street in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 15, 2021

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as they moved into the capital, which has been gripped by panic throughout the day as US helicopters raced overhead as its diplomats were evacuated from the embassy. Bagram air base, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops on Sunday despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the United States and NATO over the past two decades to build up Afghanistan's security forces

Diplomats flee US Embassy in Chinook helicopters US diplomats have been evacuated from Kabul just hours before Taliban forces stormed the Afghan capital. In a stark scene mirroring that of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war, a US Air Force helicopter was seen taking off from the US Embassy earlier today. The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital. Smoke was also seen rising from near to the US embassy earlier today as security staff work to burn any important documents, including CIA information, or material that could be used 'in propaganda efforts'. The US flag is soon expected to be lowered, signalling the official closure of the embassy. As many as 10,000 US citizens are being evacuated from the city. Around 3,000 US troops are being sent to aid the mission. Meanwhile, Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, while RAF planes are being scrambled from around the world, to airlift more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Advertisement

Khatibzadeh said staff had evacuated three of the Islamic republic's five Afghan diplomatic missions - in Mazar-i-Sharif, Jalalabad and Kandahar - but would continue their activities from the capital.

'Currently at these three offices only some guards and some local workers are present,' he added. He said diplomats had remained at Iran's consulate in Herat, adding that they were 'safe'.

Iran's foreign ministry had called Friday for security guarantees for its personnel in the western city after Taliban militants seized it.

President Ashraf Ghani fled Afghanistan on Sunday, effectively ceding power to the Taliban, who took the capital Kabul at the climax of a nationwide military victory that took just 10 days.

Last month, the Taliban and Afghan government had held talks in Tehran, where Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif urged both sides to 'make difficult decisions for the future of their country'.

Zarif said Sunday that 'Iran stands ready to continue its peacemaking efforts' in Afghanistan.

'Violence and war - like occupation - never solve problems,' he added on Twitter.

Analysts say Tehran is taking a pragmatic stance on the Taliban's resurgence in Afghanistan, with which it shares a 560-mile border. Iran already hosts nearly 3.5 million Afghans, who make up nearly four per cent of its population, according to the UN refugee agency.

Mr Johnson has vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country, calling the situation 'extremely difficult'.

After chairing a meeting of the Government's Cobra contingencies committee he said the UK was determined to work with allies to prevent the country again becoming a 'breeding ground for terror'.

However, he faced a backlash from Tory MPs - including former soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - who said the West had been humiliated by insurgents armed with just basic weaponry.

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis.

In the meantime, Mr Johnson said the Government's priority was to assist the remaining British nationals as well as those Afghans who had helped the UK.

He said the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow had been at Kabul airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave.

'Our priority is to make sure that we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who helped the British effort in Afghanistan over 20 years, and to get them out as fast we can,' he said. 'We are going to get as many as we can out in the next few days.'

The Prime Minister also said Britain will work with allies to try to prevent Afghanistan again becoming a 'breeding ground for terrorism'.

'I think it is very important that the West should work collectively to get over to that new government - be it by the Taliban or anybody else - that nobody wants Afghanistan once again to be a breeding ground for terror and we don't think it is in the interests of the people of Afghanistan that it should lapse back into that pre-2001 status,' he said.

'What the UK will be doing is working with our partners in the UN Security, in NATO, to get that message over. We don't want anybody to bilaterally recognise the Taliban.

'We want a united position among all the like-minded, as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into a breeding ground for terror.'

Labour has called on the Government to 'live up to our obligations' to the Afghan people as Taliban fighters stood poised to take control of Kabul.

Shadow Home Secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds has written to Home Secretary Priti Patel saying that safe and legal asylum routes need to be put in place.

In his letter to the Home Secretary he said: 'The situation in Afghanistan is truly awful. We must now live up to our obligations, especially to those Afghan people who worked so bravely with British representatives in Afghanistan. Our resettlement scheme must, urgently, be expanded to ensure people to whom we owe a huge debt are not abandoned.'

He said the process must include looking to help Afghan workers who helped in areas such as military, media and those who supported the work of the Department for International Development.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is celebrating her 63rd birthday and sharing all the celebrations with her fans.

And Madonna looked as youthful as ever in radiant new snaps uploaded to her Instagram on Sunday as she opened her lavish presents.

The pop icon showed off her smooth complexion while donning a quirky outfit as he fans gushed in the comments that she still 'looked 21'.

Ageless: Madonna looked as youthful as ever in radiant new snaps uploaded to her Instagram on Sunday as she opened her lavish birthday presents as she turned 63

Madonna showed off her edgy sense of style in a blue and white patterned strappy dress which she accessorised with elaborate silver jewelled earrings and a necklace.

She wore her hair in braids held back by two sliders and opted for a glamorous makeup look as she captioned the snaps: 'Opening Birthday presents....!'

In other snaps she posed in her dressing room with bunches of beautiful red and pink rose - presumably gifted to her on her special day.

Wow: The pop icon showed off her smooth complexion while donning a quirky outfit as he fans gushed in the comments that she still 'looked 21'

Stunning: In other snaps she posed in her dressing room with bunches of beautiful red and pink rose - presumably gifted to her on her special day

The beauty then gave a glimpse of her presents which included a studded red leather handbag and a statement sunhat with the words 'Hello Boys' on it.

Fans were quick to notice how youthful she looked with one commenting: 'Looking 21 gorgeous girl! Happy birthday, happy 21 again xxxxxx.'

Another said: 'Happy birthday! You don't age!'.

Gushing: Fans were quick to notice how youthful she looked with one commenting: 'Looking 21 gorgeous girl! Happy birthday, happy 21 again xxxxxx'

It comes after Madonna posed in a series of Instagram posts on Thursday as she began to enjoy her birthday week.

'My Birthday week is getting better every minute!' the pop icon wrote in the caption of the shot, with a series of emojis.

The entertainment icon was pictured in a trio of shots donning a Burberry ensemble of a black top with print shorts over fishnet stockings, accessorizing with a silver necklace and gold and silver bracelets as she leaned next to a bath tub.

Luxe life: It comes after Madonna posed in a series of Instagram posts on Thursday as she began to enjoy her birthday week

Earlier this week she wished a happy 21st birthday to her son Rocco whom she shares with her ex-husband Guy Ritchie.

'We Have Been on many Trips together around the World,' wrote Madonna on Instagram alongside a throwback snap of her holding him as a child.

'But the Greatest journey i have taken with you is the one inside my [heart]. Love you to the moon and back. Forever and Always.'

In addition to welcoming Rocco biologically Madonna and Guy also adopted their son David Banda, 15, from Malawi.

The Express Yourself singer in fact adopted four of her children - David Banda, Mercy James, Stella and Estere - from the same country.

Madonna's eldest child is her 24-year-old daughter Lourdes Leon whom she shares with her former personal trainer Carlos Leon.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Aston Merrygold showed off his impressive body transformation on Sunday after revealing he had gotten into the 'worst shape he's ever been in'.

The JLS singer, 33, took to Instagram to share candid before and after snaps as he marked the half way point of a gruelling 12-week exercise regime and strict diet.

He looked incredible in the second snap as he showed off his rippling abs and toned frame while posing for the camera.

Wow! Aston Merrygold showed off his impressive body transformation on Sunday after revealing he had gotten into the 'worst shape he's ever been in'

In the caption he penned how he was suffering with low confidence and felt sluggish and tired as well as struggling to even lift up his kids due to his poor fitness levels.

He wrote: 'A few months ago I had got myself in the worst shape I’ve EVER been in! Confidence was low, I felt sluggish, tired, useless and was unhappy ever time I looked in a mirror…

'And the worst part was I had severe ligament damage to my shoulder which left me in daily pain! It was easy to let excuse after excuse stop me from changing it.. but one morning I woke up and just HAD to change it!'

Honest: The JLS singer, 33, took to Instagram to share candid before (pictured) and after snaps as he marked the half way point of a gruelling 12-week exercise regime and strict diet

Fit: He looked incredible in the second snap as he showed off his rippling abs and toned frame while posing for the camera

He went on to explain how he took action: 'I started a 12 week programme which I’ve been going hard for 6 weeks.. Eating clean and training as hard as I can (shoulder is still ropey, but we move) and I’m feeling strong, more confident and happier within myself than I have in years!

'I rarely show any side other than confidence being someone that came into the entertainment industry at a young age.. having thick skin was always easy for me.. but looking at my kids on a daily basis and getting to the point I was struggling to even lift them was killing me!!! So I made a promise to myself I will NEVER let that happen!

He signed off by saying: 'I’m focused and waking up everyday thankful, blessed and wanting to be a better version of myself than the day before! So big up everybody that is hustling, working, fighting and striving to be better.'

Upset: In the caption he penned how he was suffering with low confidence and felt sluggish and tired as well as struggling to even lift up his kids due to his poor fitness levels

It comes after earlier this month Aston blasted Liam Payne for blaming his mental health issues on being in One Direction.

Liam, 27, previously cited the 'toxic and difficult' environment of being in the boyband for being a detriment on this mental health.

However, Aston who also found fame in a band, JLS, called out the claims, saying that it 'comes with the job, you sign away your privacy' and that Liam should have understood that fame comes with a price.

Liam previously revealed that he had difficulty adjusting to the lifestyle and had a hard time being locked up in hotel rooms while on tour.

'You sign away your privacy': It comes after earlier this month Aston blasted Liam Payne for blaming his mental health issues on being in One Direction; pictured in 2021

Both singers found fame on the X-Factor, and Aston told The Sun that there were other reasons why the band were not allowed out and it may have had something to do with safety, with fans bombarding hotels.

He said: 'You are your own boss. It’s not that you were not allowed to do something. He was in the biggest band on the planet and there were thousands of people outside the hotel. So it was probably a safety thing.'

Aston continued: 'It comes with the job. You sign away your privacy. I think you should expect everything, expect it all and say, "This is what I want to work for".

'If you don’t want any of those things then you should not start it because it (the downside) does come and when it does come there are going to be bits that you don’t like.'

Hard times: Liam previously cited the 'toxic and difficult' environment of being in the world's biggest boyband was detrimental on this mental health; pictured in July 2021

MailOnline has contacted Liam's representatives for comment.

JLS - formed of Aston, Oritsé Williams, Marvin Humes, and JB Gill - appeared on The X Factor in 2008 and finished as runners-up

Meanwhile, the members of One Direction - Liam, Louis Tomlinson, Niall Horan, Harry Styles and Zayn Malik - were joined together on the talent show two years later and finished in third place.

Despite not winning the show, the boys were catapulted to fame and ended up becoming one of the best-selling boy bands of all time before they split in 2015, with all five members going on to pursue solo music careers.

Liam has spoken openly in the past about his own struggles with mental health, revealing he battled suicidal thoughts after finding fame, and saying he went through a 'pills and alcohol phase' when he was in the band.

'For some certain circumstances I'm quite lucky to be here still,' he told Sky One's Straight Talking with Ant Middleton.

'There are times when that level of loneliness and people getting into you every day, it's like, "When will this end?" That's almost nearly killed me a couple of times.'

Meanwhile, JLS are set to release new music and it was revealed that they signed a new record deal earlier this year, eight years after their split.

The boyband revealed they’ve already got several singles lined up for fans in 2021.

Speaking about their exciting comeback plans in an interview with The Sun, Marvin explained that after their reunion tour was postponed amid the pandemic the band were able to get 'writing and recording'.

For confidential mental health support, please contact Samaritans on 116 123
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

British holidaymakers could be paying 20 times more than the 'fair' price for PCR Covid tests, a top scientist has claimed.

A price in the region of £20 would be reasonable for the swabs according to Professor Stephen Bustin, a world-renowned expert on PCR at Anglia Ruskin University.

But the most expensive test listed on the Government's website of approved providers costs £400. On average, British travellers have to fork out £92 per test.

Tourists travelling to green list countries and fully vaccinated holidaymakers going to amber list destinations are required to book one PCR test in Britain for when they reenter the country.

Non-vaccinated travellers need two after returning from amber list countries and red list destinations require two regardless of inoculation status.

Ministers insist travellers take PCR tests — which can take three days to produce results — because they are more accurate than cheaper lateral flows, which give answers in as little as 20 minutes.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid has already asked the Competition and Markets Authority watchdog to investigate potential profiteering among firms providing tests for holidaymakers. Tests can cost up to five times as much as flights, it emerged last night.

Ministers are facing increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks.

The World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) today urged No10 to pay for tests for double-jabbed travellers or replace the PCR requirement with cheaper lateral flow tests.

British holidaymakers could be paying 20 times more than the 'fair' price for PCR Covid tests required for travel abroad, it has been revealed. Graphic shows: The step-by-step process of a PCR test

Professor Bustin told The Independent: 'A fair price, one which reflects ingredient costs and the infrastructure required, would be around about £20.'

There are dozens of options available for just £20, according to the Government's list of 431 approved Covid PCR test providers.

But some of the companies listed are actually charging nearly five times that amount.

Test For Now claims to offer a self-swab Covid test for £21 on the Government website but the cheapest available on its website is for travelers to take on their second day back in the UK and costs £89 for a self-swab version, while it costs £97 for the same test at its clinic.

Meanwhile, Everything Genetic's £20 offer is only available to NHS staff, with others charged £60. Pillhub-Feltham Pharmacy and 0-100 Travel 19's £20 tests are currently sold-out and their other PCR tests cost £80.

Scientists say it is difficulty to come up with an exact figure for how much PCR testing costs because it involves complicated laboratory analysis and takes up to three days to produce results.

Professor David Livermore, a medical microbiologist at the University of East Anglia, told MailOnline: 'Someone, somewhere has a huge mark-up on this.

'I don't know whether it is the company selling tests to the traveller, the lab to which that company then sends the tests for processing, or the manufacturer of the test kits used by the lab, or all of them. But someone is doing very well.'

Ministers are facing increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks. The World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) today urged No10 to pay for tests for double-jabbed travellers or replace the PCR requirement with cheaper lateral flow tests. Pictured left, Naomi Carpenter, a sports rehabilitation student at Hull University takes a lateral flow test. Pictured right, the contents of a self-swab PCR test that is dished out by the Government

Research by airline consultancy Skytrax shows airport PCR tests were available for as little as $8 (£5.70) in Mumbai, India, in April. The cost in Britain was nearly £100

The £399 PCR test listed on the UK Government's approved list of providers is offered by the Mayfair GP, a small private practice based in London.

The Department of Health says the tests — which can be performed in a matter of minutes — are carried out by people in their own home. But they are supervised by medical staff, meaning the firm may factor in some travel and labour costs.

The Mayfair GP uses Oncologica's laboratory to carry out the testing, suggesting the provider likely has to pay to get samples analysed. Labs use a machine and array of chemicals to decipher whether a sample contains Covid.

Northern Irish testing firm with overflowing swab bins that has made millions from pandemic Randox Laboratories was founded by Dr Peter FitzGerald in 1982 and currently employs more than 1,500 people. Dr Fitzgerald pictured above Randox has hoovered up commercial testing contracts during the pandemic - and is the recommended tester for airlines including British Airways. It offers tests for as little as £40 but prefers tests are dropped at their 'bins' outside pharmacies rather than receiving them in the post like other companies. Before the pandemic it made most of its cash from tests created for cardiac risk, various cancers and diabetes. By last September Randox became responsible for a quarter of all community tests across the UK after winning a £133million contract in March 2020. Randox Laboratories was founded by Dr Peter FitzGerald in 1982 and currently employs more than 1,500 people, with offices in Brazil, America and India among others. Its main base is in Antrim in Northern Ireland but it has sites all over the world. The lab employs Conservative MP Owen Paterson as a consultant for £100,000 a year which easily surpasses his salary as an MP. Paterson has previously lobbied the government on behalf of the company. Randox has insisted its relationship with Mr Paterson had no role in it winning the multimillion contract from the government. It has also denied prioritising commercial contracting. Advertisement

RT-PCR tests — the same kind as used in Britain — were last week capped at 500 rupees (£4.80) in private labs and hospitals in Delhi, although there are also reasons why tests could be so cheap in India.

Officials who capped the price tests to make them more accessible for the 'common man' have not confirmed if they subsidised part of the price.

A Canadian study of RT-PCR tests used for the SARS outbreak in 2004 suggested the entire testing process could be done effectively for as little as £3.10 ($4.30).

Professor Livermore told MailOnline: 'Since then molecular biology has become more efficient and costs haven't gone up but more than inflation. Moreover, given the amount of testing, there should be major economies of scale.'

Much of the mark-up in tests appears to be made by the companies that manufacture test kits, which include swabs, test tubes and special reagents used to detect the virus inside the laboratory.

Thermo Fisher — a major manufacturer in the US — provides these kits to labs and PCR testing agents for $1,562.50 (£1,190) per 25 tests. It works out around $62.50 (£45) each — 64 per cent of the average cost for PCR testing in the UK.

Shortages in swabs and vials because of the global demand for tests may have also driven up the price of kits.

Labs or companies buying high volumes of these tests are likely to be able to drive down the price they pay.

But a listed price of around £45 per kit would represent a mark up of nearly 10 times the costs of the entire testing process — including distribution and actual laboratory testing — if they are as low as suggested by the prices in Delhi.

Labs themselves are also raking in the profits. In 2019, Quest Diagnostics and Laboratory Corporation of America made on average $42 (£30) in revenue per procedure and the average processing cost was $29 (£21). For Covid, the basic price set by US Government-backed insurer Medicare is $100 (£72).

Pandemic testing is unusually fiddly and more reliant on manpower than some other types but even with double the normal level of expense, to reflect the extra quirks and intricacies of Covid-testing, the company’s coronavirus-test margin would be one-third higher than it generates from its regular activities.

Professor Livermore told MailOnline: 'There is little justification for the present level of pre- or post-travel testing. The only pertinent issue is whether new variants are being introduced via travellers.

'And this could be better monitored by sampling — and sequencing — virus from any travellers who experienced a post-arrival respiratory infection.'

It comes after the WTTC said if the British Government want people to take 'unnecessary' PCR tests 'they should pay for it'.

Virginia Messina, senior vice president and acting chief executive, said: 'If they don't pay, then consumers will vote with their feet and avoid international travel altogether, further damaging the already struggling UK Travel and Tourism sector.

'For many people, especially families and small businesses on a budget, the crippling added cost of the unnecessary PCR tests makes the difference between being able to travel or not.

'It’s clear that many British adults simply can’t afford to travel overseas at all if they have to pay the excessive cost of PCR tests.

'More affordable antigen tests, with PCR tests for those who do test positive, will help keep travellers safe and make taking a trip overseas within the budget of most people.

'But if the Government wants extra information for genomic sequencing, they should pay for it. If they don’t pay, then consumers will vote with their feet and avoid international travel altogether, further damaging the already struggling UK travel and tourism sector.'

THE RULES FOR RED, AMBER AND GREEN-LISTED COUNTRIES RED Before travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book a quarantine hotel package, including 2 Covid-19 tests

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England you must: quarantine in a managed hotel, including two Covid-19 tests AMBER Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – you must take the test in the three days before you travel to England

book and pay for Covid-19 tests – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form You must do these things whether you are fully vaccinated or not. On arrival in England If you are fully vaccinated After arrival in England, you must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two. This applies if you're fully vaccinated under either: the UK vaccination programme

the UK vaccine programme overseas

an approved vaccination programme in Europe or the USA - not all are recognised in England It also applies if you are: taking part in an approved Covid-19 vaccine trial in the UK or the USA

under 18 and resident in the UK, a UK Overseas Territory, the USA or one of the specified European countries If you are not fully vaccinated If you do not qualify under the fully vaccinated rules, on arrival in England you must: quarantine at home or in the place you are staying for 10 days

take a Covid-19 test on or before day two and on or after day eight If you are in England for less than 10 days, you need to quarantine for the time you are here. You need to book day two and day eight travel tests. You only need to take the tests if you are still in England. GREEN Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book and pay for a day 2 Covid-19test – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England You must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two after you arrive. Children aged four and under do not need to take this test. You do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive. You must quarantine if NHS Test & Trace informs you that you travelled to England with someone who has tested positive for Covid-19. If you have been in a country or territory on the red or amber list If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the red list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, you must follow the red list rules. If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the amber list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, and have not visited a country on the red list, you must follow the amber list rules. Source: FCDO. Used under the Open Government Licence. Advertisement

Covid tests are FIVE TIMES the cost of flights: Families are left with huge extra bills to travel abroad as it emerges screening is more expensive than return journey to Europe

Covid travel tests can cost more than five times the price of a return flight to Europe, it emerged last night.

It leaves families paying hundreds of pounds extra to go abroad this summer with MPs branding the expense ‘a rip-off’.

Ministers face increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks.

A study by MPs looked at the cost of trips to popular European destinations later this month and compared them with the average fee for a single PCR swab after getting back to Britain.

It found Ryanair was offering return flights from East Midlands airport to Barcelona and Exeter to Alicante for just £18 between August 24 and 27.

But the typical charge for a post-return PCR test among Government-approved providers is £93 – some five times as expensive. The swab is also almost four times as costly as a return flight from London Stansted to Madrid.

A study by MPs found Ryanair was offering return flights from East Midlands airport to Barcelona and Exeter to Alicante for just £18 between August 24 and 27. Pictured: a sign to a Covid-19 test centre at London's Heathrow Airport on July 31

Ministers face increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks (pictured: terminal 5 departures at Heathrow Airport this month)

And for destinations such as Berlin, Budapest and Faro in the Algarve, the test is more than double the price of plane tickets.

The research only includes the cost of a single post-return PCR swab, which double-jabbed travellers must take by day two after returning from a green or amber country.

It does not include the pre-return swab all passengers must take before boarding UK-bound planes, meaning testing bills as a proportion of flight costs can be even greater. Non-fully vaccinated holidaymakers also face much larger bills as they are required to take two post-return PCR swabs on days two and eight.

The Daily Mail has championed calls for the Government to drive down costs.

Tory MP Henry Smith, chairman of the all-party Future of Aviation Group, which conducted the study, said: ‘These figures demonstrate that testing for international travel has become little more than a tax on travel, adding a huge disincentive to travel.

‘When the cost of testing can be more than the price of a ticket, it is clear that the current system is not fit for purpose and needs urgent reform to stop the rip-off fees we are currently seeing.’

He said travellers should be allowed to take much cheaper rapid lateral flow tests on return followed by a ‘gold standard’ PCR only if this is positive.

He added: ‘Alongside this, ministers must urgently consider a cap on the total cost of testing. It is high time that the Government got to grips with this issue.’ Sir Graham Brady MP, chairman of the Tory backbench 1922 Committee, said: ‘The number of tests required and their exorbitant prices in the UK risk making foreign holidays the preserve of the well off.

‘This is plainly unfair to families on average incomes and risks destroying our very successful travel industry. This problem should be tackled as a matter of urgency.’

The study found a post-return PCR test can also cost more than return flights to Nice in southern France, Malta, Gibraltar and the Balearic island of Menorca, doubling the cost of a trip even for fully vaccinated individuals.

Carrier easyJet is offering return flights to Mahon in Menorca for £61 later this month, making the average cost of a test nearly 50 per cent more than the flights. British Airways is offering return flights from Heathrow to Paris for £100, making the typical post-return testing bill almost as expensive as the flights.

Ministers insist arrivals must take pricier PCR tests as they are considered more accurate and can be ‘sequenced’ for mutant Covid strains. But NHS Test and Trace figures show just 5 per cent of swabs are being sequenced. Greece and Italy have capped the price of PCR tests, while in France they are free for citizens. Some European countries have also axed VAT on testing kits.

The Government has repeatedly said it is working with the travel industry and testing providers to see how to ‘further reduce the cost of travel for the public’. Health secretary Sajid Javid has asked the Competition and Markets Authority watchdog to investigate whether travellers are being ripped off by testing firms.

But Labour MP Ben Bradshaw, who sits on the Commons transport committee, said: ‘While the rest of Europe is enjoying a relatively normal summer on the beach, for many British families the cost of the tests and the confusing and chaotic traffic light system is putting the dream of a foreign holiday out of reach.’

A Government spokesman said: ‘We are clear that all private providers must meet a set of required standards and each provider is held to account by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service, with companies that fail to meet high standards being removed from the list of approved suppliers.’

The great travel test farce! Swab boxes left overflowing

By David Churchill and Josh White for the Daily Mail

Britain's travel testing system was branded an ‘absolute mess’ yesterday after uncollected swabs were left piled high outside pharmacies.

Pictures posted online showed three drop-off boxes run by Randox, the UK’s largest PCR testing provider, overflowing with swabs.

It meant outraged customers were forced to choose between adding to the pile – risking their personal details being stolen by thieves – or shell out for a private courier.

Yesterday’s images have fuelled fears that the testing system will be unable to cope if too many Britons go abroad during the school holidays.

Piled high: A Randox drop-off bin in London filled with uncollected PCR tests, showing the demand in the currently privately-run holiday testing system

Ditch traffic light system, says former vaccine boss The current traffic light system for international travel is too complicated and should be ditched, the former head of the Government’s vaccine taskforce has said. Clive Dix said the current four categories – green, green watchlist, amber and red – should be replaced with just red and green. He said that high levels of vaccination in the UK and other countries meant only those destinations with low jab uptake and without widespread testing should be on the red list, with quarantining required. All other countries should be green, needing only a test on return. ‘We don’t really know what the viral variants are [in those countries],’ he told the Daily Telegraph. ‘The rest, we’re pretty sure what’s there. I think there’s no difference between moving around there and us moving around within the UK.’ Advertisement

All travellers returning from green and amber list countries must take a test by day two after arriving back in the UK. Those who have not been fully-vaccinated must also take a test on day eight. Some countries also require a pre-holiday test to show on arrival.

It means that, were any of these types of tests left uncollected, potential burglars could work out when people were away and their homes empty.

Gavin Williams, 51, from Southfields in south-west London, said he travelled 30 minutes to the nearest Randox drop-off bin to deliver his daughter’s day two PCR test. But when he arrived, it was filled to the brim and overflowing.

Posting a picture to Twitter, the teaching assistant, who paid £43 for the tests, said he felt ‘ripped off’.

Replying with a picture of another drop-off bin with uncollected tests piled 20 boxes high, Tilly Slight posted: ‘You think that one’s bad?’

The pictures have sparked fury among travel experts, with Paul Charles, CEO of consultancy The PC Agency, saying they were ‘a symbol of the absolute mess that PCR testing has become’.

And Rory Boland, editor of Which? Travel, said the watchdog had repeatedly warned the testing system would be unable to cope with too many people travelling abroad.

‘It’s particularly frustrating as Which? raised this with the Government a few months ago,’ he said. ‘The system isn’t set up for large numbers of people travelling. Now many people are travelling, the system is not working properly.’

Randox is among more than 400 private testing firms on the Government-approved list of providers.

According to the Government’s website, the firm charges £43 for a ‘self swab at home’ day two test. The cost for a days two and eight package is £86.

The latest controversy comes a year after Randox sent out hundreds of thousands of unsterile tests to care homes.

As a result, it was forced to recall 750,000 unused kits.

Despite this, the company was awarded a new £347million Government contract and is capable of processing around 500,000 swabs a day.

A spokesman for Randox said the firm was increasing the number of drop boxes across the UK as well as the frequency of test collections.

‘All of the sample kits pictured will be processed,’ the spokesman added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Google is planning to slash the salaries of staff who refuse to return to the office with those who live further away hit harder.

The move is part of a Silicon Valley experiment and will see employees who work from home paid less because of the savings they make on commuting and costs like food.

Though the plans are being considered in the US for the moment, it is thought that Google could later apply them to its London office.

The tech giant is preparing for UK staff to return to the office from October - though it expects about a fifth of staff to continue working from home.

And, according to research from CV Library and Reed, the number of working from home positions available are continuing to rise.

CV library carried nearly 70,000 postings which allowed remote working between March and July 2021 – four times the number of the year before. On Reed, just 1% of jobs offered remote working in 2019, with the number now at 5%

However, Paul Williams, chief executive of property firm Derwent London, says he expects businesses to return to the office from September, with demand rising for offices with amenities such as gyms, bars and running tracks.

A running track at a site owned by property firm Derwent London. The firm's CEO said demand is rising for offices with appealing amenities

Google headquarters in London. Google is planning to pay employees who work from home less because of the savings they make on commuting and costs like food

The cost of commuting: Mail Online analysis on the thousands of pounds and hundreds of hours people living outside London spend commuting to and from work in the capital. Hours calculated through average journey time multiplied by number of days average UK worker works

It comes after it was revealed that Whitehall officials are considering stripping civil servants of their London weighting if they continue working from home – a salary boost worth around £4,000.

Downing Street refused to condemn civil servants resisting a return to Whitehall, however, amid the calls for them to face a pay cut if they want to continue to work from home.

Property firm chief Mr Williams told BBC Radio 4 Today that his clients are eager to return to offices from September.

He said: 'The demand is being driven by a war for talent. There's a fight for good, green buildings that are zero carbon.

'An adaptable place, a place for people to go for amenities, a building that's got a running track and all the things. A place to go and develop and have creativity.

'Talking to our customers over the last 6 to 18 months there's a strong desire to get back. We are seeing a desire to get back and lots more people planning to get back from September.

'People want to go back to the office. Whether it's to learn or see their colleagues. We've got a lot of roof terraces, bars, gyms. If you keep creating great buildings, more people will come back.'

MailOnline analysis suggests workers could save thousands of pounds and hundreds of hours by working from home instead of commuting into an office in London.

Property firm chief Mr Williams told BBC Radio 4 Today that his clients are eager to return to offices from September

Mr Williams says he expects businesses to return to the office from September, with demand rising for offices with amenities such as gyms, bars and running tracks

Mr Williams added: 'People want to go back to the office. Whether it's to learn or see their colleagues. We've got a lot of roof terraces, bars, gyms. If you keep creating great buildings, more people will come back'

Some of the available amenities in an office building developed by property developer Derwent London

Congestion on UK streets is still comfortably less than the same time in 2020 and 2019 as people gradually return to the office

From Sevenoaks, an annual season ticket costs £3,804, while the journey would see you spend around four hours travelling per week. Annually, this adds up to 166 hours.

From Windsor to London, an annual season ticket costs £3,468, with commuters spending 10 hours a week travelling and 454 hours a year.

Travel times are the same for Oxford to London - though a season ticket costs £5,544.

Those areas are among some of the most popular destinations for Londoners who left the capital during the pandemic.

Workers returning to offices are 'struggling to cope with noise' Many workers returning to offices are struggling to cope with noise or problems with facilities such as video conferencing, a new study suggests. Research among 2,000 adults indicated that most of those who worked from home during the pandemic have now gone back to offices at least once. The Institute of Workplace and Facilities Management said only one in four of those it questioned noticed any changes to their office layout on their return. Seven in 10 home workers in the West Midlands, Northern Ireland and London have returned at least temporarily to the office, compared to half in the South West, Wales and North West, said the report. Scottish workers were said to be the least likely to have tried to return. Half of respondents believed they are more productive working from home, especially among younger workers. Linda Hausmanis, chief executive of the Institute of Workplace and Facilities Management, said: 'We are now at a tipping point, where the majority of us have had the chance to sample working from the office once again. 'For far too many this has been a disappointing and frustrating experience. Employers must invest to allow workplaces to reflect new working realities, or risk a calamitous decline in productivity. 'As we move into new modes of working, businesses must adapt physical spaces, working culture and supporting technologies.' Seven out of 10 returning workers said they struggled to identify any changes to their offices since before the pandemic, and half felt their office needed modernisation. Almost one in three said they no longer felt comfortable sharing a desk with a colleague. Advertisement

Now, Google is appearing to crackdown on those working from home with its new policy.

The plan suggests the firm will deduct salaries based on money saved by commuters.

'Our compensation packages have always been determined by location, and we always pay at the top of the local market based on where an employee works from,' a Google spokesperson said, adding that pay will differ from city to city.

In the US, one Google employee, who asked not to be identified for fear of retaliation, typically commutes to the Seattle office from a nearby county and would see their pay cut by about 10% by working from home full-time, according estimates by the company's Work Location Tool launched in June.

The employee was considering remote work but decided to keep going to the office - despite the two-hour commute. 'It's as high of a pay cut as I got for my most recent promotion. I didn't do all that hard work to get promoted to then take a pay cut,' they said.

Jake Rosenfeld, a sociology professor at Washington University in St. Louis who researches pay determination, said Google's pay structure raises alarms about who will feel the impacts most acutely, including families.

'What's clear is that Google doesn't have to do this,' Rosenfeld said. 'Google has paid these workers at 100% of their prior wage, by definition. So it's not like they can't afford to pay their workers who choose to work remotely the same that they are used to receiving.'

Screenshots of Google's internal salary calculator show that an employee living in Stamford, Connecticut - an hour from New York City by train - would be paid 15% less if she worked from home, while a colleague from the same office living in New York City would see no cut from working from home.

Interviews with Google employees indicate pay cuts as high as 25% for remote work.

News of Google's plan comes as Lee Biggins, founder and CEO of CV Library, says he believes working from home is here to stay.

He told MailOnline: 'Contractual obligations, weighting allowances and individual circumstances will be unique to each business. What is apparent is that flexible working is here to stay and we're in a candidate led market with job postings at a record high.

'If businesses choose to cut salaries and benefits for those working from home, there will be plenty opportunities from companies who will be prepared to meet the needs of top job seekers.'

In a recent survey, CV Library asked 2,000 candidates the most important factors in choosing a new job.

More than 50% said a competitive salary - while 43% said reasonable hours and 38.2% said flexible working.

Marcus Storm, of the United Tech and Allied Workers union, said that Google would set a 'dangerous precedent' if it tried to also cut salaries for home workers in the UK.

He told the Times: 'You are discriminating based on where a worker lives not on their ability or even their ability to come into the office.'

Joseph Lappin, head of employment at Stewarts, a law firm, said that British workers had 'greater protections' than their counterparts in the US. 'Employers cannot unilaterally change a key term of the employment contract. Pay will always be a key term,' he said.

Paul Nowak, the TUC's deputy general secretary, said: 'After working hard at home during the pandemic, many workers will want to retain the option of hybrid working into the future. Employers need to negotiate their approach with their staff and unions — without threatening cuts to their pay.'

Civil service union chiefs blasted a Cabinet minister last night for suggesting staff should have their pay cut if they refuse to return to Whitehall (stock image)

Meanwhile, civil service union chiefs blasted a Cabinet minister last night for suggesting staff should have their pay cut if they refuse to return to Whitehall.

They accused ministers of 'dreaming up a rufty-tufty strategy' that was 'devoid of any basis in reality' to force civil servants back into their offices.

Mandarins are also said to have considered stripping civil servants of their London weighting – a salary boost worth around £4,000.

But Dave Penman, general secretary of the FDA – the union representing senior civil servants, accused ministers of making 'reckless' and 'cowardly' attacks.

He said it would be a 'legal minefield' to withdraw London weighting and said those proposing it had 'no idea how this works in reality'.

The PCS, the union for those in government departments, has warned of potential strike action if the Government tries to dock civil servants' pay.

A Government spokesman said yesterday there were 'no plans to change terms and conditions around London-based pay'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Winchester is the most expensive city in Britain to buy a home, with an average property price tag of £630,432, an astonishing 14 times higher than average local pay packets, new findings have revealed.

While there has been considerable talk about a mass exodus from urban hubs during the pandemic, some remain as popular as ever - and in many, prices have risen sharply.

The average cost of a city home has swelled by 10.3 per cent to £287,440 in the past year, while the average earnings of people living in them climbed by just 2.1 per cent, mortgage lender Halifax said in a report.

Costly: Winchester is the most expensive city in Britain to buy a home, with property price tags 14 times higher than local people's pay packets

London was outside the top five least affordable cities for the first time in six years.

With its impressive cathedral and quaint river mill, Winchester replaced Oxford as the most unaffordable city to snap up a property when average local earnings were taken into account.

Any prospective buyers looking for a home in Winchester can expect to pay around £630,432, which is 8 per cent more than last year, according to Halifax.

Across the country, the affordability of cities has deteriorated. Last year, house prices in cities typically cost around seven-and-a-half times wages.

There are, however, some more affordable options for buyers wanting a slice of urban life for a fraction of the price.

Londonderry in Northern Ireland held its position as the most affordable city for the third consecutive year, with a price-to-earnings ratio of 4.7. There, a property costs around £155,917.

Housing affordability improved in seven cities compared with a year earlier, namely Oxford, Carlisle, Portsmouth, Durham, Salford, Inverness and Glasgow.

Carlisle and Aberdeen are now more affordable than five years ago, with their house price-to-earnings ratios easing, Halifax said.

Inverness is the only city found to be more affordable than 10 years ago. An average home there costs 5.6 times average earnings, down from 6.2 in 2011, due to wage growth outstripping house price growth.

All of the most affordable cities have house prices below the average for all UK cities (£287,440), expect for Hereford, where property prices are around £316,929.

Halifax said: 'Despite Hereford being the most expensive location in the top 20, affordability there is boosted by average earnings of £48,048, almost £10,000 above the UK average.'

London is now outside the least affordable cities for the first time in six years, yet affordability in the capital has not improved. Average property prices rose by 5 per cent to £564,695 in Greater London, while earnings grew by 4 per cent, pushing London's price to earnings ratio up to 11, up from 10.9 last year.

Russell Galley, managing director, Halifax, said: 'Affordability is significantly better in the north and there are now just two cities – Plymouth and Portsmouth – with better than average affordability in the south.'

Summing up all its findings, Halifax said the average property price tag to earnings ratio in cities was 8.1. It has been increasing for the past eight years, and stood at 5.6 between 2011 and 2013.

Wages in cities are often higher than in rural areas, and during the pandemic a high number of city dwellers have relocated to the countryside, helping to push up house prices in many greener areas.

Across all parts of the country, the house price-to-earnings ratio is 8.5, with property prices at an average of £327,691.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Stunning POV footage shows the first-ever roller coaster at sea in action on board Carnival's new £1billion cruise ship

Strap in as POV footage shows the breath-taking ocean views aboard 'Bolt': The world's first rollercoaster at sea which is onboard Carnival Cruises.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called an election Sunday as he seeks to capitalize on Canada being one of the most fully vaccinated countries in the world.

Trudeau announced the election would be held on September 20 after visiting the governor general, who holds a mostly ceremonial position representing Britain's Queen Elizabeth II as head of state.

'We've had your back, and now it's time to hear your voice,' Trudeau said.

'Canadians need to choose how we finish the fight against COVID-19.'

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, his wife Sophie (second from the left) and his children arrived at the house of Governor General Mary Simon Sunday morning to request the election

The Prime Minister urged the public to 'choose how we finish the fight against COVID-19'

Trudeau is seeking to win a majority of seats in Parliament. His Liberal Party fell just short of that two years ago and must rely on the opposition to pass legislation.

The election comes as Canada is experiencing a new wave of COVID-19 cases, apparently driven by the Delta variant of the coronavirus.

Trudeau isn't as popular as he once was, but his government's handling of the pandemic has been widely viewed as a success.

After a slow start Canada now has enough vaccines for each of its citizens.

Opposition leftist Jagmeet Singh called it 'selfish' for Trudeau to call an election amid COVID

More than 71 percent of eligible Canadians are full vaccinated and over 82 percent have received at least one dose. The government has spent billions to prop up the economy amid lockdowns that have now lifted.

But if the result is another minority government, the 'knives will start to come out,' said Robert Bothwell, a professor of Canadian history and international relations at the University of Toronto.

'Trudeau is not widely liked. He's what the Liberals have so they will fall in behind him, but if he loses he's toast,' Bothwell said.

Over 70 percent of Canadians had received at least one dose as of August 7. The number is now up to 82 percent

'It's not that he's unpopular but there's no affection there. The Liberals behave as if he is this beloved figure but he's not. The novelty is gone. But there's still enough there and the performance on COVID was pretty solid so I think people will balance these things going into the election and vote for Trudeau.'

Trudeau, the son of the late Liberal Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, became the second youngest prime minister in Canadian history when he was first elected with a majority of seats in Parliament in 2015.

The Liberal's victory ended almost 10 years of Conservative Party government in Canada, but scandals combined with high expectations have damaged his standing.

His father served as prime minister from 1968 to 1984 with a short interruption.

Opposition leftist New Democratic Party leader Jagmeet Singh said it's 'selfish' for Trudeau to call an election in a pandemic.

Ontario, Canada's largest province, reported more than 500 cases for the fourth straight day.

Nelson Wiseman, a political science professor at the University of Toronto, said many Canadians will resent having an election they see as unnecessary, but said the Liberals will win the most seats.

'Trudeau is seen as having delivered on vaccines and there has been widespread support for the government's income-and job-support programs to counter COVID's economic fallout,' Wiseman said.

'Canadians compare their situation to the U.S. The current spike in the U.S. contributes to smug complacency among Canadians. This feeling benefits the Liberals at present.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How Prince Andrew must wish he could turn back the clock. But to where and when?

Might it be that November night in 2019 when his singular lack of remorse over his friendship with the monstrous Jeffrey Epstein was shredded in the unforgiving glare of the Newsnight cameras?

Or might he, perhaps, go back further to December 2010 and that chilly walk with Epstein in New York's Central Park after the billionaire's conviction – and jailing – for sex offences, as an unseen paparazzo clicked away?

Certainly they are both episodes over which he must harbour regret, if not shame. But one incident above all, surely, stands out. It is the evening of March 2001 when a smiling Andrew was photographed with his arm around the bare midriff of 17-year-old Virginia Roberts.

Yesterday, as the enormity of Miss Roberts's lawsuit in which she accuses the prince of battery, sexually assault and emotional distress when she was a teenager emerged, that infamous picture returned to haunt him again.

How Prince Andrew must wish he could turn back the clock. But to where and when? While other family members have been angered by how Andrew has tarnished the monarchy, the Queen has remained steadfast in her support for her favourite child

Yet even as details of the bombshell allegations were making headline news, the Duke of York's silence was deafening.

Astonishingly, in view of his previous vehement denials that he'd ever had sex with Miss Roberts, the prince and his legal team had no comment at all.

Last night that strategy of saying nothing was being questioned.

'The duke has previously expressed his innocence and not to do so again looks like a misstep,' said one figure who has advised him. 'Saying nothing allows the other side's version of events to go unchallenged.'

There is no doubt that there was a deliberately theatrical element to the way the news was masterminded from New York, but the danger for Andrew, 61, in not offering any response is that he is in danger of losing in the court of public opinion.

Yesterday, the saga was threatening to overshadow the Queen's summer holiday at Balmoral, where Andrew and ex-wife Sarah Ferguson arrived yesterday in the same car

This is not the first time Miss Roberts has made these claims, but it's the first time she has sued Andrew directly.

She has ratcheted up the pressure on a man who has repeatedly insisted her claims are untrue, but who has also repeatedly declined to be interviewed under oath by the FBI.

These are the most serious allegations ever to be made about a member of the Royal Family in modern times. Refusing to cooperate also damages the integrity of the Crown.

One reason for choosing to stay silent may, of course, be because of past experience – that disastrous BBC interview with Emily Maitlis.

Andrew believed he could set the record straight over Epstein. But, as Maitlis probed his answers, the prince made a series of stunning – even risible – comments that left viewers shocked.

He claimed he could not have had sex with Miss Roberts because on the night in question he was with his daughter Beatrice at Pizza Express in Woking.

How Prince Andrew must wish he could turn back the clock. But to where and when? Might it be that November night in 2019 when his singular lack of remorse over his friendship with the monstrous Jeffrey Epstein was shredded in the unforgiving glare of the Newsnight cameras?

He also said a medical condition brought on by being shot at during the Falklands War left him 'unable to sweat', challenging Miss Roberts's assertion that as they danced together at London nightclub Tramp he had been 'sweating profusely'.

But most controversially he offered no regret for his friendship with Epstein because of 'the opportunities I was given to learn either by him or because of him'. Crucially, he showed no sympathy for his victims.

Andrew is hardly the first royal to bury his head in the sand in the face of public uproar.

'Over the years the first instinct is often to adopt the ostrich syndrome,' says a courtier. 'The hope is if they say nothing things will blow over.'

But the Epstein affair has cruelly exposed that tactic. Time after time Andrew has been caught on the back foot as smart American lawyers and slick PRs have crafted a narrative in which the prince is painted in the worst possible light.

Or might he, perhaps, go back further to December 2010 and that chilly walk with Epstein in New York's Central Park after the billionaire's conviction – and jailing – for sex offences, as an unseen paparazzo clicked away?

Yesterday, the saga was threatening to overshadow the Queen's summer holiday at Balmoral, where Andrew and ex-wife Sarah Ferguson arrived yesterday in the same car.

While other family members have been angered by how Andrew has tarnished the monarchy, the Queen has remained steadfast in her support for her favourite child.

She admires his resolutely positive outlook. She was the first person he spoke to after recording the Maitlis interview and believed him when he said it had been a great success. It was Prince Charles who coordinated the royals' response after he saw how catastrophically it had backfired.

The Queen then had to approve his recommendation that Andrew should step back from public duties.

As of May, 47 charities had retreated from their association with the duke or removed him as patron, while his Pitch@Palace mentoring network has erased his name from its website saying it will 'reassess its future direction'.

And yet no one should underestimate the strength of the relationship that exists between mother and son.

But one incident above all, surely, stands out. It is the evening of March 2001 when a smiling Andrew was photographed with his arm around the bare midriff of 17-year-old Virginia Roberts

The Queen was always impressed with how Andrew handled his divorce, putting aside public humiliation to ensure the best possible home life for Beatrice and Eugenie. As for his unrelenting support for ex-wife Sarah Ferguson, the Queen saw it as the embodiment of loyalty.

After Philip's death, when he spoke warmly of his father on camera, it seemed Andrew might be harbouring some hope of rehabilitating himself with the public.

The latest developments suggest that is a long way from reality. And the longer he chooses to remain silent, the more the suspicion grows that he has something to hide.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The private vs state divide: Gap in results between fee-paying and Government-run schools hits new record high The gap between private and state schools in terms of results has never been larger with fee-paying institutions accused of gaming the system. And private schools and historically poorer performing state schools appear to have worked the A-Level system to the advantage of their students with huge increases in As and A*s while middle class schools have seen more modest rises, it was revealed today. MailOnline analysis of today's results shows the number of children gaining top grades at all schools has exploded since they last sat exams in 2019. Fee-paying independent schools appear to have benefitted the most. Two years ago, when there were last exams, 44% of private school students gained an A or A*, growing to 60.8% last year and to 70.1% this year - an overall increase of 26.1% since 2019. Secondary modern and high school students, which are generally in working class and poorer area have seen the number of As and A*s head upwards from 17.3% in 2019, 29.9% in 2020 and then 35.3% this year. Up 18% in that time. But middle class children at often urban and semi-rural sixth forms have had the lowest rises in top grades of 13.4% since 2019. In 2019 these students achieved 21.9% As and A*s, rising to 31.5% last year and 35.3% this year - the exact level of an average secondary modern that was previously lagging behind. Advertisement

Rampant grade inflation fuelled by the pandemic today led to almost half of all A-level students gaining an A* or A grade from their teachers today - a new record - after exams were abandoned for the second year in a row with 2022 now looking increasingly likely to be the same.

In total 44.8 per cent of UK entries to a subject were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 per cent on 2020 when 38.5% achieved it - and one in five of all results was an A* this year, another record.

It means that the number of top grades handed out has almost doubled in the two years since students last sat exams in 2019, when 25.2% got an A or an A*.

And there are growing concerns about the record gap in results between private and state schools, with 70.1% of fee-paying students gaining an A or above in their exams - compared to around 35% in a comprehensive.

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust and chair of the Education Endowment Foundation for social mobility, said: 'The pandemic has compounded existing inequalities and today's results are a reflection of that. We're seeing growing gaps between independent and state schools at the top grades'.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the increase in top grades as 'deserved' after teenagers forced to stay at home in lockdown but admitted there will have to be a 'glide path' back to 'a more normal state of affairs'.

He also admitted that because of the disruption in schools there may not be exams next year, allowing teachers to decide on grades.

They were allowed to submit their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Only one in five of those results were scrutinised by exam boards, according to regulator Ofqual, who also barely disputed any of the grades, it emerged today.

Mr Williamson, who repeatedly refuses to reveal his A-level grades claiming he'd forgotten them, said: 'This is an exceptional year. It is unlike any other year, and hopefully will be unlike any other year in the future, but I believe this is the right thing for children.

'I do expect to see youngsters getting better grades this year than maybe they have in previous years, but they have worked incredibly hard for those grades, wherever they have been, right across the country, and I think we should be celebrating that, and it gives them the opportunity to take that next step.'

Today around 250,000 students received their A-level results today - and they achieved higher grades than any cohort in British history.

And according to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019, the last time they sat exams, as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1% - the highest proportion since the top grade was first introduced in 2010.

And private schools managed to more than double the number of children gaining As or A*s, breaking the 70 per cent barrier for the first time, while the level at comprehensives was at 39 per cent.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show, but on the most popular courses up to a third of students may be rejected or have to go through clearing due to the number of people getting the required grades.

Today's unprecedented results revealed:

The number of students achieving an A or A* has increased to 44.8% - up from from 38.5%;

Students achieving an A* is now at one in five, while the proportion receiving three A*s has also trebled to 6%;

70% of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39% for a non-selective comprehensive school;

Girls have outperformed boys in terms of high grades and overtaken them in maths for the first time. Last year, girls led boys by 3.2 percentage points (39.9% girls, 36.7% boys). Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018, following a long period in which girls had been ahead;

The overall pass rate (grades A* to E) was 99.5%. This is down very slightly from 99.7% in 2020. Some 88.5% received a C or above, up from 88.0% in 2020 and the highest since at least 2000

The most popular subject this year was maths. It was taken by 97,690 entrants, up 3.6% on 2020. Psychology remains the second most popular subject. It was taken by 71,235 entrants, up 9.2% on 2020. Biology was once again the third most popular subject, taken by 70,055 entrants, a rise of 7.6%.

Geography saw the biggest percentage jump in candidates of any subject with more than 1,000 entrants, rising by 16.8% from 30,203 to 35,268. Chinese had the largest fall in candidates from around 1,600 to 1,300;

There were 824,718 A-levels awarded, up 5.1% on last year's total (784,959);

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their record-breaking A-Level results

In a stark graph, it shows how the proportion of students getting an A or an A* has gone from 17.8% in 2000 to 44.8% this year

70% of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39% for a non-selective comprehensive school

Shalayna Morton reacts with joy as she finds out her A-level results at the London Academy of Excellence, Tottenham

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results on a record day where teachers decided on grades because of covid

Leila Jarvis hugs her mother after receiving her grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London while students in Nottingham celebrate their success, including one young man seen looking like he couldn't believe his results. Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool (right)

Girls increase attainment gap with boys in battle of the genders and even overtake male students in maths for the first time in A-level history as experts warn pandemic may have hurt young men more Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades in this year's A-level results, with female students overtaking their male counterparts for the first time in maths. The proportion of girls who achieved an A grade or higher was 46.9% - 4.8 percentage points higher than boys at 42.1%, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show. This widens the gap between the genders since last year when female students led their male peers by 3.2 points. Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018 after a long period in which girls had been ahead. In maths, female students overtook their male counterparts for the first time this year in the number of A*s - with 29.1% of girls achieving the top grade, compared with 28.5% of boys. Hundreds of thousands of students have been awarded grades determined by their teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic. Exam regulators said that while it is difficult to know why female pupils have performed better than their male peers overall, there is evidence that girls often perform better in continuous assessment such as coursework. Jill Duffy, chief executive of awarding body OCR, told a briefing with journalists that it was 'very early to say exactly what the reasons are'. She added: 'Previous research has shown that girls tend to perform better in more continuous assessment, boys tend to pull it out of the bag, if you like, when they come to an exam. But we also know the pandemic has had wider impacts not just on education but also on mental health, and recent reports have suggested that has hit young men more than females.' She added that the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) does not publish data for students who identify as non-binary but 'it is something the exam boards are continuing to work to support in the future'. Advertisement

Record breaking results for children at fee-paying schools The number of top grades at private schools has never been higher than today. Today of the students getting A-level results at independent schools, 39.5% gained the top A* grade, compared with 27.4% in 2020 and 16% in 2019. 70% of entries at private schools received A grades or higher, compared with 39% at comprehensives and 42% at academies. Watchdog Ofqual signed off on the results and hitting back at claims at private school children are getting unfairly helped they said the children in those schools tend to be 'clustered' around those top grades anyway. Advertisement

Will pupils ever sit exams again? Gavin Williamson says teacher-assessments could continue next year Gavin Williamson (pictured today) defended this year's record high A-level grades and said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has said that, while the Government wants to return to an exam-based system, pupils will continue to need extra support into 2022. 'We also recognise that those students who will be taking exams in 2022 will have also had their education disrupted,' he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. He said however that he hopes it will be possible to return to a more normal system before 2024. 'I would hope that we would be able to move to a normal system of exams much more rapidly than that, but we are making sure that we are getting the support in place for students again who have seen disruption to their education,' he said. 'For me that is incredibly important. The impact of the pandemic isn't just one year.' Advertisement

Universities that refuse to offer face-to-face learning should NOT charge full £9,250 fees, say Gavin Williamson - as 91% of students are accepted on first-choice of degree while numbers heading for further education rises 5% Universities should not be charging students full fees if they are not giving face-to-face teaching, Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has said. The minister, speaking on the morning of A-Level results being released, he said the Government expected all of them to be moving back to in person lectures and tutorials. It came as the number of students accepted on degree courses rose by five per cent on last year after more pandemic learning. And Mr Williamson warned the Office for Students would target and punish universities who were offering sub-standard course. He said: 'Universities are autonomous institutions. Our guidance is clear, our direction is clear and we do expect all universities, unless there's unprecedented reasons, to be moving back to the situation of actually delivering lessons, lectures, face-to-face. 'I think if universities are not delivering, not delivering what students expect, then actually they shouldn't be charging the full fees. 'I think universities have got to sort of stand up their offer to their own students. 'I think that they have the flexibility and the ability to deliver face-to-face lectures, and expect them to be delivering face-to-face lectures.' Advertisement

Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades - but the Tory minister admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers allowed to decide the results again.

The Education Secretary said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption as teachers decided marks for a second year following the cancellation of exams, and said: 'We do expect students to get better grades this year'.

He said: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step. But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

And hinting at more teacher-decided grades next year he said: 'We also recognise that those students who will be looking at taking exams in 2022 will also have had their education disrupted as part of that; that's why, as part of that extensive consultation that we did in the last academic year, we set out some mitigations in order to be able to support those children.'

Ofqual interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said: 'I don't think it's very meaningful to compare this year's results with 2019.'

Asked if he was comfortable with the results, he told BBC Radio 4's World at One programme: 'Yes, I am. The approach this year was to trust teachers and to ask teachers to make the judgments on which we are going to base grades and that was based on the reality that there's been significant disruption to learning.

'It's been uneven and we wanted to make sure that students had the opportunity to show what they were capable of and teachers are in the best position to make those judgments.

'In particular, we wanted to make sure that students were treated fairly and that meant ensuring that they weren't being tested or assessed on material that they hadn't learnt.'

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by their schools and sixth-forms, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England - around one in five schools and colleges - was scrutinised by exam boards.

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.

The Education Secretary said: 'This year is a year we can't compare to other years. No other cohort of students have experienced this before, being kept from the classroom not once just twice'.

Mr Williamson has said the Government will consult on a contingency plan 'largely based around' teacher-assessed grades for next year, but with a hope to move back to an examination system.

Despite criticism about grade inflation, Mr Williamson insisted that 'we must support these students in looking to the future' and insisted universities and employers can have 'confidence' in the grades awarded today.

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

The Scottish Highers results were also released on Tuesday.

School results in Scotland are consistently lower than last year but have shown a sharp rise since 2019, before the pandemic.

For Highers, the rate of students receiving between and A and a C, known as the attainment rate, fell from 89.3% to 87.3%, while the attainment rate for Advanced Higher dropped to 90.2% from 93.1%.

But the figure for Higher qualifications is significantly above the 2018-19 level, which was just 75%, while the Advanced Higher rate increased from 80%.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year, compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Gavin Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, he said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

He said: 'We do have a rigorous system of grading and awarding. People have been awarded this grade on the basis of evidence.

'We took a difficult decision, and that decision was children were to be assessed on what they had been taught. We have seen various amounts of disruption around the country and children's experiences have been different.

'But still, you have a very clear grading system, you still see children who are achieving A*s, As, Bs, Cs, have really achieved so very, very much, and I think employers can have real confidence in the grades that they get. Let's not forget this is an unprecedented year.'

Writing in The Daily Telegraph he said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year – it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Last night, Ofqual's interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said that traditional tests only provided a 'snapshot' of a pupil's ability and the new system allowed a fairer assessment gauged over a longer time period.

A-Levels and Scottish Higher results this year will be based on the in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Speaking to the BBC Mr Lebus admitted that grades may be slightly higher this year, adding: 'I think a good way to think of it is exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph - you capture an instant, it's a form of sampling.

'Whereas teacher assessment, it allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment.

'I think, from that point of view, we can feel satisfied that it's likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.'

Meanwhile Mary Bousted of the NEU told the Times: 'I think there was a political decision to put teachers in the firing line.

'We think there will be a rise in the top grades but I've been assured by government that they won't say teachers have been too generous.'

On average students receiving results today will achieve almost a grade higher than they would have in 2019, a source said.

It comes as Tory peer Lord Lucas predicted that private school pupils will get short shrift in admissions because universities are prioritising the disadvantaged.

East London school gets more children into Oxbridge than Eton Pupils at an inner city state school are celebrating after 55 teenagers got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge, which is more than the offers made to Eton College students. The majority of pupils at Brampton Manor Academy (pictured today) in Newham, east London, are from ethnic minority backgrounds, in receipt of free school meals (FSMs), or will be the first in their family to attend university. Sam Dobin, Brampton's sixth form director, said he is 'delighted' that 55 of its students are now set to study at Oxford or Cambridge University this year, which is more than leading independent schools. At Eton, where Boris Johnson studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers, a fall from 69 last year. After a bout of excited screaming, hugs and hyperventilating, Nyat Aron-Yohannes said there was 'black excellence in this building' after hearing about how many of her classmates are now heading to Oxford or Cambridge. The 18-year-old of Purfleet, Essex, who got three A*s and is going to Oxford to study philosophy, politics and economics, said 'the struggle was real'. She added: 'We woke up early to come into school and sometimes it did not even seem like it was worth it at those times when the grades were not matching up to your work ethic. 'Then lockdown happened and you had to persevere on your own because you did not have your classmates or teachers physically nearby to push you'. She said she was happy for her relatives, particularly her father Abraham, adding: 'I am the first in my family to go to Oxford. 'My father told me this could be possible. His words were of motivation.' Advertisement

Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades in this year's A-level results, with female students overtaking their male counterparts for the first time in maths.

The proportion of girls who achieved an A grade or higher was 46.9% - 4.8 percentage points higher than boys at 42.1%, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

This widens the gap between the genders since last year when female students led their male peers by 3.2 points. Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018 after a long period in which girls had been ahead.

In maths, female students overtook their male counterparts for the first time this year in the number of A*s - with 29.1% of girls achieving the top grade, compared with 28.5% of boys.

Hundreds of thousands of students have been awarded grades determined by their teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

Exam boards said that while it is difficult to know why female pupils have performed better than their male peers overall, there is evidence that girls often perform better in continuous assessment such as coursework.

Jill Duffy, chief executive of awarding body OCR, told a briefing with journalists that it was 'very early to say exactly what the reasons are'.

She added: 'Previous research has shown that girls tend to perform better in more continuous assessment, boys tend to pull it out of the bag, if you like, when they come to an exam.

'But we also know the pandemic has had wider impacts not just on education but also on mental health, and recent reports have suggested that has hit young men more than females.'

She added that the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) does not publish data for students who identify as non-binary but 'it is something the exam boards are continuing to work to support in the future'.

The editor of the Good Schools Guide said yesterday that institutes will be 'pretty cautious' about giving places to fee-paying youngsters who missed their grades as they had 'all the chances' to succeed.

Instead, they will give leg-ups to pupils who experienced 'challenges' such as having 'nowhere to work' during lockdown.

But despite alleged grade inflation, individual pupils could lose out and there is likely to be variability between schools.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

London and south-east schools get the highest rate of top grades while the north-east has the lowest The percentage of A-level entries awarded the top grades (A* or A) by nation and region: North-east England 39.2% (up from 35.6% in 2020) North-west England 41.4% (35.8%) Yorkshire & the Humber 41.1% (35.0%) West Midlands 40.9% (35.0%) East Midlands 41.3% (34.5%) Eastern England 44.8% (38.3%) South-west England 44.7% (38.8%) South-east England 47.1% (41.2%) London 47.9% (40.7%) England 44.3% (up from 38.1%) Wales 48.3% (41.8%) Northern Ireland 50.8% (43.3%) All 44.8% (up from 38.5%) Advertisement

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England, around one in five schools and colleges, was scrutinised by exam boards.

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.

For the remaining 15%, professional discussions took place between teachers and curriculum leads in schools and colleges with external subject experts and, where necessary, centres reviewed and revised their grades.

This represented less than 1% of all the grades issued on Tuesday, according to the exams regulator.

But Ofqual said that, at the time of writing its report, exam boards were in continuing discussions with 'a small number of centres' and grades would be withheld for these schools should concerns remain unresolved on results day.

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, the Education Secretary said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

Asked about concerns about grade inflation, he told ITV's Good Morning Britain: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the NAHT school leaders' union, said: 'Our advice is to ignore the chat about grade inflation.

The grades awarded in 2021 are a holistic judgment based on work which students have produced.

'These evidence-based decisions are very different to the normal way grades are awarded through exams.

'Students should be confident that they are getting the grades they deserve and that reflect the standard of achievement they have demonstrated.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), said: 'It is important to understand that the system used to assess students this year is different from both formal exams and the approach that was used last year too, when an attempt to use an algorithm to standardise grades nationally went wrong and had to be abandoned.

'It is therefore invidious to make direct comparisons with other years and vital that we celebrate the achievements of this year's cohort who have had to endure so much over the past 18 months.'

Last night, regulator Ofqual defended the system, claiming the results are 'more accurate' than if exams had been held mid-pandemic.

The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time. We know exams are the fairest form of assessment but in their absence this year there is no one better placed to judge their abilities than their teachers.'

Suggestions that almost half of today's grades will be an A or A* were reported in The Times.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson wrote to all teachers, thanking them for their 'hard work' on grading. The Association of School and College Leaders stressed that qualifications had not been 'devalued'.

Lord Lucas said anyone not getting the grades they need for university should call the admissions tutor.

But he added that 'tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well'.

Today's grades have been based on coursework, mini-assessments and classroom performance.

Most pupils will benefit from it but research by Ofqual shows teachers sometimes show bias.

Thanks Miss!': Moment A-level pupil opens her teacher-assessed grades then turns to thank her headteacher - as students find out results today A happy A-level student at a West Midlands school thanked her teacher for her two As and A* grades today after opening her results live on television as thousands of anxious teenagers find out their marks. Students Erin, Drew and Keehan opened their results live on GB News next to Balvinder Sidhu, the channel's West Midlands Reporter in front of their peers and headteacher Nikki Clifton this morning. Erin was visibly delighted as she found that Kinver High School in Stourbridge had awarded her two A grades and an A* as she laughed, said 'wow, I am very happy' and turned to her teacher to say: 'Thank you'. Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half to be given A* and A grades. Appearing on GB News, Keehan said he got an A*, A and a B, and Drew - who was expecting to receive two Bs - got an A and a B, telling Ms Sidhu: 'I'm really chuffed with it, really really happy'. Erin and Keehan said they had received the grades required to get to their universities of choice, while Drew said he planned on joining the Royal Air Force and doing an apprenticeship in intelligence. Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades. Headteacher Nikki Clifton said of the three students on GB News: 'They're so brave, but they're a credit to each and every youngster up and down, around the country and I couldn't be happier for them. 'Today's a fabulous day, it's one of my favourite days of the year and I think coming after the two years of disruption, I think I'm really looking forward to having a great day of fun and celebration with the students.' Asked how she was feeling, Ms Clifton said: 'I'm excited, a little bit nervous as I always am on these days because it is a nervous day and students are nervous. But I'm hopeful that our students will open a set of results that will give (sic) them where they want to go and I hope that is replicated up and down the country.' She added: 'It has been a very different and rigorous set of processes, and it's very different to any other year. You can't compare this set of year's results with last year, we've got a completely different set of assessment parameters, a whole new policy, a whole different way of working for our students and our staff, and I couldn't be prouder of them.' Advertisement

Moment Gavin Williamson repeatedly refuses to reveal his A-level grades and claims he's 'FORGOTTEN' them... after fondly reminiscing his 'walk up to college and absolute delight at opening envelope'

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson failed history this morning as he claimed he could not remember the results of his own A-levels.

As hundreds of thousands of students received their own grades, Mr Williamson vividly recalled the day 27 years ago and painted a detailed picture of how he received his results.

But pressed on what they actually were, he insisted that his memory failed him, although he acknowledged he did not get top marks.

'I didn't get three A*s, it's fair to say,' he said

'I have forgotten, it is so long ago. It is 27 years ago.

'You probably can't remember what was happening last weekend,' he added to LBC's Nick Ferrari.

Ferrari quizzed: 'Why won't you tell me? Is it a state secret?'

Mr Williamson aged 17 the year before he would take his mysteriously-graded A-levels

Earlier Mr Williamson was able to remember how he went to his sixth form college in Scarborough to pick up the envelope with his grades.

He recalled his 'absolute delight' when he saw the results and realised 'all my dreams of doing social science at Bradford University' had been achieved.

'For a lad growing up in Scarborough, Bradford was the most exotic and exciting place in the whole world,' he said.

'It opened up the pathway to those next steps and I was absolutely delighted.'

Listeners seemed unconvinced he was unable to recall his grades, given his role in Government.

Colin Holmes said: 'I'm the same age as Gavin Williamson. My memory is generally pretty poor.

Students react receiving their A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

John Ryder did not mince his words appraising Mr Williamson's recall skills over his A-levels

Colin Holmes was similarly unimpressed with the Education Secretary's memory powers

Nursing students leap after pandemic heroics The professionalism shown by nurses during the coronavirus pandemic could be behind a leap in the number of students, leading nurses have said. Ucas figures show the number of students accepted onto nursing courses has increased by 8% from last year, to 26,730. The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) said that the increase is 'encouraging' but warned of significant staff shortages. It said the newest cohort of undergraduate students will not qualify until 2024 at the earliest. RCN director for England, Patricia Marquis, said: 'This latest increase in acceptances to nursing courses is encouraging and is no doubt a result of the high profile and professionalism of nursing staff during the pandemic. 'But record numbers of acceptances does not equate to record numbers of nurses entering the workforce, as many of these students won't qualify until 2024 and beyond. 'There are already significant staff shortages in nursing and it is clear acceptance numbers are not keeping pace with vacancies. 'Pressures of the pandemic have also left nursing staff exhausted. 'This not only puts patient care at risk but means students risk not completing their studies and entering the workforce. 'Ministers must reverse the 3% pay deal if we are to discourage many from abandoning the profession, leaving future nurses without the expert teaching they need.' Advertisement

'I can remember what I got. I can also remember that A* wasn't a thing back then.

John Ryder said: 'How can the Education Secretary forget the answer to such an obvious question to an Education Secretary? Gavin Williamson is incompetent and should be nowhere near education.'

Speaking on Tuesday morning before the results were officially announced, Gavin Williamson defended an increase in the proportion of higher grades, describing an 'exceptional year' and saying students have worked 'incredibly hard' and the results should be 'celebrated'.

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic, following a second year in a row when exams were cancelled due to Covid-19.

The proportion of A-level entries awarded an A grade or higher has risen to an all-time high. In total, more than two in five (44.8%) of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5% achieved the top grades.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Mr Williamson told Sky News 'we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year'.

He told ITV's Good Morning Britain that as the pandemic ends there will have to be a 'glide path back to a more normal state of affairs'.

He said students 'have worked incredibly hard for those grades, wherever they have been, right across the country, and I think we should be celebrating that'.

Asked about concerns over grade inflation for A-levels, Mr Williamson said: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

'This year is a year that we can't truly compare to any other year,' Mr Williamson told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

'No other cohort of students have experienced a situation where they haven't been able to go into the classroom for a sustained period of time, not just once, but actually twice, and we have seen people having different experiences.'

What can students do if unhappy with grades, can they still sit an exam and how does clearing work? Vital Q&A as teacher-assessed A-level grades are released TODAY

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers.

Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half are to be graded at A* or A.

It is hoped the school-based assessments system will be a major improvement on last year's computer algorithm fiasco which saw a massive public outcry over some unfairly low marks.

However, it is feared that there could be fierce competition for places at leading institutions among students who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers, as there could be fewer selective courses available in clearing.

Unions representing school leaders and teachers have even urged parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results - and appealing against grades just 'for the sake of appealing'.

Here, MailOnline breaks down what students should do if they are unhappy with their final grades, and what to expect today.

Tens of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers (stock image)

What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades?

Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made.

Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade.

If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf.

In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed.

Unions have urged parents and students against hiring lawyers to appeal the grades.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.

'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet. Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.

'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

Youngsters who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers are likely to face greater competition for a place at leading institutions as there could be fewer selective courses on offer in clearing (stock image)

How does clearing work?

Ucas, the university applications body, has said competition for places is tougher than ever thanks to inflated grades and a lack of courses.

It warned students going through clearing - which helps people find courses with places remaining - are likely to find it harder to get onto the courses they want as a greater proportion of people receive the top grades.

Clearing is a way for universities to fill any places they still have empty, while applicants who did not receive an offer have another chance at getting into higher education.

Around 90,000 students will be aiming to join different courses, with many trying to switch.

Applications chief Clare ­Marchant said a record number of students will take up places through clearing. She warned that 'for those most selective courses at the most selective institutions, it is likely to be more competitive'.

Ms Marchant has urged students to make a decision about courses 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks as she expects the system to be 'active'.

Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results?

Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn.

AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December.

The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam.

When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results?

Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week.

A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12.

Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead.

The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended this year's grade inflation, saying students 'deserve to be rewarded' after another year of disruption due to the Covid crisis

How have the grades been decided this year?

All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment.

Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate.

Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022?

In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams.

But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic.

The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term.

'Time to BREAKDANCE!': Hundreds of A-level pupils share their delight after record numbers achieve top grades and are set for university in September

Ecstatic teenagers across the UK have revealed their delight at receiving top A-level results today, with thousands of students set for university in September as teachers set grades for a second year following the cancellation of exams due to Covid restrictions.

Hundreds of thrilled students shared funny GIFs of celebrating footballers, break-dancers, a skit from Family Guy and even a cheering Jeremy Clarkson on Twitter today as they revealed that they received the grades necessary to meet their first-choice university offers.

Teenagers had spread good luck messages as they suffered a sleepless night yesterday ahead of results day, with one writing: 'Funny how I said I wasn't nervous but here I am awake at 5.45am #alevels2021'. Another said: 'Me laughing to cover the fact I can't sleep because I know I'm not gonna get into my dream university and am too nervous'.

Ecstatic teenagers across the UK have revealed their delight at receiving top A-level results today, with thousands of students set for university in September as teachers set grades for a second year following the cancellation of exams due to Covid restrictions

Students awaiting the grades which will get them to universities across the UK from this autumn said they 'didn't sleep a wink' last night, with nearly half of today's results expected to be graded at A* or A

Lottie Olive wiping away tears with mother Kate after she managed to get an A* at Peter Symonds College, Winchester

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

A student at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) finds out his A-Level results in north London

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Lanre Dada poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level resultS

'If the teachers didn't give you the A-level results you were hoping for...': Jeremy Clarkson posts annual exam tweet boasting he got a C and 2Us and 'ended up happy...with a Bentley'

Jeremy Clarkson has boasted he has 'loads of friends' despite failing his A-Levels in his annual results day tweet.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams.

Today he wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager.

Students were today handed their results based on in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Mr Clarkson wrote: 'If the teachers didn't give you the A level results you were hoping for, don't worry. I got a C and 2Us and I've ended up happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley.'

His 7.4million followers reacted with hilarity at the latest results day tweet, with one saying 'it's that time of year again lads' while another added 'makes me smile every year…University of life, the best university and woke free'.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams

Today Mr Clarkson (pictured) wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds.'

He added: 'And I didn't even get the chance to insist the government gave me three As instead.'

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning.

One wrote: 'The world is alright by me as long as this tweet appears each year.'

Another said: 'It's that time of the year again...'

One said: 'I like this annual tweet, I pop back during the day to see just how many people have zero sense of humour....which is humorous in itself.'

'Thank you for reminding kids again that exams aren't the only thing that can drive someone to success, Jeremy. It's such a valuable lesson,' said another.

Another added: 'I was really expecting you to say that you have a slightly bigger than average Lamborghini tractor, this is somewhat disappointing Clarkson..'

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it's a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades? It just makes it sound like we plucked it out of thin air when in fact we have to judge certain criteria to award grades.'

Anxious teenagers across the UK have today described suffering a sleepless night ahead of their A-level results being published at 8am.

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds'

Clarkson posts the tweet to his 7.4 million followers on A-level results day every year

Students awaiting the grades which will get them to universities from this autumn said they 'didn't sleep a wink' last night, with nearly half of today's results expected to be graded at A* or A after a year of disruption amid school closures during the pandemic.

Among the hundreds of thousands of students and their parents unable to sleep last night, many took to Twitter to share their feelings and spread good luck messages, with one writing: 'Funny how I said I wasn't nervous but here I am awake at 5.45am #alevels2021'.

Another nervous teenager posted: 'Me laughing to cover the fact I can't sleep because I know I'm not gonna get into my dream university and am too nervous'. One tweeted: 'It's results day and after a night of absolutely no sleep I wish the best of luck to everyone, we'll smash it'.

Around 30 per cent of the qualifications are expected to receive an A with 19 per cent getting an A*, it was reported last night. If more students gain top grades then it will be more difficult for top universities to differentiate between applicants, it has been suggested.

It comes after 38.6 per cent of A-levels were graded A or A* last year when exams were first cancelled.

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it's a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades'

A 'don't panic' guide for parents on A-Levels results day: Education experts reveal what YOU can do to help your child - from finding a back up option to deferring for a gap year

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous 18 months that has seen their education disrupted due to Covid-19.

Rather than formal exams, which were cancelled due to the pandemic, grades have been decided by teachers' estimates based on previous pieces of work and mock exams over the last year.

While some students will be looking forward to starting at university this autumn after securing their required results, there will be disappointment for others who fail to hit the mark.

But no matter what grades your child receives, it is important to be ready to give them the best advice possible.

Students across England will receive their A-level results today after a tumultuous year that saw their education disrupted due to Covid-19. Here, experts share their advice. Stock image

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education and exam experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm concerned parents and guardians with everything they need to know.

Offering words of encouragement to students receiving their results, Ms Marchant said: 'Great opportunities for next year will be available to you, whatever situation you are in now, and any of them could be the beginning of a great story.

'You might be soon studying an undergraduate degree in your original chosen subject, looking for a new course in Clearing, or exploring apprenticeships to get you set for a stellar career.

'Whether your grades are higher, lower, or different to what you were anticipating, there is a route for you and we're here to help navigate through your choices through straightforward, personalised information and advice.'

Remember: Don't panic

Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College, explained the most important thing is to keep the results in perspective - no matter what they are.

'The most important thing to remember is that the grades a student gets at A Level doesn't determine how successful they will be in the future,' she said.

'If you've done well, that's amazing, but don't be disheartened if you didn't get the grades you were hoping for.

'I've met so many incredible people who either didn't get the grades they wanted first time round so tried again and succeeded, or who took a completely different path and achieved great things.

'Whatever happens, there are so many opportunities to take advantage of, so help them stay positive, move forward and keep going.'

Before your child checks their results...

Find a back up option

FEMAIL has spoken to higher education experts, including Clare Marchant, chief executive of UCAS, to arm parents and guardians with everything they need to know. Stock image

Dr Lisette Johnston, ex BBC World News Editor and Head of School at ScreenSpace, said it is worth your child spending some time considering and researching a 'Plan B' before receiving their results - just in case they aren't quite what they are expecting.

'Have a look for similar courses to their chosen one, they might find one with lower entry requirements,' she said.

'For example, if you've applied to do Film or Media Studies why not look at other courses that focus on film or media, such as Film and Screen Business, or for some courses check the requirements comparing a BA with a BSc - this works with courses such as Economics.'

If their heart is set on a particular university then consider getting a head start and registering through clearing to save time if he or she does need to go through the Clearing process.

Be prepared for phone calls

Make sure your child is ready to make Clearing calls today, advised Amy Smith, Associate Director of Admissions and Applicant Experience at Nottingham Trent University.

For parents or guardians, this involves taking a step back.

'It is the student that universities want to speak to, and not their parents or advisers, so ensure they are ready to make the call themselves and have everything to hand that they might need – results, UCAS login, and a pen and paper to note down next steps and make sure they don't miss any important information.'

If they haven't achieved the grades they need...

Still check UCAS Track - you might have been accepted

Ms Smith said: 'First thing to do when a student receives their results is to log on to UCAS Track.

'Even if they have not done as well as they expected in their A levels or other qualifications, the university that they have applied to may have been able to accept them anyway, or made an alternative offer for a related course with lower entry requirements.

'Students shouldn't make any assumptions about the outcomes of their applications until they have logged on to UCAS to find out.'

Find a course through Clearing or Clearing Plus

Clearing

Clearing is how universities and colleges fill any places they still have on their courses. A student can apply for a course using Clearing if they are not already holding an offer from a university or college, and the course still has places.

There are around 30,000 courses to search in Clearing on UCAS.

A student can use Clearing if:

they're applying after 30 June

they didn't receive any offers (or none they wanted to accept)

they didn't meet the conditions of their offers

they've declined their firm place using the 'decline my place' button in Track

The most important thing is to reassure your child that there is no need to feel unsettled or anxious if they find themselves in Clearing.

Last year, a record 58,000 people secured their place in Clearing after applying earlier in the year, and a further 25,000 applied directly into Clearing.

Combined, that means that almost 15 per cent of everyone accepted last autumn took this route.

Clearing Plus

If your child finds themselves in Clearing this year, the UCAS team will personally match them to courses they may be interested in, using what they have shared in their application, and what universities and colleges are looking for in a student.

This information will be fed to the student when they log in to UCAS Track. They will be able to see a personalised list of courses available to you.

If they see a course they are interested in, they can express and interest using Track and the university will be in touch.

Last year, over 20,000 people found their course by using the Clearing Plus service.

Defer a year and take a leap

Jo Caine, MD and specialist HR recruiter for Cathedral Appointments, said: 'Just because your child thought they were going to go to university in 2021 doesn't mean they have to go to university in 2021.

'If their results didn't quite hit the mark this year, they may be able to strike a deal with the university of choice and defer the place for a year. This scenario is more common than you may expect and may be the best decision.'

With a year out, your child can take the time to do something completely different.

'Perhaps travelling the world could be on the agenda or volunteering with a charity – maybe work experience in their chosen field to give them an early step up on the career ladder,' Ms Caine continued. 'The list is endless.'

If their grades are better than expected...

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September. Stock image

'First of all, they should be very proud of themselves,' said Elaine Bowker, principal at The City of Liverpool College.

If your child has exceeded their predicted grades, they don't necessarily need to change anything. They can just rest easy knowing they're all set for September.

There is also the chance to reconsider where and what they study through UCAS Adjustment.

Ms Marchant explained: 'Adjustment is a straightforward process and each year several hundred students use it to secure their place on a different course.

'Follow the instructions within Track, and a student can hold only their confirmed place, while searching for a new one if they've achieved all the grades their conditional firm choice asked for, and at least one higher.

'If they don't find anything new that's suitable, that's ok. They will still have their place at their original firm choice.'

If they've had second thoughts on their original choice...

'Clearing is also available if you've changed your mind on your original choices,' explained Ms Marchant.

If your child had been planning to go to university and isn't sure about what they want to do now, it's important to think about the reasons why they wanted to apply to higher education originally, because they will still be valid in the future.

'This year is clearly different to previous years, but I encourage students to progress as they originally planned. Universities and colleges continue to be incredibly flexible in response to the pandemic and are sharing stories of how they've supported their current students over the past 18 months.'

Ms Smith added: 'Contact the university that they are interested in, to see if there are any spaces available.

'Usually this is done over the phone, and students can look on university websites now to find the clearing hotline numbers that they might want to use on results day.'

It might also be possible to defer for a year to give them more time to consider.

If they are not sure they want to go to university...

Alternate routes

Ms Caine said: 'Nowadays, university isn't the be all and end all of higher education. Holding A-Levels gives you the opportunity to explore numerous pathways into further learning and careers and, more often than not, for a lot less money.

'Apprenticeships, vocational studies, or alternate exam-based qualifications (such as the ACCA qualification for budding Accountants) are all options available.

'Not only are they much more accessible than university, many of these choices will allow students to 'earn while you learn', giving valuable experience and allowing them to have financial independence – a luxury not many students have.'

Interim roles

'It may be that when your child opens their results, university simply isn't on the cards anymore - and that's okay,' said Ms Caine. 'Some of the brightest minds of past generations have been those without a degree.

'But this complete u-turn may mean they're a little unsure of where to go in terms of getting their foot in the door with a career. This is where interim or temporary roles are invaluable. Working for a specific sector for a short period of time will give key industry experience and well as transferrable skills, but without the worry of being tied down for a long time.

'Through short bursts of employment, a student can work out where their passions lie and what career path is perfect for them while also garnering brilliant knowledge and skillsets for their CV.

'And, more often than not, once they've found that perfect role – an interim job has the opportunity to become a permanent placement.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A six-year-old girl was found curled up asleep in a field after vanishing from her home in the middle of the night, police footage has revealed.

The child's 'terrified' parents called 999 after realising their daughter was missing from her bed at their farm near Chittlehamholt in Devon at 9.30pm on Saturday, August 7.

Incredible footage taken from a police helicopter showed the moment the girl was found by officers an hour later - at 10.40pm.

The National Police Air Service (NPAS) described the situation as 'every parent's worst nightmare' as it shared the video on social media.

In a tweet the force wrote: 'Missing from a farm in a rural setting at night, she was located in the pitch dark by our helicopter crew using their infra-red camera system.

The child's 'terrified' parents called 999 after realising their daughter (pictured) was missing from her bed at their farm near Chittlehamholt in Devon

'She was found asleep in a field, over a half a mile away from her home.

'In this instance, a massive team effort from the police control room, the police officers on the ground and the officers in the air to get this child home safely to her terrified parents.'

In the video the camera pans across fields looking for signs of heat which show up as black marks.

Animals grazing nearby can be seen dotted around the grasslands but it is a small figure next to a hedgerow that catches the attention of the crew.

The camera pans back and starts to zoom in on the black figure, which turns out to be the child.

Incredible footage (pictured) taken from a police helicopter showed the moment the girl was found by officers

Meanwhile, on the ground officers have parked up their car and are making their way towards the little girl

The little girl was found curled up asleep in a corner of this field after she went missing

Meanwhile, on the ground, officers have parked up their car and are making their way towards the little girl.

After a scary evening for her parents the family were reunited for a brief trip to hospital so the girl could be checked over.

A spokesman for Devon and Cornwall Police said: 'Police were called at 9.30pm on Saturday 7 August after a young girl was reported missing from a rural property in the Umberleigh area.

'Officers attended and carried out an area search along with the police helicopter and a dog unit.

'The child was located safe and well in a field around 10.40pm by the helicopter working with officers on the ground. She was taken to hospital to be checked over a precaution.'

Underneath the tweet supporters of the NPAS were quick to congratulate the force on the success of the operation.

One wrote: 'Fantastic job. We are so lucky to have such resources.'

Another said: 'Brilliant work. That's why you are essential. Proud of you all.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Did you know Davison? Did you witness the incident in Plymouth? Email: james.gant@mailonline.co.uk

Advertisement

Did you know Davison or witness the incident? Email: james.gant@mailonline.co.uk Advertisement

This is the moment killer Jake Davison casually walked across a Plymouth street towards his final victim - moments after shooting dead a three-year-old girl and three others.

The CCTV footage emerged as it was revealed that police had returned his shotgun to him last month after confiscating it in December last year following an accusation of assault - for which Davison was allegedly given an 'anger management' course.

Davison's shooting spree left five people dead apart from himself and was Britain's first 'incel' mass shooting, named after a violent online subculture of 'involuntary celibates', whose members define themselves by their inability to find a sexual partner.

In the video obtained by ITV News and captured on a quiet street, the 22-year-old incel gunman is seen during his killing spree, his pump action shotgun hanging by his side.

Minutes earlier he had murdered his own cancer survivor mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing three-year-old Sophie Martyn and her father Lee, 43.

Sophie was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee who was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One witness said: 'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

Davison then aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Davison then walked out of the cul-de-sac down a path, telling a stunned resident: 'Nothing to worry about mate,' before shooting dog walker Stephen Washington, 59.

One witness said: 'I went up there to see if I could help and there was a bloke lying on the grass face down. He was obviously dead, and his two dogs were running free.'

The video shows Davison at this point. He is then seen walking past a house and crosses the road in the direction of Blush hair salon, where he will fatally shoot Kate Shepherd, 66, his fifth victim. This is where the footage ends.

A witness to Ms Shepherd's murder said she was shot 'without a word' from Davison as she was smoking a cigarette outside the salon.

This is the moment caught on CCTV showing killer Jake Davison casually walked across a Plymouth street towards his final victim - moments after shooting dead a three-year-old girl and three others.

Adopted Sophie Martyn, 3, and her father Lee, 43, (pictured left) were shot by Jake Davison at random. Lee's wife Becky is pictured right. Witnesses have told how Lee died while trying to shield his daughter from the gunman

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife Becky works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts. Sophie was pushing a toy pram when the gunman struck

Jake Davison's mother Maxine was the first to be killed. She and other relatives are claimed to have begged the police and NHS to help him with mental health problems

66-year-old Kate Shepherd was Davison's final victim, and was gunned down by Blush hair salon in Plymouth

Plymouth residents last night came together for a candlelight vigil at North Down Crescent Park after the local community was rocked by the shooting spree

Davison first murdered his own mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing schoolgirl Sophie Martyn, her father Lee, 43, and dog walker Stephen Washington. He then crossed a road to a hair salon where he shot and fatally injured Kate Shepherd, 66

Jake Davison then moved on towards a nearby wooded area where he shot and murdered dog walker Stephen Washington, 59, (above)

'Police gave shotgun back to gunman after 'anger management class' one month before rampage' Police are tonight facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago. Gunman Jake Davison, 22, murdered his mother Maxine, 51, in her Plymouth home with a pump-action shotgun before going out into the street and killer a further four innocent people. The bodybuilder, who had posted rambling videos about being 'beaten down' on social media, said nothing during the 12-minute rampage through a quiet residential street before turning the gun on himself. Tonight the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said they would investigate Devon and Cornwall Police over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate. The legally held weapon had been taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault last September. It was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot shotgun. Confirming a mandatory referral from Devon and Cornwall Police this morning, IOPC regional director David Ford said announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'. This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing, he said. Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12. 'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun. 'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered. 'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings. 'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.' Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.' According to The Telegraph, Davison had claimed that he had the shotgun for sports use and had the licence reinstated after he attended an anger management course. Advertisement

A 16-year-old boy, who was walking to a supermarket when he saw the murder, said: 'She fell to the floor and he just carried on walking. He didn't say anything to her. I don't know if she worked at the salon or not. A man in a hoodie arrived and held his hands over her stomach wounds. I couldn't believe what I saw.'

Seconds later, Davison turned the gun on himself before armed police can reach him.

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts.

In other developments:

A former top prosecutor said Davison should have been on a police watchlist before he killed five people and himself in a shooting spree;

Friends claimed Davison's mother had begged the NHS and police to give him urgent mental health treatment during lockdown, but failed to get the help he needed;

Neighbours also said his father Mark had previously told the police his son's gun should be taken away from him;

The police watchdog is also investigating what information Devon and Cornwall Police had about Davison's mental health, and if it was considered

Boris Johnson said the issue of how the killer came to legally own a gun should be 'properly investigated' as he described the mass shooting in Plymouth on Thursday night as an 'absolutely appalling' incident

Plymouth residents held a candlelit vigil for the five victims killed in the shooting spree on Thursday;

Tributes have flooded in for the Martins who lost their lives during a six-minute scene of carnage, as it was revealed Sophie was adopted by Lee and his partner two years earlier.

One friend said in tribute: 'You were such a kind selfless gentleman who put everyone else before yourself we have shared many memories together, I will never forget the things in life you have done for me.'

Another wrote: 'I am totally distraught that a good friend's brother and niece have been taken in such an horrific way, my heart is breaking for my friend & his family at this very very sad news.

'Deepest and sincerest condolences to all the deceased & hope those injured make a speedy recovery.'

Neighbours said penultimate victim Mr Washington was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path close to the Davison family home when he was shot by the killer.

Mike Moore, who lives near by said: 'Both the dogs ran back to Stephen's home and that's when the family became concerned.

'Stephen was well known around here because he was always out with his beautiful dogs. He wasn't friends with Jake and there's nothing connecting them so we think it was completely random.'

Within six minutes, officers, some armed only with Tasers, had raced to the scene of the carnage. But they were too late to save the victims, whose bloodied bodies lay in the street.

Davison's body was found 12 minutes after the shooting began.

Yesterday police and social services were facing questions about whether Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade could have been prevented.

Last night the Independent Office for Police Conduct launched an investigation into 'Devon and Cornwall Police's decision-making in relation to Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate'.

IOPC regional director David Ford said the probe will look at 'what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed'. The killer's shotgun and certificate were removed by police in December some three months after an allegation of assault in September 2020.

He is said to have had a row with two youths which was reported to police, to whom he was already known. A family friend also claimed yesterday that Davison had assaulted his own father.

A source close to the family said: 'Apparently, he hasn't been well for quite a bit, mentally, and also beat up his father a couple of months ago. The police took his gun licence from him, but then gave it back to him.'

His weapon, which is legal in the UK for sports such as clay pigeon shooting if a licence is obtained, was then returned in early July.

Nazir Afzal, who was previously chief crown prosecutor for the North West said Davison, 22, was 'exactly the type of person the authorities should be keeping an eye on'.

When asked on BBC Breakfast on Saturday if Davison should have been on a watchlist, Mr Afzal said: 'Yes, absolutely, particularly given that he had a firearms licence and given that we now learn in December it was taken off him temporarily because of allegations he was facing and returned to him.

'He was exactly the kind of person that you would be keeping an eye on or the authorities should be keeping an eye on.'

Mr Afzal said none of Davison's social media posts seemed to have been taken into account when restoring his gun licence.

When asked on BBC Breakfast if a year seemed like a short period of time for the licence to be revoked, he said: '100% I agree with you. It's not just about the fact that the gun was returned to him, his licence was restored.

The chilling parallels between the shooting in Plymouth and the Sandy Hook and Hungerford massacres In December 2012, 20-year-old Adam Lanza gunned down 27 people, including his mother, before turning his weapon himself at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Connecticut. Lanza murdered 20 elementary school children, six adults and shot his own mother, Nancy, 52, four times in the head with a rifle while she slept in bed. A 2014 report found Lanza was a deeply troubled young man who obsessed over mass killings as he fell deeper into a pit of mental illness while his mother ignored his struggles. FBI files revealed he had an 'obsession' with historic mass shootings and a 'paedophilia-like' interest in children before he committed the fourth deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States. Documents also showed Lanza had meticulously created a spreadsheet documenting previous mass shootings, including the 1999 Columbine High School shooting. He had acquired National Rifle Association safety permits after attending shooting ranges with his mother, Nancy Lanza. Details on the pair's relationship remain unclear, but one a medical professional said Nancy was never allowed into Adam's room. It was on August 19, 1987 that loner and gun fanatic Michael Ryan went on a shooting rampage in Hungerford, a market town in Berkshire. Armed with an automatic rifle, a pistol and at least one hand grenade he shot 16 people dead, including his mother, before killing himself. His victims included a police officer who tried to tackle him. At least another 15 people were also injured. His first victim was a woman who was picnicking with her two children in Savernake Forest, 10 miles from the Berkshire town. Less than 10 minutes later, firefighters were called to a house in Hungerford where they found the body of Ryan's mother. Ryan, dressed in combat gear, then made his way, shooting at people as he went on foot, to the town's main shopping area where he indiscriminately shot and killed 12 people. He then managed to evade a massive manhunt by armed police and helicopters until he was tracked down to the empty John O'Gaunt Community Technology College where he barricaded himself in. Negotiators made contact with Ryan after he had fired at circling helicopters. At one point Ryan waved an unpinned grenade at police through a window. He is reported to have told negotiators: 'Hungerford must be a bit of a mess. I wish I had stayed in bed.' The body of the 27-year-old, who had shot himself, was later found inside. Ryan was described by the press as a gun fanatic who had an 'unhealthy' relationship with his mother. The incident led to tighter restrictions on gun ownership with the introduction of the Firearms (Amendment) Act of 1988 but critics said the legislation did not go far enough. On March 13 1996, former Scout leader Thomas Hamilton entered the gymnasium at Dunblane Primary School and opened fire on a class of five and six-year-olds, killing 16 children and their teacher. In a shooting spree which lasted less than three minutes, Hamilton, who was armed with two pistols and two revolvers, fired a total of 109 rounds. A public inquiry into the Dunblane massacre found that Hamilton, a former shopkeeper, had been investigated by police following complaints about his behaviour towards young boys. The incident led to further tightening of gun controls with a ban on owning handguns. Advertisement

'In the interim there were all these social media posts talking about the violence he believed in or felt was necessary, how he felt about women. None of that seems to have been taken into account.'

He added: 'If they (the police) were aware (of his social media posts) then they have got even more questions to be asked.'

Mr Afzal said that Davison's social media posts painted a picture of a man who thought women were 'lesser beings'.

He added: 'We have now seen posts on various social media sites which paint a picture of somebody that has a very low opinion or had a very low opinion of women, who seemed to have a belief he was entitled to do whatever he wanted to, a real expectation that women were some kind of lesser being.

'That kind of extreme misogyny of the type we have seen here and in terms of the incel community is a threat to all women and, ultimately, to all our communities.'

Within hours of the carnage, a disturbing series of YouTube videos emerged in which Davison, under the user name Professor Waffle, fantasised about being the 'Terminator' from the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.

He also spoke of his belief in the 'blackpill' philosophy of the 'incel' community, a fatalistic and misogynistic world view that your position in life cannot change.

His family had desperately applied for professional help with Davison's ADHD according to a close family friend, with the gunman being described as 'introverted' and a 'troubled soul'.

The friend told the Telegraph: 'Jake was always very quiet growing up, almost introverted. He was a troubled soul. He got into guns and he knew everything there was to know about them.

'Maxine and Jake used to be close. You'd always see him helping her with the shopping at Lidl up the road, but then his views changed and he went against women and he became misogynist. They clashed a lot about that.'

Victoria Cleave, 29, whose husband worked with Davison at Babcock, said: 'Absolutely vile man.

'So sickening what he did and to think Danny was sat in the same room as him yesterday and worked with him.'

Local Kristina Viladzidzi called him as a sociopath. She wrote: 'He was absolutely terrified of dogs. I remember him being super anxious when we met him in the park, I was always automatically taking dogs on a lead.

'We were about to go to exact same place but my boyfriend wanted to finish [a computer] game so we went ten minutes later. If we went a bit earlier he would definitely target us as he hated our dogs.

'He was a great example of a sociopath. Even eye contact with him was awkward. Before I knew details, he was the person [who] came to my mind and not surprisingly for me it was him.'

Self-described 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and bodybuilder Davison was described as having a 'pump action shotgun'. The weapons are legal in the UK - but only as long as they have a fixed magazine capacity of no more than three cartridges and a valid Shotgun certificate.

The murders came 22 days after he was bragging online about the UK 'having more guns you think' in a post about US-style mass shootings.

He 'liked' about 800 clips about gun culture, the US second amendment and violent games online.

Davison also described his fascination with previous atrocities including the Hungerford massacre in 1987 - one of the worst UK gun attacks in history - where an unemployed former labourer shot dead 16 people with semi-automatic rifles and a handgun.

In a chilling Reddit post written just over three weeks ago about the evolution of gun attacks over the past 80 years, Davison wrote: 'There are lot more guns in Europe and the UK then people think'.

MailOnline yesterday revealed the killer was a nihilistic YouTuber who fantasised about being The Terminator, ranted about being a 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and described his affinity with the 'incel' movement linked to mass murder by misogynists in the US and Canada.

Only today did YouTube and Facebook delete his hate-filled accounts.

And one friend of the family wrote on Facebook last night that his relatives, including his mother Maxine, had begged for mental health support for Davison, adding: 'The NHS basically said they are short staffed and that was it.

'The family even asked the police to come out to see him as he was talking acting and acting strange - they didn't do a welfare check. And now six people are dead'.

Devon and Cornwall police chief constable Shawn Sawyer said his social media and claims his family went to the police and the NHS about his mental health would form part of their investigation.

Speaking at a press conference outside Crownhill police station in Plymouth, the senior police officer said the weapon used in the Plymouth shooting was described as a 'pump action shotgun' and confirmed a firearm had been recovered from the scene.

Mr Sawyer said police would look at Davison's social media output as part of the investigation.

He said: 'This is an extraordinarily unusual response by a fellow human being.

'Whether there were mental health issues I cannot say at this time.' He said most witnesses were 'shocked at what was unfolding before them,' but said there was no evidence to suggest Davison was saying anything as he carried out his atrocity.

Police investigating the Plymouth shootings raided the gunmen's father's flat on Thursday.

Armed officers forced their way into the home of Mark Davison, about a mile from where his son Jake killed five people before turning the gun on himself.

Mr Davison was not in at the time - according to a neighbour - but returned later in the evening and spoke to detectives.

He was being comforted by one of his other sons this afternoon and declined to comment about the tragedy.

Plymouth has two gun shops in the centre of the city, Pull The Trigger and Peter's Fishing and Sports, which are both near the city's market.

A member of staff at Peter's Fishing and Sports recalled how Davison had been in last year. He said: 'I remember the gunman came in just before the first lockdown and was interested in an air rifle we had up on the wall.

'He didn't buy it in the end but spent a few minutes examining it. He didn't have the bushy beard back then and seemed fairly normal, nothing that would trigger any kind of alarm.

'Apparently he was seen walking through the market on Monday. I've seen him around a few times.

'But how he managed to get a license to own a shotgun is a mystery because in order to have a license you have every part of your background scrutinised down to the most minute details. Or at least you're supposed to.'

The vigil was organised by the local neighbourhood watch and chairman Kevin Sproston who led attendees in a minute's silence

Mr Washington (pictured above) had been out walking with his 'beautiful' huskies, who rushed back home to raise the alarm with concerned family members

On a Reddit thread, under the question 'What do incels think of their mother', Davison replied: 'Can't stand her'

Davison wrote this post about mass shootings and more guns being in the UK 'than people think' just 22 days before the Plymouth massacre

Davison shot multiple people and then himself last night in the worst shooting atrocity in Britain for 11 years

In rambling and unsettling films made in the weeks before his rampage, he described an obsession with The Terminator and repeatedly mentions to 'incel' movement linked to mass shootings in the US

Was his GP contacted over shotgun licence? A gun licence will only be granted if police decide the applicant poses no threat to public safety and has a 'good reason' for owning a firearm. To decide if they are fit, officers will carry out a series of checks. These include interviews, visiting the person's home, obtaining character references, carrying out a criminal record check and contacting the family GP. Home visits are not always necessary to renew a licence, but police must be satisfied there is no 'danger to public safety or the peace'. As part of the application process consent must be given for the person's GP to share medical information with officers. If a licence is granted a note is placed on the owner's GP record and the doctor should contact police if concerns arise about their suitability. In most cases GPs are only contacted during the vetting procedure if the applicant has declared a medical condition. Relevant conditions requiring a GP report include depression and personality disorders. Mental health problems can also be relevant. Applicants must have a legitimate reason to own a shotgun, such as for hunting and gun club target shooting. Pump-action shotguns by law cannot hold more than three shells. There is no minimum age to get a shotgun certificate, but you are not allowed to use it without adult supervision until you are 15. You have to be 14 before you can get a separate firearms certificate, which allows you to own a rifle. Advertisement

A senior police source said firearms licence departments were struggling in forces in areas such as Devon and Cornwall.

He said: 'The resources are not there to regularly and proactively visit every single firearms licence holder. There are simply not enough staff to do that because of the sheer number of licences.

'The gun lobby is also relatively powerful. Suspension or revocation of a licence is seen as an extremely big step. That needs a certain amount of justification. You cannot do it on a whim.'

Activists want police to brand the killings terrorism. The Everyday Sexism project's Laura Bates said we 'are talking about an individual radicalised online into an extremist belief system who then acted on those beliefs to massacre people. This is terrorism. It is extremism. It is radicalisation.

'Repeated news reports, police and politicians all saying this is not terror related. This is shocking and shameful. Extremist misogyny, male supremacy, sees women die all over the world, including repeatedly in incel massacres. We cannot tackle it if we do not name it.'

One policing source said: 'This may need to be something that the policing world needs to review, to keep pace with this threat.'

MailOnline has revealed Davison was an active YouTuber calling himself 'Professor Waffle', who posted videos of himself working out and most recently ten-minute rants about life being 'rigged against you', humanity being on the 'brink of extinction' and being repulsive to the opposite sex.

He also shared clips from ultra-violent video games and just two days ago 'liked' videos of a M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle being shot.

In his most recent online rant from his bedroom he said: 'You wake up and you stare at the wall and you're thinking um nothing's changed but I'm still in the same position, same period in life, still a f***ing this, that virgin f***ing fat ugly, what'. He added: 'I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something. And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission'.

A fortnight ago, the 23-year-old also spoke of his affinity with the 'incel' movement, which has been linked to a number of mass shootings in the US. The most notorious was by misogynist killer Elliot Rodger, who killed six people in California in May 2014 before he turned the gun on himself. In Canada in 2018 Alek Minassian posted a Facebook message showing his support for Incels before ploughing a van into crowds, killing ten.

'Incel' stands for 'involuntary celibate' and those referring to themselves as such believe their unattractiveness to women is predetermined by his genetics. Some extremist followers believe they are owed sex by women. Davison says repeatedly in his videos that he is repulsive to women, overweight and so is all his family.

He also talks about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Davison also 'liked' a series of videos about guns, and shared posts on Facebook quoting former American president Donald Trump as well pictures of a statue holding a rifle with the US flag in the background.

His Facebook profile suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

He said on July 28: 'People like similar to me, they've had nothing but themselves. And then they've socially had it tough, probably grew up in a s*** background, like, like… How can you have drive and willpower, you know, when you've been defeated a million times? It's you wake up and you're like 'what the f***?', you know, when you've when you've worked so f***ing hard – so f***ing hard – and you see mother***ers who work nowhere near as hard as you.

'For the most part it's just been me against the world. It's just been me fighting an uphill battle with a big f***ing rock on my back, you know, while I'm seeing mother***ers that don't deserve half of anything, now they're getting a free road to the top'.

He added: 'I think any as long as you're breathing air… It's like in the Terminator, right, you know, fate is nothing, you know, the whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything's rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction, you know, these machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted.

'But yet humanity still tries to fight to the end! And I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something.

'And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission, you know'.

Obsessions of a maniac who called himself the Terminator: Plymouth gunman posted videos on YouTube of himself pumping iron and ranting about his life before going on murder spree

Staring intensely into the camera, Jake Davison signed off his final video on YouTube with the chilling words: 'I am a Terminator.'

Within weeks, the 22-year-old virgin would enact his bloody fantasies with appalling consequences.

In a 12-minute rampage, the gunman murdered his own mother and four strangers, including a three-year-old girl.

The gun massacre – the worst in a decade in the UK – left Plymouth residents questioning how a loner with seemingly serious mental health problems was allowed to have a firearms licence.

Shockingly, it emerged yesterday that the behaviour of the apprentice crane operator had been of concern for some time to those close to him, including his mother Maxine and father Mark – who had reportedly begged the NHS for help and even allegedly contacted the police saying he should not be allowed to keep a gun.

Within hours of the shootings, disturbing videos emerged online in which the 17-stone weightlifter moaned about being 'defeated in life' and talked about the violent sci-fi films starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Jake Davison who shot multiple people and then himself last night was a YouTuber who ranted about being a 'fat ugly virgin'

He said: 'The whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything is rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction.

'These machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted, but yet humanity still tries to fight to the end.

'I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes I'm a Terminator or something and despite reaching almost total system failure, he keeps trying to accomplish his mission.'

Recording his final video on July 28, Davison said: 'I'm beaten down and defeated by f****** life. That drive I once had, that's gone.'

The loner had described himself as an 'incel' – a reference to the 'involuntary celibate' movement, a radical group of misogynistic young males who spend their lives ranting online about women and are of growing concern to police.

Recording videos in a small bedroom he likened to a 'prison cell', Davison spent his days agonising over why he had never had a girlfriend or even been kissed.

Obsessed with sex, he fired off scores of messages to incel groups asking why he was constantly rejected on dating sites and bemoaning his lack of experience of love as a teenager.

Incels and 'black pill' links to Plymouth gunman: Misogynist movement who believe they are 'owed sex' and have been behind several mass shootings in the US including 2020 machete attack classed as terrorism An incel, which is an abbreviation of an involuntary celibate, refers to a group of men who advocated for violence against women because they believe they are unjustly denied sexual or romantic attention. Essentially, they blame women for refusing to have sex with them and believe in responding with rape and violence. Those who identify as an incel interact with each other on online forums where they discuss their hatred of women, hatred of feminism, how to get away with rape, and specific women to target. In 2014, self-proclaimed Incel Elliot Rodger (pictured) declared a 'War on Women' and went on a killing spree near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Since then, Incels have been linked to a number of violent attacks, and are increasingly described as a terrorism threat. In February 2020, a machete attack in a Toronto massage parlor became the first incident of alleged Incel violence to be prosecuted as an act of terrorism. Jake Davison talked about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Dr Joseph Downing, a fellow in nationalism at LSE who studies security and terrorism, told MailOnline: 'The incel attacks and jihadi attacks share many commonality. In all cases it's the chicken and egg problem. 'Is it somebody who acts like this because of their predisposition to violence who found the incel movement, or is it the incel movement that gave that individual the idea to go and commit violence? 'Many think it's about extremist propaganda and the ability to access it and be radicalised, but I'm on the side of that it doesn't really matter. 'These people go and seek extremist ideologies because they're predisposed to do that kind of thing. So whether it's Andre Breivik or jihadis or the incel movement it doesn't matter. 'The incel movement is pretty nuts. When you go down the rabbit hole they say stuff like women are forcing me to be celibate and should cater it upon themselves as their feminine duties to give sexual favours to men. 'But it doesn't really say much about acts of violence. It's not really an ideology that goes as far as say radical Islam. 'They're more of an abstract nihilistic, misogynistic kind of group. So there is a commonality with other forms of extremist violence. 'It's more the person is predisposed to to that kind of behaviour and they go and seek out some kind of extremist ideology. 'The individual is just not interested in the other information out there, they want to find the radical ideology.' He added: 'I don't think people like him will encourage similar acts of violence - in this case we lose the fact that what he's done is really mysterious. 'The majority of people you could just never sway to do that kind of thing. But there may well be other individuals who will go out and commit acts of violence and say it's inspired by him, for example. 'Some may say yes I was inspired by him and incel and stuff like that, but I don't think people are swayed, some just have that psychopathic tendency to extreme violence or they don't.' Advertisement

Revealing he had not spoken to a girl since he was 17, Davison considered himself a virgin loser with nothing to live for.

He wrote of his loneliness and despair, saying he had been 'forgotten about'.

'I used to be OK with being a virgin too, but when you get older and the inferiority complex kicks in and the feeling of despair and missing out occurs,' he said.

'Try being an unemployed, autistic, poor, sexually frustrated male with tons of health issues, no social circle and being stuck in government housing with my mother for years on end, having missed out on so much in life.

'Not being able to do the hobbies and things I enjoy as I don't have a car, I am socially isolated and a black sheep who barely interacts with anyone other than a few people at work.

'It's not just sex and teen romance I feel I missed out on, I feel I missed out on the entire teenage experience. Since leaving school I don't have any friends.'

Born in Plymouth, he was raised with his older brother and sister by their single mother Maxine, with whom he had a difficult relationship, writing online: 'Feel my mother has played a role in [me] being a male virgin.'

Diagnosed with autism as a child, Davison was sent to Mount Tamar special school in Plymouth, where he was said to have been a 'disruptive' influence on his peers.

Jess Wallace recalled: 'My boyfriend went to school with him and said he was pretty shy and quiet and would talk about how cool Americans are, and the idea of having a gun collection.'

Another woman related to a former classmate said: 'He was well-known for his anger issues.'

After leaving school, Davison described feeling positive as he embarked on a career working in construction scaffolding before an ankle injury sent him spiralling into depression. He admitted online that his 'mental, physical and emotional health' had been deteriorating for two years.

He wrote of his frustration at being unable to get a doctor's appointment and revealed he tried a cocktail of supplements and steroids and even considered drugs like cocaine.

Consumed by self-loathing, the recluse posted regular questions such as 'Should being ugly be considered a disability?' and recorded scores of videos and selfies discussing his weight issues and fear of being too fat to get a girlfriend.

Lonely and bored, he described himself as a 'computer addict with nothing else to do for many years'.

He wrote: 'When you have been a recluse for as long as I have, you search up and go on pretty much every subject on the internet. I can't think of a subject I haven't dabbled in on the internet – technology, politics, space, exploration, astronomy, LGBT transgender movies, comics, video games, military, special forces guns, weapons, tanks, jets, nuclear power, futurism, transhumanism, drugs, biology, history.'

In a desperate search for like-minded individuals, he signed up for IncelTV on YouTube.

Spurred on by others in the community, Davison said he had 'overdosed' on 'black pill' – an incel philosophy centred on the belief that success with the opposite sex is determined by genetics.

He wrote: 'Inferiority complex of being a virgin for almost 23 years and the panic of getting older is crippling.' Incel culture has been associated with killings and acts of violence, particularly in the US, where Davison had fantasised about living.

Elliot Rodger became a spiritual figurehead of the incel movement when he murdered six people in Isla Vista, California, in 2014 aged 22 – the same age as Davison.

Before his rampage, Rodger had posted a video on YouTube saying he wanted to take revenge on women for rejecting him.

Within hours of Davison's killings, other incel internet users had built what was described as an online 'shrine' to him yesterday.

Shortly before the attacks, Davison called for a 'Government-funded incel social programme or rehab centre' to get them to do group activities 'to build confidence and self-esteem and getting them out of their depressed mindset'.

Among his ideas were group therapy, activities such as rock climbing and 'taking away computers, phones, internet to detox from social media and the internet'.

But trapped in his bedroom during lockdown, Davison's despair only grew.

Yesterday it emerged that he had liked nearly 800 videos on YouTube pointing to an obsession with US gun culture, violent video games and weightlifting.

He boasted to followers that he held a shotgun licence, writing: 'It would be good if there were more [shooting] ranges and clubs too.

'I have a section SGC (shotgun certificate) but would properly have a FAC (firearms certificate) as well if there were more ranges... as soon as I get a car, which should not take too long, I will apply for my FAC.'

Within recent weeks, Davison's thoughts had turned to death and knives. He wrote online: 'Machetes are awful weapons... most are cheaply made and lack the cutting power to do any real damage like actual swords do.

'If you actually look at machete attacks, videos and news reports, more often than not they only manage to cut and lacerate skin.

'They rarely have the weight and sharpness to cut through bone and skull. They are good for cutting through bush, not cutting limbs and heads... best sword for zombie would be a two-handed great sword which would cut limbs clean off and penetrate skull easily.'

In another post on 'mass shootings' he referred to the Texas clock tower shooting in America in 1966 and the Hungerford massacre in Berkshire in 1987.

Davison wrote: 'There are a lot more guns in Europe and the UK than people think.'

Yesterday, neighbours revealed the Davison family's desperate pleas for help.

Donna Croft said: 'His poor mum has only just got cleared of cancer. His sister was a harmless soul, she was in the same class as my son.

'The dad even begged the mental health team to assess him but they basically said they couldn't be bothered and said they were too short of staff to come out.

'So not have only the mental services on this country let these poor families down, they could [have] prevented this to happen.

'People like that need 24/7 help. How he got a gun to kill these people is crazy.'

His Facebook profile and logo'd T-shirts suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

Six minutes of utter carnage: How the Plymouth gunman's sickening rampage unfolded and left five innocent people dead

The rampage lasted for just six minutes – 12 until the gunman's body was found - but it left five innocent people and their killer dead and the whole nation in shock.

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade.

The first warning residents had in the cul-de-sac of Biddick Drive was when Davison, 22, burst into the house he shared with his mother and began shouting on Thursday evening.

However, the heated argument quickly became murderous.

His killing spree began shortly before 6.11pm, when terrified neighbours made a flurry of 999 calls to Devon and Cornwall Police's control room.

They told operators they could hear gunfire and there was a man with a pump-action shotgun killing people at random.

One witness, Sharron Turner, 57, who lives nearby, said Davison kicked in the door of a property – now known to be his own home – where he turned the gun on his 51-year-old mother, Maxine, who had cancer.

'Firstly, there was shouting, followed by gunshots – three, possibly four to begin with,' she said. 'This was when the shooter kicked in the door of a house and randomly started shooting. He ran from the house shooting as he ran.'

Some in his line of fire had lucky escapes.

On his way out, still clutching the weapon, Davison, who was dressed in black and grey, told a stunned passer-by: 'Nothing to worry about, mate.'

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade

But an instant later he gunned down a girl of three, Sophie Martyn, who was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee, 43.

Mr Martyn was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One retired resident who lives opposite and watched the murders from his kitchen window, said he 'couldn't believe what I was seeing'.

The shocked local added: 'We were sat in our kitchen when we heard shots in the street, so we looked outside.

'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

'This is on the pavement across the road from my house. You don't witness a murder, two people killed right in front of you, every day. He was just shooting indiscriminately.'

By now armed police were on their way. But Davison, a crane driver whom relatives claimed had mental health problems but was unable to get help in lockdown, had not finished.

Still on Biddick Drive, he aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Ben's brother, Jordan, confirmed his brother and mother had been caught up in the carnage.

In a message posted on social media later, he said: 'Just a little update... Ben is now home and going to make a full recovery.

'My mum has to have an operation on her arm and is expected to make a full recovery.'

Peggy Holliday, an intern at the National Marine Aquarium in Plymouth, was walking to a shop when she heard screaming. There were also gunshots, which she thought initially were fireworks.

She said: 'A couple of the gunshots went off and I ran opposite a pub and the owner came out and he shouted at me, 'Get in here, get in here now!'

'I forward-rolled into the pub and I literally clung underneath one of the pool tables for dear life and I froze.

'I said, 'There's shooting, it's violent, it's terrifying'. It literally felt like a living nightmare. It felt like I was being hunted.'

Davison, who held a licence for the shotgun, entered a nearby strip of open land known to locals in the Keyham area of Plymouth as the 'dog park', where he shot Stephen Washington, 59, who was walking his two husky dogs. He died at the scene.

His friend Caitlin Greyling, 19, added: 'Paramedics were working on the woman. I could see them moving up and down as they did compressions on her chest.

'After a while they stopped and I thought maybe she has been saved, but she hadn't.' Police later confirmed Mrs Shepherd had died at Plymouth's Derriford Hospital.

Davison then doubled back to garages at the back of the hairdressers, where he put the gun to his own head and killed himself.

Another witness said: 'He just looked around, turned the gun on himself and fired it. I couldn't believe what I was seeing. It was like a horror movie.'

By then, police including armed officers from the nearby naval base had arrived in Biddick Drive, where they discovered a scene of carnage.

They quickly traced Davison's steps and found his body. He was pronounced dead at 6.23pm.

Survivor Bert Pinkerton told the BBC he had walked past the gunman, who had a 'vacant stare', adding: 'The bloke was walking towards me. I could smell the gunfire. It could have been me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twitter removed more than 1,900 racist, abusive tweets in the wake of England's Euro 2020 final defeat, the social media giant has revealed.

England players Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Bukayo Saka were racially abused online after missing penalties in the shootout against Italy at Wembley last month.

Now, Twitter said it had identified and removed 1,622 tweets during the final and in the 24 hours after the game - rising to 1,961 three days after the game.

It also said the majority of the abusive tweets were sent from the UK - though police reported that almost four times more of the criminal comments were posted from overseas.

The social media giant said racism was a 'deep societal issue' still also taking place offline, but acknowledged it needed to do better to make its platform safe and encouraged further collective action alongside government and football authorities.

Jadon Sancho (pictured), Marcus Rashford and Bukayo Saka were racially abused online after missing penalties in the shootout against Italy at Wembley last month.

The unit has made data requests to social media firms to progress and where there have been responses the information has been passed on to local police forces. Pictured: Manager Gareth Southgate hugs Bukayo Saka after he missed his shot

The message was posted on the page of Mr Bone shortly after three England players missed their penalties

In an update on its response to the incident, Twitter said it had put in place plans to 'quickly identify and remove racist, abusive tweets targeting the England team and wider Euros conversation' before the tournament.

The site and others have been accused of being slow to respond to online abuse and removing it, but Twitter said as a result of these plans, only 2% of the tweets removed following the final generated more than 1,000 impressions, or views, before being taken down.

It said it was continuing to work on ways to reduce the visibility of this type of content to ensure fewer people see it before it removed.

The company also said the UK was 'by far' the largest country of origin for the abusive tweets on the night of the final and the days that followed.

In response to the incident, some campaigners have called for ID verification to be introduced to social media to cut the spread of online abuse and help quickly identify those involved, but Twitter said its analysis suggests this would have been unlikely to prevent the abuse during the Euros from happening.

According to Twitter's data, 99% of the account owners it suspended during the tournament for abuse rule breaches were identifiable and not posting anonymously.

'Our aim is always that Twitter be used as a vehicle for every person to communicate safely - be it in highlighting injustice or giving a voice to those communities who have been historically under-represented,' Twitter UK said.

'There is no place for racist abuse on Twitter and we are determined to do all we can to stop these abhorrent views and behaviours from being seen on our platform.

Andrew Bone (left and right) called in Greater Manchester Police after a racist tweet was published on his Twitter account

'We can do better. We fully acknowledge our responsibility to ensure the service is safe - not just for the football community, but for all users.

'However, we also have to be honest that the progress we will be able to make alone would be magnified by greater interventions across the board.

'As long as racism exists offline, we will continue to see people try and bring these views online - it is a scourge technology cannot solve alone.

'Everyone has a role to play - including the government and the football authorities - and we will continue to call for a collective approach to combat this deep societal issue.'

Last week, police investigating the online racial abuse of England players following the Euro 2020 final have made 11 arrests so far.

The UK Football Policing Unit say its investigation team has received more than 600 reports from individuals, charities, clubs and other organisations across the country, and 207 were criminal in nature, with 34 accounts identified as being in the UK.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Health Secretary Sajid Javid admitted the Government’s own costs were too high and said its single post-holiday PCR test package will fall from £88 to £68

Ministers finally moved to tackle the travel testing rip-off last night – slashing the cost of their own Covid tests by a fifth in the hope private firms will follow.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid admitted the Government’s own costs were too high and said its single post-holiday PCR test package will fall from £88 to £68.

A two-swab NHS Test and Trace package will be cut from £170 to £136.

Mr Javid also accused some private testing firms of ‘acting like cowboys’ by advertising misleading prices on the Government website and vowed to boot them off within days.

But the changes were dismissed by the travel industry last night, with bosses saying the price cuts amounted to ‘tinkering’.

The head of Gatwick Airport said testing should be removed altogether for the double vaccinated to restore ‘shattered’ passenger confidence and help the industry through a desperate time.

Ministers were branded ‘hypocrites’ this week after repeatedly calling on private firms to drop their prices but failing to cut their own for summer.

The Mail reported on Thursday how the Department of Health was charging more than four times what the cheapest private provider was advertising on the Government’s website. This ratio has doubled from earlier this summer.

It is understood that officials do not want NHS Test and Trace travel swabs to dominate the market and hope the move will nudge private firms into bringing their own prices down so more families looking for a well-earned break can afford to go abroad.

Industry insiders have previously said the Government’s own prices have inflated the market and that they won’t bring down their own costs until ministers move first.

Officials will now also conduct a rapid review of the firms listed on the Government website and boot off any deemed to be ripping off or misleading consumers. The internal review will start this weekend and last ten days. Providers failing to meet necessary standards will be immediately removed.

It will run alongside the review being conducted by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), ordered by Mr Javid last week after a flood of complaints from customers about receiving swabs and results late or not at all.

This has led to some having to extend their quarantine period or even miss flights.

Announcing the latest moves, Mr Javid suggested he was expecting the CMA initial findings within days so swift action can be taken.

Officials will now also conduct a rapid review of the firms listed on the Government website and boot off any deemed to be ripping off or misleading consumers

He added: ‘I know how much people have looked forward to their summer holidays and that the cost of PCR testing can be a barrier to that. That is why I am determined to protect consumers and hard-working families from exploitative practices and ensure high quality tests are available at a reasonable price.

‘I am pleased to announce that with immediate effect we’re slashing the price of day 2 and 8 tests from NHS Test and Trace by a fifth – this will benefit people right across the UK...

‘I’ve also ordered my department to urgently review the list of private providers on gov.uk to ensure pricing is clearer and transparent.

‘Any provider found to be misleading the public will be kicked off. Too many providers are acting like cowboys and that needs to stop.

‘The public should be allowed to enjoy their summer holidays without having to face excessive costs or anxiety.’

There are more than 400 private firms listed on the Government’s website. Yesterday, the average price of a single PCR swab across them all was £90.

Prices are listed between £20 and £400.

However, as the Mail reported this week, the cheapest rates are often not realistically obtainable for many, as when clicking through to each firm’s website they are mostly out of stock or offered in centres, meaning many would have to travel hundreds of miles to take advantage of them. It is this practice that Mr Javid is looking to clamp down on.

There are more than 400 private firms listed on the Government’s website. Yesterday, the average price of a single PCR swab across them all was £90

However, the new Government price could still add more than £250 to the cost of a foreign break for a family of four.

For an unvaccinated family, it could add more than £500.

The travel industry last night dismissed the price cuts as ‘tinkering’ and said they ‘do not go anywhere near far enough’.

Karen Dee, CEO of the Airport Operators Association, said: ‘It is time for the Government to get a grip on testing and replace costly PCR tests with more affordable rapid tests for low-risk countries and bring international travel in line with the rest of the economy.’

Paul Charles, of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said: ‘Even with the changes, test costs are still far too high to restore confidence to travel, and also far higher than most European countries.

‘Providers who are making substantial profits during the pandemic are acting unethically when consumers are being forced to take these PCR tests by Government. It’s the policy that urgently needs reviewing, not just pricing.’

A guest holds a COVID testing kit at the window of the Radisson Blu hotel near Heathrow Airport, London, where they are undertaking a 10-day quarantine in the Government-designated quarantine hotel

Queen Elizabeth rules the waves again

By Transport Correspondent

The Queen Elizabeth took to the high seas yesterday for the first time since the start of the pandemic.

Holidaymakers boarding the ocean liner – one of Cunard’s most luxurious and spacious – hailed the voyage as the ‘beginning of the end of the pandemic’ for them.

Many said it was the first cruise they had been on since we were plunged into lockdown last year. Only the double-jabbed were allowed on board.

The sold out seven-day domestic voyage, which will take 800 passengers along the Jurassic Coast and around the Isles of Scilly before heading to Scotland, will return to Southampton next Friday.

It set off last night, marking the Queen Elizabeth’s first voyage since March last year. The liner boasts staterooms, suites, a plethora of restaurants and even a shop-lined promenade.

Passengers spoke of their elation to be back on the seas after so long. Tim Dillon, 74, and wife Kate, 71, from Hull, last went on a cruise two years ago.

Mr Dillon, who used to manage his own engineering firm, said: ‘We usually cruise four or five times a year but this is our first for two years and we are looking forward to getting back into it. It’s a big moment – the beginning of the end of the pandemic, or at least we hope so.’

He added: ‘We have to be double-vaccinated and we have to get a test now before we board. I don’t know how much safer you are going to get.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Survivors accused authorities of not giving them proper warning and allowing building inside flood zones

Advertisement

The death toll in Turkey's devastating flash floods has now climbed to 55 victims with hundreds more missing - as the country battles disaster on two fronts after eight more people died in a fire-fighting aircraft crash.

The country's official disaster agency AFAD said teams were combing through the rubble of dozens of homes that collapsed due to the floods that hit Black Sea regions after heavy rains.

It comes as southern Europe swelters in near record-breaking temperatures due to the 'Lucifer' heat dome.

The intense heat has sparked some wildfires in Spain, with emergency crews rushing to tackle blazes north of Madrid and near Valencia on the country's east coast.

Wildfires have been raging on hillsides along Turkey's southern coast areas, although some have since been brought under control.

In the Turkish village of Babacay in the northern province of Sinop, 40 houses and two bridges were completely destroyed by the floods, according to state news agency Anadolu.

The latest official death toll published Saturday by AFAD stood at 55, with nine other people in hospital.

Floods survivors accused local authorities of not giving them proper warning about the dangers of incoming storms and that several collapsed buildings had been built in flood zones.

Flash flooding in Turkey has claimed at least 55 lives, the country's official disaster agency AFAD confirmed last night. Pictured: Partly collapsed buildings are seen after the deadly flash floods in Bozkurt district of Kastamonu

Rescue teams were still combing through the rubble of dozens of homes that collapsed due to the floods that hit Black Sea regions after heavy rains

Floods survivors accused local authorities of not giving them proper warning about the dangers of incoming storms and that several collapsed buildings had been built in flood zones

In Bozkurt in Kastamonu province, one eight-storey building constructed on the banks of the Ezine river collapsed

Turkey was facing disasters on two fronts last night as the death toll for flash floods on the Black Sea coast rose to 55, and a fire-fighting plane crash killed eight in the country's south

In Bozkurt in Kastamonu province, one eight-storey building constructed on the banks of the Ezine river collapsed.

Footage shot by survivors showed furious river waters flooding the streets in just a few minutes, carrying off cars and traffic signs.

The government - which did not adopt the 2015 Paris climate accord - has denied that the sudden rise in water levels was linked to a hydro-electric power station further up the river.

Last night officials in Ankara and Moscow also announced that all eight people on onboard a Russian fire-fighting plane had perished on a mission to control the wildfires.

Russian President Vladimir Putin - who is battling 'unprecedented' wildfires in northeastern Siberia - sent condolences to his Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erodgan saying 'the pain of this loss unites us'.

Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu added: 'Condolences to our nation and to the Russian people. This heroic sacrifice will not be forgotten.'

In Moscow, the defence ministry said five Russian servicemen and three Turkish citizens were on board the Russian Be-200 plane that went down around midday.

Last night officials in Ankara and Moscow also announced that all eight people on onboard a Russian fire-fighting plane had perished on a mission to control the wildfires

Private news agency DHA said the plane crashed as it was fighting a forest fire in the inland Bertiz region. It said the cause of the crash had not yet been identified

The plane, which was carrying five Russian army personnel and three Turkish officers, was pictured in flames as it bellowed thick black smoke into the air

The plane, which was carrying five Russian army personnel and three Turkish officers, was pictured in flames as it bellowed thick black smoke into the air (Pictured: The amphibious Beriev BE-200 model)

Television footage showed a column of smoke rising from the remote mountainous zone in Turkey's south.

Turkey's defence ministry issued a statement saying the aircraft on loan from Russia had taken off from Adana to help extinguish fires burning in Kahramanmaras province.

A surveillance plane and a helicopter had been dispatched to the crash site, the ministry added.

Scientists believe natural disasters like the floods and wildfires are becoming more intense and frequent because of global warming caused by polluting emissions.

Spain is hit by wildfires as the country swelters in 116F heat on hottest day of the year so far - as 'Lucifer' heat dome puts 16 Italian cities on red alert

Intense heat is threatening to spark wildfires across Europe's southern coast today, as temperatures along the Mediterranean soared over 100F.

Spain endured its hottest day of the year so far, with temperatures topping 113F (45C), while authorities in Italy expanded the number of cities on red alert for health risks to 16, as a heatwave engulfed southern Europe.

The hottest temperature by late afternoon was recorded in Ecija, Seville, at 115.7F (46.5C), just shy of the country's all-time record of 116.42F (46.9C) hit in Cordoba in July 2017.

Europe's heat record came in Athens in 1977 at 118.4F (48C).

In Robledillo, a town just north of Madrid, fires broke in bushes and trees that threatened neighbouring houses.

Some 191 soldiers of the Spanish Emergency Unit were sent to help local firefighters to deal with the blaze.

There were also dramatic pictures from the village of Azuebar, near Valencia on Spain's east coast, where a helicopter was seen dumping payloads of water on a forest fire that started a day before. At least 500 hectares were destroyed in the fire and the village's residents had to be evacuated

In the southern Spanish province of Granada however, where the mercury rose to 114F (45.4C), few people ventured outside.

Those who did sought shade and stopped to take photos of public thermometers displaying the rocketing temperatures.

Intense heat is threatening to spark wildfires across Europe's southern coast today, as temperatures along the Mediterranean soared over 100F. Pictured: A resident battles flames in the town of Robledillo, central Spain

Dramatic pictures from the village of Azuebar, near Valencia on Spain's east coast, show a helicopter dumping payloads of water on a forest fire that started a day before. At least 500 hectares were destroyed in the fire and the village's residents had to be evacuated

Spain endured its hottest day of the year so far, with temperatures topping 113F (45C), while authorities in Italy expanded the number of cities on red alert for health risks to 16, as a heatwave engulfed southern Europe

Spain has endured its hottest day of the year so far, with temperatures hitting 113F (45C) across the country. The highest figure - 115.7F (46.5C) - was recorded in Ecija, Seville

Conditions however were manageable for people in Benidorm where hundreds took to the beaches

Floods in Turkey are the latest in a bout of extreme weather in the Mediterranean which has baked in blistering temperatures this week and which are expected to rise again on Friday as the 'Lucifer' heat dome continues to grip southern Europe

Ice cream parlours did a brisk trade, and some restaurants installed sprinklers to spray mists of water over sweating guests.

Miriam Garcia, a student, wished she had not stepped outside.

'It is very hot, we have to drink water and put on sun cream all the time, stopping to have a drink at a bar every so often,' she said. 'It would be better to be at home than in the street, it's so hot.'

Dominic Roye, a climate scientist at the University of Santiago de Compostela, said hot air from the Sahara Desert that has brought days of heat and fuelled hundreds of wildfires across Mediterranean countries shows no signs of ending any time soon.

'The heatwave we are experiencing now is very extreme and a lot of people are saying that it's normal, as we are in summer. But it's not, not this hot,' Mr Roye said.

With night-time temperatures forecast to exceed 77F (25C) in much of Spain, Roye worried about residents who cannot afford air conditioning and other vulnerable people, like the homeless or outdoor workers.

Ice cream parlours did a brisk trade, and some restaurants installed sprinklers to spray mists of water over sweating guests. Others searched for water fountains in Madrid (pictured)

Dominic Roye, a climate scientist at the University of Santiago de Compostela, said hot air from the Sahara Desert that has brought days of heat and fuelled hundreds of wildfires across Mediterranean countries shows no signs of ending any time soon. Pictured: A street thermometer in San Rafael bridge, Cordoba, hits 51C

A woman lies on a bench during a heatwave in Madrid, Spain yesterday

The intense heat is the result of a 'Lucifer' heat dome that continues to hold a grip over southern Europe

'The more intense the heat, the higher the mortality risk,' he said. 'When you have high night temperatures, our bodies are prevented from resting.

'The body is working and working to cool down. We have found a strong link between mortality and night temperatures exceeding 20C (68F).'

Authorities in Italy also raised concerns about older adults and other people at risk as they expanded heat warnings to 16 cities.

Temperatures over 110F were forecast for the Sicilian cities of Palermo and Catania, and as high as 98F (37C) for Rome, Florence and Bologna, all places that the health ministry put on red alert.

Italians sought respite at the sea and in the mountains from the aptly named Lucifer anti-cyclone that was bringing hot air from Africa during Italy's peak summer holiday weekend.

High temperatures were forecast to continue through Sunday, the traditional Ferragosto holiday on the religious feast of the Assumption of Mary, which marks the summer holiday exodus from Italian cities.

In Rome, drinking fountains provided relief, while authorities kept tourists away from ornamental fountains like the famed Trevi Fountain, fearing imitators of Anita Ekberg's soaking in the film La Dolce Vita.

'I put my head under the water at each fountain, drinking a lot, staying in the shade as much as I can,' said Alessia Pagani, who was visiting from the northern city of Brescia.

High humidity accompanied the high temperatures, making it feel even hotter. Storms in the north were forecast to bring the first signs of relief starting on Monday.

'More than anything else, fresh air from the Atlantic will bring a coolness and greater ventilation that will sweep away the humidity and make the air much more breathable,' Lt Col Filippo Petrucci of the Italian air force's weather service told RAI state TV.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Moment mechanic, 30, fled police at 70mph on the WRONG SIDE of busy North Circular road in London before losing control and dying when he hit a lorry

Kane Gardner, 30, was killed after crashing into a lorry while hurtling 70mph the wrong way down a dual carriageway during a police chase, a coroner's court has heard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: PICTURED: 'Kind and beautiful' woman, 32, killed when two buses crashed into pedestrians in London Victoria rush hour tragedy

A woman in her 30s has died and two people were hospitalised after a crash involving two buses outside Victoria Railway Station in London.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has backed the death sentence for doomed alpaca Geronimo.

Sir Keir said there was ‘no alternative’ but to kill the eight-year-old male over bovine tuberculosis fears despite pleas from campaigners.

‘It’s a really sad situation and you can see why emotions are running really high,’ he said.

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has backed the death sentence for doomed alpaca Geronimo. Pictured: Geronimo with his owner Helen MacDonald

Geronimo was condemned to death this month following a judicial review in the High Court. He had tested positive twice for bTB after he was given an Enferplex blood test.

His owner Helen MacDonald, 50, from Wickwar, Gloucestershire, has argued Geronimo was repeatedly dosed with primer Tuberculin which prompted false positive results.

Sir Keir said: ‘It’s always tragic when it happens. I don’t think we can make an exception in this case. Of course it’s sad – it’s sad for farmers as well when they lose their animals but we have to keep TB under control.’

The intervention comes amid a furious row between animal rights campaigners and the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.

Defra has insisted its test is accurate and refused to discuss the standoff.

Sir Keir said there was ‘no alternative’ but to kill the eight-year-old male over bovine tuberculosis fears despite pleas from campaigners

Under a High Court warrant it has 30 days to slaughter Geronimo.

Defra has repeated refused to retest Geronimo for bTB arguing its test is accurate despite the Daily Mail’s bombshell evidence of nine other camelids who were slaughtered following false positives for bTB.

Miss MacDonald said: ‘We are just asking to have him tested with something appropriate. I get they have policy to follow but there are other ways, and they don’t have to kill him.’

The Prime Minister’s spokesman said: ‘The fact remains that Geronimo has sadly tested positive twice using a highly specific and reliable and validated test.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Britain's daily Covid cases may already be flattening off, with official figures suggesting the uptick in infections over the past week was merely a blip.

Department of Health bosses today posted another 29,612 positive tests, up just 1 per cent on last week's figure (29,312). The rolling seven-day average — a more accurate barometer because day-to-day counts can fluctuate heavily — has also fallen for the first time since the end of July.

Scientists remain confused by the true state of the UK's third wave, which began to shrink naturally in mid-July before seemingly picking up pace again last week.

Meanwhile, data also hinted deaths may be close to peaking. Some 104 victims were added to the Government's official toll today, down 12.6 per cent on last week (119).

Fatalities always lag behind cases by several weeks because of how long it can take between getting infected and becoming seriously ill.

Covid hospitalisation figures are also delayed for the same reason, however they have already dipped and now appear to be creeping upwards in line with the recent increase in cases.

Another 712 coronavirus-infected patients needed NHS treatment on August 7, the most recent day statistics are available for. This was 6.6 per cent up on the week before.

The figures come after one of the Government's top scientific advisers claimed blanket lockdowns can no longer be justified as a way to control Covid as Britain moves towards living with the virus.

Professor Andrew Hayward, a University College London epidemiologist and SAGE member, said future restrictions to control outbreaks should 'target the most vulnerable', rather than involving disruptive restrictions imposed on everyone.

Covid restrictions came to an end in England last month and were eased in Scotland and Wales in the last few days, bringing an end social distancing laws and other rules.

No10's vaccine advisory panel made U-turn to recommend Covid jabs for 16 and 17 year olds because doctors were seeing more infected children getting seriously ill, expert claims The panel advising the Government on Covid vaccine policy U-turned to allow over-16s to have a jab because of a rise in the number of infected children getting seriously ill, one of the experts claimed today. Ministers announced the rollout would be extended to 16- and 17-year-olds last week, after the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) changed its tune on the policy. Previously, health chiefs were against inoculating teenagers amid fears over myocarditis — a rare heart condition being linked to Pfizer and Moderna's vaccines. But Professor Adam Finn, who sits on the JCVI, said the number of serious cases among young people in recent weeks merited a change in approach. NHS data shows around 20 Covid-infected children aged between six and 17 are being admitted to hospital every day currently. For comparison, the rate was in single figures until the start of July, when the third wave began to spiral rapidly. There were two days in May where no youngsters were hospitalised. The tiny numbers of children who become seriously ill is the main argument used by critics of No10's decision to expand the roll-out to youngsters. Data also suggests around one in 15,000 teenage boys given Pfizer's jab will develop myocarditis — which can lead to heart failure. It has raised concerns about the risk-benefit ratio for children, especially boys, who may be up to 14 times more likely to be struck down with the complication. But other scientists agree with the UK's move to vaccinate children, saying cases of the condition appear to usually be mild. Any increase in prevalence tips the risk-benefit balance in favour of jabs because the dangers posed by Covid are skewed higher. Professor Finn, a paediatrician at Bristol University, said while most young people will only have the virus in a mild form, the vaccines will be effective at preventing serious cases. Advertisement

In other Covid developments today:

The panel advising the Government on Covid vaccine policy U-turned to allow over-16s to have a jab because of a rise in the number of infected children getting seriously ill, one of the experts claimed;

Covid rates in classrooms were three-and-a-half times higher last autumn than they were this June when the third wave began to spiral, a Government-funded study revealed;

Heathrow recorded its highest monthly passenger total of the coronavirus pandemic in July, even though the number of travellers using the airport was still 80 per cent lower than before Covid;

Ministers may ban companies which mislead customers by promising cheap Covid tests, it was claimed after research showed holidaymakers buying travel tests face paying up to five times the amount advertised;

Britain has bought another 35million doses of Pfizer's Covid vaccine for next autumn's booster jab drive — but the deal will cost in the region of £1billion after the drug giant hiked its prices by a fifth.

Since Prime Minister Boris Johnson declared last month that it was time to learn to live with Covid, experts have hinted at what that may look like.

Yesterday, one of the country's top coronavirus experts Sir Andrew Pollard said Brits who do not have symptoms should no longer take routine tests.

Sir Andrew, chairman of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, told MPs swabs should only be offered if people are unwell to reduce the enormous disruption to daily life from mass testing, tracing and isolation.

And today, Professor Hayward said resorting to population-wide measures to control outbreaks will no longer be acceptable.

Asked about whether the UK could follow Germany's move to abolish free tests for asymptomatic people, Professor Hayward told BBC Radio 4's Today: 'I think as we generally move into an endemic rather than pandemic situation the potential harm that a virus can cause at a population level is much less.

'So you can't really justify such broad population-wide control measures and we tend to target the control measures more to those who are most vulnerable.

'And so I think, not only in testing but in all sorts of forms of control, as we move into a situation where we're coming to live with this virus forever, then we target the measures to the most vulnerable rather than having the more disruptive measures.'

It comes as Covid infections begin to rise across Britain once again, after cases fell for more than a fortnight.

Yesterday the UK's daily case load was 8.4 per cent up on the previous week, with 23,510 people testing positive.

But deaths and hospitalisations are still a fraction of the numbers seen in previous waves because of the success of the vaccines.

Professor Hayward's comments chime with a petition signed by more than 12,000 scientists and 115,000 members of the public in October, which called for an end to blanket lockdown restrictions.

The Great Barrington Declaration said young people should be allowed to return to life as normal while the elderly and most vulnerable are given 'focused protection'.

The declaration was written by Dr Martin Kulldorff from Harvard University, Dr Sunetra Gupta at Oxford University and Dr Jay Bhattacharya at Stanford University.

But No10 resisted the calls at the time, which came before life-savings jabs were available.

Ministers said they could not rely on the assumption that the virus would only 'rip' through younger age groups without putting more vulnerable people at risk.

Meanwhile, Sir Andrew, who helped develop the AstraZeneca jab, yesterday told the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus there should be a change to the testing regime.

He insisted herd immunity is 'not a possibility' because fully vaccinated people can still get infected and instead Britain must establish a strategy for 'living with Covid'.

Using lockdowns to control spread of Covid in future won’t be justified and efforts should focus on protecting the most vulnerable, SAGE adviser says Blanket lockdowns can no longer be justified as a way to control Covid as Britain moves towards living with the virus, one of the Government's top scientific advisers said today. Professor Andrew Hayward, a University College London epidemiologist and SAGE member, said future restrictions to control outbreaks should 'target the most vulnerable', rather than involving disruptive restrictions imposed on everyone. Covid restrictions came to an end in England last month and were eased in Scotland and Wales in the last few days, bringing an end social distancing laws and other rules. Since Prime Minister Boris Johnson declared last month that it was time to learn to live with Covid, experts have hinted at what that may look like. Yesterday, one of the country's top coronavirus experts Sir Andrew Pollard said Brits who do not have symptoms should no longer take routine tests. Sir Andrew, chairman of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, told MPs swabs should only be offered if people are unwell to reduce the enormous disruption to daily life from mass testing, tracing and isolation. And today, Professor Hayward said resorting to population-wide measures to control outbreaks will no longer be acceptable. Advertisement

Sir Andrew said: 'Over time we need to be moving to clinically-driven testing... where it’s people who are unwell who get tested and treated and managed, rather than lots of community testing in people who have very mild disease.'

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the "living with Covid".'

He added: 'What does that mean in terms of the surveillance that we're doing, the testing that we're doing, and also how we should manage patients in hospital or even before hospital in their treatment to try and stop them getting into hospital?

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the 'living with Covid'.

'That doesn't mean that we live with it and put up with it, we still have to manage those cases of patients who become unwell with it.'

Meanwhile, it was claimed today that Britain has bought another 35million doses of Pfizer's Covid vaccine for next autumn's booster jab drive.

Whitehall sources told The Times the deal will cost in the region of £1billion, after the drug giant hiked its prices by a fifth in response to demand.

Ministers already ordered an extra 60million doses for this year's campaign to give out third doses, which would be enough to give top-ups to all 54million British adults and fully vaccinate the 1.4million 16- and 17-year-olds who are now eligible.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid yesterday confirmed preparations were in place for the booster campaign to start next month.

But experts have repeatedly questioned whether they are even necessary.

One of No10's top scientific advisers today claimed top-ups may only be needed for anyone with a weak immune system, such as cancer patients, the elderly and transplant recipients.

Professor Adam Finn, who sits on the JCVI, said the evidence on whether all over-50s need them remains unclear.

Pfizer has insisted a third dose is necessary and BioNTech — the German firm which produces the vaccine — has said double-jabbed people need a top-up for a 'robust neutralization response'.

It comes after a study claimed Moderna's vaccine is better than Pfizer's at stopping people getting infected with the Delta variant.

One expert behind the research, by the US-based Mayo Clinic, argued Moderna's jab would be better for top-ups.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woman has revealed how she found out she was five months pregnant after taking a test as a joke when a sandwich left her size four physique feeling bloated.

Jasmin Miller, 24, from San Diego, California, bought a home pregnancy test kit for a laugh when a snack left her feeling full - and mother Erica joked she could be expecting.

But shockingly the test was positive and it was later confirmed that the then 22-year-old was five months pregnant - despite staying a svelte size four over that period of time.

Just three months later, at 32 weeks, social media manager Jasmin gave birth to her first child Leighton Skye Miller.

Jasmin Miller, 24, from San Diego, California, bought a home pregnancy test kit for a laugh when a snack left her feeling full - and mother Erica joked she could be expecting. Pictured left to right: Jasmin when six months pregnant, and with daughter Leighton

Shockingly the test was positive and it was later confirmed that the then 22-year-old (pictured when three months pregnant) was five months pregnant - despite staying a svelte size four over that period of time

Jasmin said: 'The reason I tested was the week prior, I was going to a concert, ate a sandwich and then blew up with bloat. I broke down immediately on seeing the tests and started bawling my eyes out.'

Jasmin didn't have a period throughout her pregnancy since she was on birth control, and while she was starting to need the bathroom more frequently, she put this down to having a urinary tract infection (UTI) and didn't think anything of it.

The new graduate also had severe cramping but was suffering from a stomach illness which she just associated her symptoms with.

Jasmin, who studied Communications at UCLA, said: 'I had a boyfriend that was not super serious and 100 per cent neither of us were ready to start a family.

Just three months later, at 32 weeks, social media manager Jasmin (pictured at her baby shower) gave birth to her first child Leighton Skye Miller

Jasmin didn't have a period throughout her pregnancy since she was on birth control, and while she was starting to need the bathroom more frequently, she put this down to having a urinary tract infection (UTI) and didn't think anything of it. Pictured, baby Leighton in hospital

The new graduate also had severe cramping but was suffering from a stomach illness which she just associated her symptoms with. Pictured, baby Leighton in hospital

'I remember one time he asked me if we could get a dog, and at the time my exact response was "A dog? That's like a 15 year commitment, what are we going to do? Ship it back and forth if we aren't together?"'

Normally a size six, the week she found out she was pregnant, Jasmin had actually lost weight and was down to a size four.

At the end of July 2019, Jasmin went to a Billie Eilish concert where she ate a tomato sandwich as a snack and quickly became extremely bloated.

She said: 'It was so abnormal, that I sent a picture to my mother and said something is wrong look how bloated I am. She jokingly said I looked pregnant based on where the bloat was. She was joking but said I should take a test just in case.'

At the end of July 2019, Jasmin went to a Billie Eilish concert where she ate a tomato sandwich as a snack and quickly became extremely bloated (pictured)

Jasmin (pictured at five months pregnant) and a friend went to a pharmacy and picked up two pregnancy tests to take as a joke

Jasmin and a friend went to a pharmacy and picked up two pregnancy tests to take as a joke and to ease her mother Erica's mind.

When the first one came up positive, she frantically took a second one, and then bought a third and fourth, only to get the same result.

Jasmin said: 'I was freaking out, had no clue what to do.'

She drove over to see her mother and told her in person, who also teared up at the news.

'She told me she was sad because she knew how hard it would be for me as she was a young single mom at 24 too,' said Jasmin.

Four days later, she visited the doctor for the first time for an ultrasound - and found out she was 19 weeks and five days along.

When the first one came up positive, she frantically took a second one, and then bought a third and fourth, only to get the same result. Pictured, Jasmin with Leighton

Four days later, the mother-of-one (pictured with her daughter) visited the doctor for the first time for an ultrasound - and found out she was 19 weeks and five days along

She said: 'I started laughing and bawling in the ultrasound room with the tech. I was completely by myself and was so scared. I was in complete shock, tons of disbelief, lots of denial.'

When she tried to tell the father - her ex-boyfriend who she had broken up with just two weeks prior - she claims he accused her of lying and that she hadn't been taking birth control.

Jasmin recalled: 'In the middle of me talking, he gets up, walks out of the car slams the door and doesn't look back. That's the last time I saw him while I was pregnant.'

The next 12 weeks were a whirlwind of preparations for her new arrival, but the expecting mother wanted to keep her pregnancy as much of a secret as she could.

She said: 'I hid my entire pregnancy from the world, because I was scared of being judged by the people I knew in high school. It's so embarrassing when I look back that I let those people prevent me from fully celebrating such a special time in life.'

On October 23 2019, Jasmin went into labour at 32 weeks pregnant - and just three days after her baby shower. Pictured left, Jasmin's mother Erica with Leighton (pictured right)

Leighton Skye Miller was born weighing 3lb 14.6oz and was rushed to NICU and remained there for two months until she was 6lbs. Pictured, a baby scan of Leighton

On October 23 2019, Jasmin went into labour at 32 weeks pregnant - and just three days after her baby shower.

Leighton Skye Miller was born weighing 3lb 14.6oz and was rushed to NICU and remained there for two months until she was 6lbs.

Jasmin said: 'After spending two months in the NICU and being with the nurses 12 hours of the day every day, I learned so much that I felt more ready when I left.

'They were able to teach me how to do diapers and bottles, what to do with choking, fainting, etc.

'Before having her, I felt ready and adjusted, but after having her, I felt so confused. It took forever for saying "my daughter" to feel semi-normal.'

Life for the little family is a lot easier now, and Jasmin chose to share her journey on her TikTok, @jasminandleighton, to help provide support to other young mothers.

The video of her explaining how she didn't know she was pregnant has over 800,000 views.

She said: 'It's crazy to imagine my life without her, and where I would be had she not come along. She makes me strive to be a better person every day.

'I think it's important to share your story with others when it can help other people going through a similar situation. I think sharing is such a powerful tool, and to see that life isn't perfect but its about what you make of it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The CEO of one of UK's largest car dealership groups said there's been 'a lot of change' at his company since appearing on Undercover Big Boss.

Robert Forrester, chief executive of Bristol Street Motors, one of the largest car dealership groups in the UK, decided to secretly watch his employees after expanding his business during the pandemic.

He posed as a history lecturer in search of a new career to film the global hit series, which has been rebooted for ITV after originally being aired on Channel 4.

Appearing on This Morning today, Robert said that after working among his employees he decided to enhance maternity pay, and introduce programmes to stop lack of 'confidence' blocking career progression.

Robert Forrester, chief executive of Bristol Street Motors, one of the largest car dealership groups in the UK, will appear on Undercover Big Boss tomorrow evening

Robert adopted the persona of history lecturer called Tom Gough, who was supposedly making a documentary about looking for a career change, post pandemic

'One thing we’ve done is enhanced maternity pay, that was something I don’t think we got completely right,' said Robert.

'The big finding for me was there was a lot of talented people, but they didn't have the confidence to progress their careers.'

Robert has since put in place leadership schemes to help employees advance in their career, but said that he wasn't 'majorly shocked' with any of his workers or company policies.

'We ended up at the end of the programme having a meeting seeing what was good, bad what we needed to sort out. Nothing majorly shocked me to be honest,' he said.

Appearing on This Morning today, Robert said that after working among his employees he decided to enhance maternity pay

He told hosts Eamonn Holmes and Ruth Langsford (left) he has put in place leadership schemes to help employees advance in their career, but said that he wasn't 'majorly shocked' with any of his workers or company policies

The four-part series will see bosses from across the UK roll up their sleeves and join workers on the bottom rung of the ladder, with the second episode airing tomorrow at 9pm.

With 149 dealerships across the UK and over 6,000 employees, Robert's company was selling one car every four minutes. When the pandemic hit, he was forced to close his dealerships and furlough the workforce.

But with other businesses downsizing, Robert took a gamble and purchased 30 new dealerships, investing millions of pounds of shareholders’ money.

To ensure his staff were working to the best of their ability, Robert adopted the persona of history lecturer called Tom Gough, who was making a documentary about looking for a career change, post-lockdown.

He revealed that while nobody questioned his appearance, his voice did give him away to a few employees while filming.

As a self-confessed ‘data geek’ who graduated from Oxford, Robert had never actually worked on the shop floor or sold a car in his life

At one point in the show, Robert was faced with employee Gervan who teared up over the difficulty to achieve his sales targets, revealing that 'nobody asked if he was okay' after not selling a car for nine months

As a self-confessed ‘data geek’ who graduated from Oxford, Robert had never actually worked on the shop floor or sold a car in his life.

At one point in the show, Robert is faced with an employee who tears up while opening up about the difficulty to achieve his sales targets, revealing that 'nobody asked if he was okay' after not selling a car for nine days.

'That was probably the trickiest moment of the programme', said Robert. 'Because he was upset. He’s actually a very talented sales guy, so we had to decide how to handle that.

When asked whether he was shocked to see the day-today of employees at his company, he replied: 'Not really.

'Im used to travelling around the dealerships and with the lockdown I hadn’t been able to, so I jumped at the chance I thought it was a fantastic opportunity.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The devastated wife of a man killed while defending their daughter from yobs has blasted his killers while adding that she's 'lost the heart of the family'.

Two boys, both 14, have been arrested after father-of-three Jamie Markham, 45, was knifed on his doorstep in Chingford, east London, on Monday night while protecting his daughter Chloe.

Now his wife Candice has revealed their family has lost its heart, while slamming the group of thugs for 'doing what they like'.

She said: 'They had metal poles, walking around with them. They were swinging them and shouting at my daughter. It’s absolutely devastating.

'I’ve lost the heart of the family. It’s just disgusting. It’s not the first time – you see them walking around and smashing bottles in the street, just doing what they like. My daughter didn't know them, one of her friends knew one of them from school.'

Neighbours say they spotted a teenage girl, who was wearing a grey vest top and leggings, being 'annoyed' by a group of boys she was with as it started raining heavily on Monday evening. They boys appeared to be swinging metal poles and shouting abuse at the girl.

One neighbour said she appeared to 'pull a face' and went to fetch her father, Mr Markham, who had just finished walking the family's pet dog. He then confronted the group of boys and was brutally stabbed, police say.

His heartbroken wife was apparently heard screaming when she found the 'kind family man' fatally wounded outside their home.

On Wednesday, a 14-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of his murder and a second boy, also 14, was arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to murder.

Tributes have now been left to Mr Markham and a family friend, who was tearful as she approached the scene of the stabbing today and did not want to be named, said: 'He was my friend, my neighbour. He was kind, a lovely man, a worker.

'He would wake up at 5am, come back 6pm, doing the daily routine with the kids, always with the kids.'

She added: 'We are devastated for Jamie. He was kind, a good person, someone who will always be there for you.

'Anything that you need, he'll always be there, fixing anything that you need from the house. He was always working. He was a very good person, a man with a good heart, a good soul, he didn't deserve that.'

Jamie Markham, 45, (middle) was knifed in Chingford, east London, by thugs who were reportedly swinging metal poles and shouting abuse at his daughter Chloe, 17

Despite the efforts of London Ambulance Service, the father-of-three was pronounced dead at the scene in Chingford Mount

A murder investigation is underway after a man was stabbed to death at the mount in Chingford on Monday evening

Bouquets of flowers and a card were laid in a parking area on Churchill Terrace, where the incident happened and where one police officer remained patrolling on Thursday.

A note with one bouquet read: 'Thinking of you all. You will be in our thoughts and prayers. Much love. 37th Chingford Scout Group xx.'

Detective Inspector John Marriott, of the Met's Specialist Crime Command, said: 'We believe that James confronted a group of youths causing a disturbance and was stabbed as a result.

'The brutality of this response is beyond shocking and our thoughts are with James' family who have been left devastated by their loss.

'The arrests of these two individuals is a significant development but we still need the public's help to build a full picture of exactly what happened on Monday evening.

'I know that there were a number of people present at the time of the murder. I want them to come forward.

'I also believe there will be parents who know that their child was there, or was involved. I am appealing for them to do the sensible thing and get in touch with us.

'A dedicated team of officers is working to piece together the tragic circumstances that led to this murder and to bring those responsible to justice.'

Despite the efforts of London Ambulance Service, Mr Markham was pronounced dead at the scene in Chingford Mount.

The area has now been cordoned off by police and detectives from the Metropolitan Police's Specialist Crime Command have launched a murder inquiry.

It came as bouquets of flowers were today left in tribute to the father, whose death has left the local community in shock.

A neighbour said 'the entire street could hear the screams' of Mr Markham's partner when he died.

Mr Markham's wife Candice (left with daughter Chloe) said she found the 'kind family man' fatally wounded outside their home

Neighbours have claimed Jamie Markham came out of his flat to defend his daughter

A man, who was sat in his car at the time, said he saw a group of eight or nine teenage boys 'run up and down' the street, but did not see the stabbing.

He said: 'I saw hooligans running up and down this way and that way.

'The police have got my dash cam because I was sitting in the car at the time.

'It was hammering down so you couldn't hear much of anything.

'I was shocked, especially seeing police doing CPR on him. I didn't realise who it even was until later.'

His partner, who also declined to be named, said: 'He was a family guy.

'He never bothered us, he just got on, and kept himself to himself and walked the dogs.

'He would come out of his place and be peacefully on his own. A day or two ago I saw him with his son chatting away.

'Yesterday everyone was just shell-shocked.'

She added: 'It's just heartbreaking when you think of it. His life is gone. Whoever done it, they've ruined the partner's life, the kids' life.

'He was the breadwinner of the family. It gets me that people think this is acceptable. People think that it's normal. I just think what do their family think they do when they get out and about?'

Alice McGill, 78, said she had spoken to neighbours about what happened.

The area has now been cordoned off by police and detectives from the Metropolitan Police's Specialist Crime Command have launched a murder inquiry

She said: 'All I know is that this girl was hanging out with these boys, one of them said something silly.

'She then went to go and get her father and her father came out and he died.

'It's a tragedy because this young girl is going to have to live with that for the rest of her life.

'It's not her fault. This girl was a proper daddy's girl - the poor, poor girl.'

Kerrie-Ann Lambert, 32, a mum of three, said: 'I was on my way back from the shops when I saw a large group of teenage boys and one girl wearing leggings and a grey vest top.

'It started really chucking it down and I was looking at the girl and I thought, 'wow you're going to get pneumonia'.

'There were loads of boys. There was one girl. It looked like a herd.

'I thought, should I offer her a jacket? I wish I had intervened.

'I thought it was a bit weird because it was one girl with a bunch of boys. I kept an eye on her for 10 minutes because I thought is she happy, is she safe with them? Is she being picked on by them?

'She seemed fine to me at first, but then I think one of the boys said something to her and she pulled a face. She looked like she'd been annoyed and she wanted to go home or something, but I'm not too sure.'

'I went home because it started chucking it down and I had to get dinner on.

'Later I just heard those screams. We all felt distraught and knew someone must have passed away.

'One of the police officers said that people can't come out this way because they're operating on him now.'

Ms Lambert added: 'I'm very upset about it. All he was doing was protecting his daughter.

'These boys thought they were big people and decided to play God.

'I've moved here to get away from all of this, it's ridiculous. I let my kids play where there's a swing.

'I'm worried they might see something. It's traumatic. I know no one is going to stab a nine year old or a 10-year-old.

'But it's disgusting. I feel really sorry for that lady and that family. Someone woke up with no dad yesterday.'

'I hope that person feels sorry for what they've done.

'One day you're going to have a daughter and someone is going to say something crap to her, and you're going to know what it's like to want to defend her. It's horrible. I really do hope the police find this person because they deserve to be put away.'

The Met Police said officers were called at 6.20pm on Monday night to reports of a disturbance in Churchill Terrace, Chingford.

They found Mr Markham there suffering with stab wounds but paramedics were unable to save him. His next of kin have been informed and are being supported by specially trained officers.

Detective Inspector John Marriott, said: 'A dedicated team of officers are working to piece together the tragic circumstances that led to this man losing his life.

'The thoughts of all of us are with his family and friends as they come to terms with their loss.

'We have already spoken to a number of key witnesses and recovered CCTV from the area, although I would like to hear from anyone else who witnessed the attack, or a disturbance beforehand.'

Chief Superintendent Richard Tucker, responsible for local policing in Waltham Forest, said: 'The Met remains committed to tackling violence across London and I would like to reassure the community that we will do everything we can to track down those responsible for this attack.

'I understand the concern this incident will cause and I would like to reassure residents that you will continue to see additional officers in the area over the coming days.

'I would urge you to speak with them about any concerns you have.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The shark was then seen thrashing wildly from side to side and its body was almost entirely out of the water at one stage

Video footage shows beachgoers watching on as the shark swam in waters

Swimmers rushed to the shore after the blue shark appeared by Poniete Beach

Holidaymakers relaxing on a beach in Benidorm were forced to flee after an eight-foot long blue shark was spotted in the shallow waters.

Horrified swimmers rushed to the shore after the huge shark appeared in the sea by Poniente Beach, just yards away from them.

Video footage shows terrified beachgoers watching on as the blue shark swam in the shallow waters, with its fin clearly visible.

The creature was then seen thrashing wildly from side to side and its body was almost entirely out of the water as it touched the sand.

Police officers who were called to the scene on Thursday can be heard telling the beachgoers to stand back, before the shark eventually swam back into the shallow waters.

Horrified British swimmers rushed to the shore after the huge shark appeared in the sea by Poniente Beach, in Benidorm just yards away from them

Local police officers sent a helicopter and two police boats, and officers could be seen watching the shark from the vessels. Above: Coast guards wrestle with the blue shark

Police officers who were called to the scene on Thursday can be heard telling the beachgoers to stand back, before the shark eventually swam back into the shallow waters

British tourist Christine Kettley, 36, who was sunbathing with her family when she spotted the shark, told The Sun: 'This shark was massive, it was about 8ft long and jerking around in the water.'

The mother-of-three added: 'You wouldn't want to go anywhere near it or make it angry as it was large enough to cause someone serious injury.

'It was just swimming around where everyone had been paddling.

'Police and lifeguards rushed to the beach and immediately started getting people out of the water.'

Video footage shows terrified beachgoers watching on as the blue shark swam in the shallow waters, with its fin clearly visible. The creature was then seen thrashing wildly from side to side and its body was almost entirely out of the water as it touched the sand

Horrified swimmers rushed to the shore after the huge shark appeared in the sea by Poniete Beach, just yards away from them

What is a blue shark? Blue sharks are considered to be dangerous and have been known to be responsible for attacks on ship and air disaster victims. Blue sharks can grow to 13ft and 400lbs and are found in oceans across the world, especially the Atlantic but they do venture into British waters during the summer months and are usually spotted around the South West. It is an open-ocean species and reaches up to 3.8m in length. The shark, which has a metallic blue back, is listed as Near Threatened globally and is a Priority Species in the UK. They feed mostly on squid and small fish but can also eat smaller sharks and seabirds. Blue shark attacks on humans are extremely rare but have been recorded. Blue sharks have been thought to have been involved in just 13 biting incidents with only four of those being fatal since 1580. The largest blue shark ever recorded in Britain's waters weighed 256lbs and measured over 9ft. Source: The Wildlife Trusts Advertisement

Christine, who is from Great Dunmow in Essex, UK, added: 'It's been going up and down the coast all day and has come in really close to the beach.'

Local police officers sent a helicopter and two police boats, and officers could be seen watching the shark from the vessels. Others had formed a line on the beach to block holidaymakers from getting close to the shark.

Blue sharks can grow to 13ft and 400lbs and are found in oceans across the world, especially the Atlantic but they do venture into British waters during the summer months.

Blue sharks, which rarely attack humans, are registered as near threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

Last month, a British postman came face-to-face with a huge blue shark while snorkelling off the coast of Cornwall.

Martin Yelland, 38, was diving just off the coast of Penzance when the blue shark swam straight towards him.

It stuck around for about an hour, before being scared off by a pod of 80 dolphins. Mr Yelland, who lives in St Erth, Cornwall, takes wildlife photographs in his spare time. He said: 'It was a really memorable encounter.

'I was apprehensive the evening before the shark snorkel, but once I saw the shark I was just amped to get in the water as they were so graceful and inquisitive.

'At no stage did I feel frightened, the sharks were curious but in no way aggressive.'

He added: 'The blue sharks come so close you sometimes need to get out of their way, as we were told never to touch them.'

Widespread fishing poses a risk to the population of blue sharks although the sharks' wide range buffers it from the effect of heavy fishing pressure. Despite this, population declines have been noted.

Its flesh is not highly valued but its fins are, meaning many Blue Sharks are finned at sea and subsequently discarded.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Thousands of desperate Afghans are gathering at Kabul airport in chaotic scenes after the Afghan capital fell to the Taliban who have announced a new 'Islamic Emirate'.

US troops are guarding the airport but all non-military flights are grounded after gunfire was heard nearby and while American personnel take over air traffic control.

US forces fired in the air at Kabul's airport on Monday to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac, a US official said.

'The crowd was out of control,' the official told Reuters by phone. 'The firing was only done to defuse the chaos.'

Hundreds of Afghans have jammed the airport trying to get out of the country after Taliban insurgents entered the capital on Sunday.

Video from Kabul showed panicked stampedes to the gates of the airport, while some passengers were forced to get off their commercial flights when departures were stopped.

Hundreds of passengers were filmed thronging the tarmac by Afghan businessman Shoaib Barak who said he was forced to get off his KamAir flight after boarding and heard gunfire.

The speed of the Taliban advance has taken almost everyone by surprise and Afghans who had booked commercial flights to escape the Taliban face being forced to remain in Afghanistan.

Westerners will be evacuated by their home nations on military flights but the Taliban has said that it will not allow Afghan citizens to leave.

Tens of thousands of interpreters and officials who helped the Western-backed Afghan government are desperate to escape the country for fear of reprisals by the Taliban.

On Sunday the US led more than 65 nations in urging the resurgent Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

'The United States joins the international community in affirming that Afghans and international citizens who wish to depart must be allowed to do so,' Secretary of State Antony Blinken wrote on Twitter as the State Department released a statement signed by its close allies. 'Those in positions of power and authority across Afghanistan bear responsibility - and accountability - for the protection of human life,' the joint statement said.

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running (pictured: Scenes at Kabul airport)

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

Pictured: Chaotic scenes at Kabul airport as Taliban insurgents enter Kabul amid a withdrawal of western forces

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

Scenes from the Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul are pictured above

Pictured: Scenes at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban enter Afghanistan's capital

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running.

Following a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergencies committee, Boris Johnson his priority was to get UK nationals and Afghans who had worked with them out of the country 'as fast as we can'.

Boris Johnson urges the West NOT to recognise Taliban government Boris Johnson is urging western countries to not recognise the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan and says the country must not become a 'breeding ground for terror', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Following an emergency meeting of Cobra yesterday, Mr Johnson called for a 'united position among the like-minded' and said it was 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' He told Sky News: 'We don't want anybody bilaterally recognising the Taliban, we want a united position amongst all the like-minded, in as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into being a breeding ground for terror.' Advertisement

'We are going to get as many as we can out in the next few days,' he said.

Around 4,000 British nationals and eligible Afghans are thought to be in the city and in need of evacuation.

When the Operation Pitting rescue operation, involving 600 troops, was announced at the end of last week, Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said it could carry on through the rest of the month.

However the speed of the Taliban advance suggests that there may only be a short window of a few days to get people out.

In a sign of the desperate situation the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow was said to be helping the small team of diplomats still in the country to process the applications of those hoping to leave.

There was particular concern for the safety of Afghans who worked with British forces when they were in the country as interpreters and other roles amid fears of reprisals if they fall into the hands of the insurgents.

The Taliban insisted that they were seeking a peaceful takeover of power and were prepared to offer an amnesty to those who had worked with the Afghan government or with foreign governments.

However those assurances were being treated with deep scepticism by many British MPs amid reports of threats to those who remain and their families.

Heavily armed Taliban fighters fanned out across the capital, and several entered Kabul's abandoned presidential palace. Suhail Shaheen, a Taliban spokesman and negotiator, said that the militants would hold talks in the coming days aimed at forming an 'open, inclusive Islamic government.'

But he refused to guarantee that Afghans would be allowed to leave the country, telling the BBC: 'We need all Afghans to stay'. He said Taliban forces would not attack NATO teams overseeing evacuations, but said aid organisations and foreign embassies should stay, saying 'We won't hurt them'.

Boris Johnson has vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country as the Taliban stood poised to take control of the capital Kabul.

With President Ashraf Ghani fled, and insurgent fighters surrounding the capital, the Prime Minister said the situation was 'extremely difficult'.

After chairing a meeting of the Government's Cobra contingencies committee he said the UK was determined to work with allies to prevent the country again becoming a 'breeding ground for terror'.

Britain has sent 600 troops - including Paras from 16 Air Assault Brigade - to assist in the operation.

Meanwhile other Western countries were scrambling to get their people out, with helicopters shuttling from the US embassy to the airport while smoke was seen coming from the embassy rooftop as diplomats burned sensitive material.

Two sources familiar with the situation at the airport could not confirm the reports of firing there, amid an exodus of Americans, their local allies and other foreigners.

Secretary of State Antony Blinken had said earlier on Sunday that U.S. embassy staff were ferried by helicopter from the diplomatic compound to the airport, about 5 km (3 miles) away on the northeastern side of the city.

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

'We're working to make sure that our personnel are safe and secure. We're relocating the men and women of our embassy to a location at the airport,' Blinken told ABC news.

Asked if the evacuation was evocative of the U.S. departure from Vietnam in 1975, he said: 'Let's take a step back. This is manifestly not Saigon.'

Sources told Reuters that most U.S. staff were expected to be evacuated from Kabul in the coming day or two.

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running.

France and Germany, members of NATO, said on Sunday they were moving their diplomats to the airport and sending military transport planes to Kabul to evacuate their citizens and their Afghan helpers.

A U.S. intelligence assessment earlier in the week had said Kabul could be encircled in 30 days and could fall to the Taliban within 90 days, but the insurgents captured most of Afghanistan's major cities in less than a week and entered the capital on Sunday.

Some 4,200 people remained in the U.S. embassy until Thursday, when the Taliban's rapid gains forced the Biden administration to begin flying in thousands of troops to help pull out many of the remaining diplomats.

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

UK military personnel boarding an RAF Voyager aircraft at RAF Brize Norton on August 14, 2021 to travel to Afghanistan

People wait at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban roll back into the country's capital

Taliban are seen inside the presidential palace in Kabul amid a withdrawal of western forces

The deployment included an additional 1,000 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division, who President Joe Biden said on Saturday would help evacuate citizens and ensure an 'orderly and safe' drawdown of U.S. military personnel.

On Sunday, U.S. officials said they were weighing whether more troops were needed. Another 3,000 are on standby in Kuwait.

Washington invested billions of dollars over four U.S. administrations in Afghan government forces, giving them advantages over the Taliban, but they were unable to defend the country in the face of the militants' advance, Blinken told CNN.

The United States' original mission in Afghanistan, launched to oust al Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, had been fulfilled, Blinken said, saying Washington had prevented further attacks by militants harbored by the Taliban.

But Biden has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to the plan to withdraw, which was agreed under his Republican predecessor Donald Trump. On Saturday, Biden defended his decision, saying an 'endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me'.

Republican lawmaker Michael McCaul said a Taliban takeover would revive the threat to the United States.

'We are going to go back to a pre-9/11 state. A breeding ground for terrorism,' he told CNN on Sunday.

Biden met with his national security team on Sunday by secure videoconference from the presidential retreat at Camp David to hear updates on evacuations and the security situation, a White House official said.

U.S. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, a Democrat like Biden, said at a news conference that the safety of U.S. personnel and of Afghans who supported the Americans should be Washington's top concern.

'Job number one is for us to bring back, first, all American personnel ... But second, all of the brave Afghans who helped our military, they have to be provided an exit to come to America,' Schumer said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Ben Wallace: From Sandhurst to Defence Secretary Ben Wallace had a proud military career before going into politics, having seen service in Northern Ireland, Germany, Cyprus and Central America. He attended the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst before being commissioned as an Officer into the Scots Guards, and was mentioned in dispatches in 1992 for helping to foil an IRA bomb plot. Mr Wallace then first entered politics as a Member of the Scottish Parliament in 1999, before moving to Lancashire and being elected to the UK House of Parliament in 2005. He worked as Parliamentary Private Secretary to Ken Clarke QC, as Justice Secretary, and has served as a whip, the Northern Ireland Minister and more recent as the UK’s longest serving Security Minister. In July 2019 he was appointed Defence Secretary, and his responsibilities include strategic operations and operational strategy, including as a member of the National Security Council. He is also responsible for strategic international partnerships with the US, France, Germany, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, and NATO. Advertisement

Ben Wallace choked up today as he vowed to fly hundreds of desperate Afghans out of the country within the next 36 hours - but insisted sending UK troops back in is not 'on the cards'.

The Defence Secretary was overcome with emotion as he talked about the consequences of the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army, after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace.

He said the crisis had become inevitable after a deal was struck with the extremists and the US pulled out, and the focus was now on evacuating British nationals, interpreters and others who might be subject to reprisals.

But he conceded that 'some people won't get back'. 'It is sad the West has done what it has done,' he said. 'Twenty years of sacrifice.. is what it is.'

Mr Wallace - who himself served in the military before entering politics - said he felt the issue so deeply because he was a soldier.

The comments came amid rising fury about the dramatic developments in Afghanistan, after Joe Biden stepped up the timetable for withdrawing US troops.

Around 4,000 British nationals and eligible Afghans are thought to be in Kabul and in need of evacuation.

Some 700 UK personnel are deployed at the airport, with Mr Wallace insisting the key areas are still secure despite chaotic scenes and reports of several people being killed when they fell from aircraft. The US has 5,000 troops in place.

In a sign of the desperation, the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow is believed to be helping the small team of diplomats still in the country to process the applications of those hoping to leave.

There is particular concern for the safety of Afghans who worked with British forces when they were in the country as interpreters and in other roles amid fears of reprisals if they fall into the hands of the insurgents.

Tories have accused ministers of displaying 'boredom' in their attitude towards the long-running military campaign, branding the defeat the worst foreign policy setback since Suez.

As the drama intensified today:

Footage showed several apparent stowaways tumbling from planes taking off from the Kabul airport;

The UN Security Council is due to meet this afternoon to consider the response to the situation with Boris Johnson urging a 'unified' stance;

Dominic Raab is attending a Cobra session as he faces a backlash for staying on holiday as Afghanistan plunged into turmoil;

The UK's ambassador is still in the Afghan capital as officials try to process as many applications for refuge as possible;

Chevening scholars from Afghanistan could be given refuge despite being told their visas were being deferred until next year.

Defence Secretary Ben Wallace admitted he was 'sad' at the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace

Taliban fighters have been posing in the presidential palace in Kabul after taking charge

There has been chaos at the airport in the capital as desperate people try to flee the country

Boris Johnson has agreed to recall Parliament as he faces the fury of Tory backbenchers over Britain's 'humiliation' in Afghanistan

Scramble to evacuate as UK pledges visas Afghans whose lives are at risk from the Taliban will be able to come to Britain. Government sources said the Home Office will set up a specific new visa route for those fleeing turmoil in the country. 'We will make sure there is a bespoke route for Afghans in need,' said a Home Office source. 'We'll ensure that we are leading the world on that.' Exact details of the resettlement scheme had not been finalised last night but the source insisted it would be 'generous'. It is understood that the visa scheme will be closely based on an existing project run from 2014 to March this year that brought 20,000 Syrians to the UK with refugee status. Advertisement

Former national security adviser Lord Sedwill said it was an 'humiliating' moment for the West and warned terror groups would be 'emboldened'.

The peer told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'This is a humiliating moment for the West.

'Afghan citizens are fearful, extremists everywhere will be emboldened, they've been quieter since the end of Islamic State - they will be emboldened.'

The Taliban insist they are seeking a peaceful takeover of power and will not persecute those who had worked with the Afghan government or with foreign forces.

However those assurances were being treated with deep scepticism by many British MPs amid reports of threats to those who remain and their families.

Labour has called on the Government to urgently expand the resettlement scheme for Afghans to ensure that none were left behind.

Boris Johnson has agreed to recall Parliament this week as he faces the fury of Tory backbenchers over Britain's 'humiliation' in Afghanistan.

MPs will hold a five-hour debate on Wednesday – the first time that they have been called back from their summer recess since 2013.

But the move was dismissed as too little, too late now that the Taliban has already seized control – with one senior Tory calling Afghanistan's collapse 'the biggest single policy disaster' since the Suez Crisis in 1956.

The Prime Minister appeared to blame the US. He said it was 'fair to say the US decision to pull out has accelerated things, but this has in many ways been a chronicle of an event foretold ... we've known for a long time that this was the way things were going.'

Pressed on whether there was any prospect of troops returning to Kabul, Mr Wallace told Sky News: 'No, look that's not on the cards that we're going to go back.'

He added: 'The US have made itself clear that they're not intending to stay and as the framework nation that leaves us with difficult choices and I've been pretty much honest about that all the way through this process.'

On the airlift of British nationals, he added: 'The military flights are coming in and out, they've just brought in more UK soldiers.

Ex-Nato chief says Raab's holiday amid Afghan crisis 'staggering' A former Nato chief has said they are 'staggered' Dominic Raab was on holiday as Afghanistan fell to the Taliban. Lord Robertson, a Labour minister before becoming secretary-general of the military alliance said the situation had not been taken 'seriously'. 'You've got to be on duty during that sort of period where we are so deeply and intimately involved in it,' he told the BBC's Good Morning Scotland programme. Looking at the British handling of the war in Afghanistan in the past 20 years, the former Nato secretary-general said: 'We bear a big responsibility ourselves. 'We never really took Afghanistan and the conflict there with the seriousness that it demanded. 'We sent people into danger, troops into danger and people died and yet we were not fully, it would appear, committed to the campaign that was going on there. 'I've been critical all along about our country not taking this situation seriously and now the chickens have come home to roost and we're facing a humiliation and a disaster for all of our people.' Advertisement

'Border Force is joining us to make sure that we accelerate the process to get more Afghans out, which is our obligation. We flew out 370 staff and British citizens, eligible personnel yesterday and the day before and we'll continue to engage those flights.

'The next group of Afghans to come out will be 782 and we'll make sure we get them in the next 24 to 36 hours out of the country and are continuing to process those people.'

He went on: 'My job as as defence secretary is to make sure that we protect not only the UK nationals, but those Afghans we have an obligation to, that is actually why we're in the country. For the last few weeks we've been in the country solely to process those people and to make sure we protect our officials doing that job and we'll continue to do so.'

Mr Wallace - who was a captain in the Scots Guards and saw service in Northern Ireland - told BBC Breakfast it will not be possible to get everyone out of Afghanistan, with the previous August 31 evacuation timetable now in tatters.

'With the US' removal of the framework, the military might and the speed of the Afghan government collapse, it's simply not possible for us to send small bands of troops miles into Afghanistan to find people if they're not able to be found,' he said.

'It is a deep regret that we have gone to a position we have, I haven't hidden that over the last few weeks. We are doing everything we can to get those people out.'

Asked if translators who have helped British citizens are eligible to come to the UK, he said: 'Yes, they are. People who are eligible are people who have worked for us in what we call public-facing roles, people who've worked for us but are not in public-facing roles, contractors and third parties … and any other special cases.'

Outlining the process of checking people who are being flown to the UK from Afghanistan, he added: 'We do have to make sure that some of the people we're bringing back aren't affiliated to either a terrorist organisation or the Taliban, which, I'm afraid, a very, very small number have been.

'They might not have worked for us for 10, 12, 15 years, so we have to see that they are right. We're doing our very best to make sure we do not discriminate against those people who are fully legitimate to come here.'

Challenged that the Taliban had 'won', Mr Wallace said: 'I don't know about a win, I think, I acknowledge that the Taliban are in control of the country. You don't have to be a political scientist to spot that's where we're at.'

Last night Mr Johnson vowed to work with allies to prevent Afghanistan again becoming a 'breeding ground for terrorism'.

After chairing a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee, he admitted the situation in the country was 'extremely difficult' and was 'getting more difficult'.

In an apparent admission that the West is now powerless to resist the Taliban takeover, the Prime Minister said he wanted a co-ordinated response to the coup 'in the coming months'.

He called on the international community to not 'prematurely' recognise any new government without agreement amid fears that Russian or China could unilaterally move to endorse the regime.

'We want a united position among all the like-minded, as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into a breeding ground for terror,' he said after meeting Team GB's Olympic heroes at an event in Wembley.

Taliban commander 'spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay' A Taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a triumphant speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan after the country's president joined thousands of Afghan nationals in a mass exodus. Taliban fighters marched into the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos, with US helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War. There were chaotic scenes at Kabul airport where thousands of desperate Afghans are gathering in an attempt to flee the country. Fighting and stampedes broke out between passengers before commercial flights were stopped and only military planes departed the terminals which are now guarded by US troops. The Al-Jazeera news channel livestreamed the press conference from inside the palace, which showed a group of Taliban fighters sitting at the President's desk before a fighter claimed he was a former inmate of the US-controlled Guantanamo Bay detention centre in Cuba. Established by George W Bush in 2002, suspected terrorists have been detained without trial and tortured at the facility. Donald Trump signed an executive order to keep the centre open indefinitely in 2018, while in February the Biden administration vowed to shut Guantanamo down. A spokesman for the Taliban's political office told Al-Jazeera TV on Sunday that the war is over in Afghanistan and that the type of rule and the form of regime will be clear soon. Advertisement

'What we're dealing with now is the very likely advent of a new regime in Kabul. We don't know exactly what kind of a regime that will be. What we want to do is make sure that we as the UK pull together our international partners, our like-minded partners, so that we deal with that regime in a concerted way.'

The Prime Minister, who yesterday held calls with Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg and the UN secretary general Antonio Guterres, said there should be meetings of Nato's North Atlantic Council and the UN Security Council as soon as possible.

But senior Tories have voiced anger at the way Afghanistan has been abandoned to its fate, 20 years after international forces entered the country.

Former defence secretary Dr Liam Fox said: 'The situation in Afghanistan has all the elements of a strategic disaster.

'A democratic government removed by military force, a Taliban-enforced brutal Islamic State and the door opening again for Al Qaeda and similar groups who will threaten our safety and security.'

Tom Tugendhat, chairman of the Commons foreign affairs committee, said that the country's collapse was 'the biggest single policy disaster since' the Suez Crisis in 1956. The Tory MP, who served as an Army officer in Afghanistan, said the priority had to be to get as many people out of Kabul as possible.

'The real danger is that we are going to see every female MP murdered, we are going to see ministers strung up on street lamps,' he told BBC News.

Tobias Ellwood, a former captain in the British Army and chairman of the defence select committee, criticised the West for pulling out of Afghanistan.

Appearing on Sky News, he said: 'The world is now a little bit more dangerous because they've now taken control of the country, and the West should really hang its head in shame after abruptly abandoning Afghanistan to a civil war after two decades of effort.'

He added: 'This is not a good day for the West at all, and China will be observing things very, very closely indeed. They are already making alliances with the Taliban and glossing over the human rights atrocities that are likely to unfold.'

MPs who want to speak at the debate will have to be in the chamber as virtual arrangements are no longer in place. Peers will also hold an emergency sitting in the Lords.

The last time MPs were recalled during summer recess was in 2013 following the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

MARK ALMOND: This Afghanistan disaster will fuel fresh terror in West

By Mark Almond for the Daily Mail

As the West's orderly withdrawal from Afghanistan yesterday degenerated into a panic-stricken race for the exits, the question is: How on earth did the Taliban succeed in defeating a much larger army, with far superior weaponry, in such a short space of time?

After all, the Afghan security services had 180,000 combat troops to call upon, while even the most generous estimates of the Taliban's strength put it at 85,000 fighters.

The answer lies to a great degree in a matter as prosaic as hard cash. Many Afghan soldiers had not been paid for months.

There have been widespread reports that ever since President Biden announced the withdrawal of US troops, corrupt officials at the Ministry of Defence in Kabul have been stashing funds earmarked for soldiers' pay into their own offshore bank accounts in Zurich (Switzerland) and Doha (Qatar).

The Afghan security services had 180,000 combat troops to call upon, while even the most generous estimates of the Taliban's strength put it at 85,000 fighters. Taliban fighters are pictured above

Faced with bloodthirsty Taliban fighters on the one hand and no support from the US Marines on the other, it's hardly surprising that so many unpaid government troops surrendered and handed over their weapons, often with the added incentive of a $500 handout from the enemy to fund their journey home.

Some were even prepared to take off their uniforms, grow a beard and join the winning side.

The Taliban is certainly well-placed to display such largesse. Thanks to its stranglehold on Afghanistan's multi-billion-dollar opium trade and revenue from a growing number of customs points, its income has shot up in recent weeks.

The great Prussian Field Marshal Moltke used to tell students in the military academy that 'the greatest good deed in war is the speedy ending of the war'. He meant that a drawn-out battle for supremacy would only add to the death toll on both sides. You could argue that the Taliban's lightning takeover of Afghanistan in a few weeks shows that they have taken on board the Moltke doctrine.

They took city after city without a fight and without bloodshed on the scale that many had feared. In the short term, at least, they will be focused on consolidating power rather than seeking retribution.

There have been widespread reports that ever since President Biden announced the withdrawal of US troops, corrupt officials at the Ministry of Defence in Kabul have been stashing funds earmarked for soldiers' pay into their own offshore bank accounts in Zurich (Switzerland) and Doha (Qatar)

They have certainly shown their shrewdness in the past. While the Taliban may be fanatics, they are not stupid.

Once a town has been over-run, one of their first priorities is to ensure that the people who operate utilities such as the water works and the electricity supply turn up for work.

And they are no slouches when it comes to imposing law and order either. If you are prepared to hang people from the lamp-posts and chop off hands, opposition tends to fade away relatively quickly.

People may not like their daughters being banned from attending school, and their wives being sacked from their jobs and ordered into a burka, but most will quickly come to the conclusion that resistance is useless.

Yet despite its claims to be a different beast from the Taliban of old, the reality is far darker.

Reports are rife of revenge killings, girls as young as 12 abducted from their families to be married off to Taliban fighters, and people being beaten for infractions as petty as playing pop music.

So the people of Afghanistan have a grim future in prospect – but there could be serious consequences for us in the West.

Thousands of Taliban prisoners have been released from government-run prison camps in the past few days.

Among their number are likely to be scores of Al Qaeda and Islamic State terrorists who arrived from abroad to fight the Americans in Afghanistan. Now they're on the loose and free to plot terrorist attacks back in their home countries – or on us in the West.

What makes this debacle different from the Americans' hasty retreat from Saigon in 1975 is the existence across the West of small cells of radical Islamists who will be inspired by our humiliating retreat from Kabul.

There were no Vietcong cells in London waiting to be activated then. Today things are different.

The humiliation of the West in Afghanistan has set Islamist fundamentalism back on a roll. Having seen off the Russians three decades ago and the Americans today, their sense of invincibility is almost certainly going to fuel radicalism here.

Let's hope our domestic security services are more clued up on the dangers than the foreign office and MI6 were about the stability of the house of cards in Afghanistan.

Worse for the wider world is the reality that the West's rivals such as Russia, China and Iran are looking on at us running away with our tails between our legs.

What other minor allies of ours, with armies lavishly trained and equipped on the Afghan model, could be gobbled up next?

Not since August 1939, has Britain enjoyed such an ominous 'holiday' season.

Mark Almond is director of The Crisis Research Institute, Oxford
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sarah Ferguson has described her former mother-in-law the Queen as more of a mother to her than her own while speaking on a podcast.

The Duchess of York, 61, who divorced the Duke of York in 1996, has sparked a raft of royal scandals over the years, but said the monarch was her 'greatest mentor' and had always believed in her.

Speaking on the Tea with Twiggy podcast as she promoted her Mills & Boon romance novel Her Heart For A Compass, the duchess paid tribute to the Queen for being 'modern, flexible and forgiving.'

Sarah compared their relationship to the one she had with her own mother Susan Barrantes, who passed away in September 1998, saying: 'I think to myself that honestly my mother-in-law has been more of a mother to me than my mother.'

Her comments come days after she joined her ex-husband Prince Andrew at Balmoral to spend time with the Queen.

Sarah Ferguson, 61, has described the Queen, 95, as more of a mother to her than her own was while speaking on a podcast

Sarah compared their relationship to the one she had with her own mother Susan Barrantes, who passed away in September 1998 (pictured together)

Fergie said: 'My greatest mentor and... person who believes in me is the Queen - and has never faltered.

'I absolutely admire the incredible way Her Majesty is so modern... and how flexible, and how understanding, and how forgiving and how generous.'

The duchess and ex-husband Andrew were said to have joined the Queen on holiday at Balmoral last week, hours after a civil lawsuit was filed against the duke over allegations of sexual abuse.

Andrew, who stepped down from royal duties in 2019, is being sued by Virginia Giuffre, who accuses him of sexually abusing her when she was a minor under US law after she was trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Her comments come days after she joined her ex-husband Prince Andrew at Balmoral to spend time with the Queen

It is the duchess's first proper summer break at Balmoral since she was cast out of the royal family amid a toe-sucking scandal in the 1990s.

The Duke of Edinburgh, who died in April, reportedly refused to let his former daughter-in-law stay at the castle at the same time as him.

Sarah, in the podcast released on Monday, referred to Andrew as her 'lovely ex-husband' who 'always believes in me'.

She told model Twiggy, whose real name is Dame Lesley Lawson: 'I absolutely think there is no greater mentor because, from a little girl to now, the consistency of Her Majesty has been a great honour, it's a huge honour - makes me want to cry.'

The Duchess of York's mother (pictured) earned the nickname 'the bolter' and caused a stir in British social circles when she eloped with Argentinian polo player Hector Barrantes in 1975

The duchess and ex-husband Andrew were said to have joined the Queen on holiday at Balmoral last week, hours after a civil lawsuit was filed against the duke over allegations of sexual abuse (pictured, Fergie with the Queen and Prince Philip at daughter Princess Eugenie's wedding in 2018)

The Duchess of York's mother earned the nickname 'the bolter' and caused a stir in British social circles when she eloped with Argentinian polo player Hector Barrantes in 1975, a year after her divorce from Fergie's father Sir Ronald Ferguson.

She was killed in a car crash in 1998 - the year after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales.

Sir Ronald died in 2003 following a heart attack in Basingstoke, Hampshire.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She rose to fame playing Joanna Hartman on Neighbours, before launching a sizzling career posing for lads' magazines in Britain, America and Australia.

But Emma Harrison has revealed she's firmly put her 'It girl' days behind her, after welcoming a daughter and finding a 'lovely new partner' to share her life with.

The actress and model, 47, told New Idea that while she has 'no regrets' about her past, she's now happier than ever raising a family and working as a property manager on the Gold Coast.

'Those were really fun days': Former Neighbours actress Emma Harrison says she has no regrets about her past modelling for lads' mags. Pictured in Los Angeles on February 7, 2006

'Those were really fun, exciting days... but at this stage in my life, family and being a mum are more important to me,' she said.

'I did have a fun time overseas and I don't have any regrets by any means, but everything happens for a reason and that reason ended.'

Emma starred on Neighbours from 1995 to 1997, before landing small roles in Hollywood movies such as Intolerable Cruelty, The Company and Street Fighter.

Career: During her heyday in the '90s and early '00s, Emma posed in lingerie - and sometimes topless - for men's magazines such as Playboy, Loaded, Maxim and FHM. She once appeared on the cover of FHM with fellow Aussie soap star Isla Fisher (left)

During her heyday in the '90s and early '00s, Emma posed in lingerie - and sometimes topless - for men's magazines such as Playboy, Loaded, Maxim and FHM.

She once appeared on the cover of FHM with fellow Aussie soap star Isla Fisher.

Emma was also ranked number 18 on FHM's 100 Sexiest Women of 1998, and was chosen by Australian Playboy as one of the 10 sexiest women in the world.

But nowadays she leads a very different life raising her daughter Jemima, nine, and her partner's eight-year-old son, which she admits keeps her 'very busy'.

Remember this? Emma starred as Joanna Hartman on Neighbours from 1995 to 1997, before landing small roles in Hollywood films like Intolerable Cruelty, The Company and Street Fighter

Secret: When asked if she'd ever show her daughter her old magazine covers, Emma said: 'Oh, it's all hidden away and locked in the cupboards. I probably won't ever show her to be honest - I don't display them, let's just say that.' Pictured on Neighbours

When asked if she'd ever show her daughter her old magazine covers, Emma said: 'Oh, it's all hidden away and locked in the cupboards.

'I probably won't ever show her to be honest. I don't display them, let's just say that.'

She added that while she was grateful for the opportunities she'd been given, she wouldn't be 'pushing' her daughter into the entertainment industry.

Emma got engaged to her partner Cade in June last year, announcing the happy news on Facebook.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Comedian Larry David says he was thrilled to be axed from Barack Obama's 60th birthday party guest list over fears he'd be asked to perform a live routine.

The Curb Your Enthusiasm star, 74, shared how he surprised the party planner by reacting with delight on being told he'd been cut from the guest list.

In Maureen Dowd's latest column for The New York Times, the Seinfeld co-creator shared why he was so glad when Obama's assistant cancelled his invitation to the party.

'I was pretty glum when I finally called back his assistant,'

'When he told me I was eighty-sixed from the party, I was so relieved I screamed, 'Thank you! Thank you!' He must have thought I was insane,'

'Then I hung up the phone, poured myself a drink and finished my crossword puzzle,' Dowd quoted him saying.

David, who was at his home on the island, went on to say that he figured he was going to be asked to perform comedy at the bash.

Dreading to prepare a routine just three days before the party, David said news that he was no longer welcome at the party were music to his ears.

Obama's birthday bash, which boasted A-list celebrity guests such as John Legend, Jay-Z and Beyoncé and was celebrated at the Obamas' $12million compound in Martha's Vineyard, was initially planned to have a 600-person guest list.

But amid backlash that his party would be a 'super-spreader' event as the country saw a rise on cases of the Delta Variant, Obama scaled back his invitations.

Many were reportedly hurt by the decision and David was perhaps the only uninvited guest who reacted not only relieved, but thrilled, to have been left out.

Comedian Larry Kennedy (pictured) told NYT columnist Maureen Dowd that he was relived to have been uninvited to president Obama's controversial 60th birthday bash

In her column 'Behold Barack Antoinette,' Dowd was critical of Obama for axing people who helped him to the top from his lavish 60th birthday guest list in favor of A-list stars

Talk-show hosts such as Stephen Colbert, Conan O'Brien and David Letterman, and Obama's former advisors such as his campaign chief strategist David Axelrod and his chief of staff Rahm Emanuel were erased from the final list. But Dowd focuses her criticism on Obama's treatment of the latter group, arguing that he chose celebrities over administration staff and politicians who helped him rise to become the 44th president of the United States.

Dowd compares Obama to F Scott Fitzgerald's Jay Gatsby, arguing that while the fictional character wanted to impress Daisy, his love interest, with a lavish celebration, Obama threw a party because 'being cool is important to him.'

'One difference is that Gatsby opened his house to the uninvited. Obama closed his house to many of the invited after getting flak for hosting 'a celebrity mosh pit,' as Stephen Colbert called it, while officials were telling people to mask back up.'

Dowd went on to condemn Obama's passive nature throughout his presidency, and his current seemingly fascination with the entertainment industry, citing the deal between his production company and Netflix to work on several documents and movies, his podcast with Bruce Springsteen and the book adaptation.

David (pictured) told Dowd that he feared he was going to be asked to perform a comedy routine

Dreading to prepare a routine just three days before the party, the assistant's call was sweet as honey to his ears

The former president disinvited his former chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel and chief campaign strategist David Axelrod. Dowd argues they were fundamental during his presidency and yet were replaced on his party by A-list celebrities

She also called Obama 'Barack Antoinette,' likening his ostentatious and 'new-rich' celebration to those of the infamous fallen queen of France.

Former staff who were disinvited are reportedly extremely hurt to have seen VIP personalities like John Legend and George Clooney, celebrating with who once was their boss, and close friend.

Dowd saying the lavish display was also damaging to the Democrat party as a whole.

She explained: 'The party crystallized the caricature of the Democratic Party that Joe Biden had to fight against in order to get elected,

'It was as far from Flint and Scranton as you can imagine: an orgy of the 1 percent — private jets, Martha’s Vineyard, limousine liberals and Hollywood whoring.'

Some guests cracked jokes about being cut from the guest list, with Caroline Kennedy telling the Times: 'I would have disinvited me if I was him.'

Dowd speculated that some of the wisecracks had been deployed in a bid to mask guests' hurt feelings.

According to a statement obtained by Fox, the Obamas reduced the guest list to include 'only family and close friends.'

'President Obama is appreciative of others sending their birthday wishes from afar and looks forward to seeing people soon,' said Hannah Hankins, a spokeswoman for Obama.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Furious Guy Sebastian accuses NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard of 'talking to people like idiots' and says he should take responsibility for Sydney's 'mess of an outbreak'

Furious Brad Hazzard sticks up for Kerry Chant during inquiry into the NSW Government's management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Flight privilege: Mother and daughter dubbed 'Karen and Karen 2.0' are kicked off Southwest flight from Sacramento to San Diego after yelling at passengers to move seats so that they could sit on the aisle

Mother and daughter dubbed 'Karen and Karen 2.0' are kicked off Southwest flight from Sacramento to San Diego after yelling at passengers to move seats so that they could sit on the aisle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A talented teenage photographer has captured the image of a lifetime from the Australian coastal town he calls home.

Jarvis Smallman, 14, from Hopetoun in Western Australia, snapped the remarkable cloud photo last week, which appears to contain a 'spooky' face high up in the sky.

The image also features a rainbow poking out of the swirling, dusty cloud formation.

'It was taken before sunset after a day of school,' the Year 9 student from Ravensthorpe District High School told Daily Mail Australia.

'I was happy with it.. it is a cool shot.'

The amazing photo taken by teenager Jarvis Smallman at sunset in Hopetoun, Western Australia, which appears to show a face (pictured right) among the clouds

The talented teen also was a runner-up in the Junior Australian Photographer of the Year category by Australian Photography Magazine for this image of a playful sea lion

Jarvis, who only started dabbling in photography last year, said he loved taking pictures on land as well as in the ocean.

'It all started when I was given a GoPro,' he said.

'After that I was lucky to also be given a waterproof camera.. now I am always out looking for different things to photograph.'

The teenager took to his Instagram to show off the incredible photo, writing: 'By far the coolest cloud I've seen so far... (although) it was a bit spooky being watched by the sky.'

ABC South West shared the image on their Facebook page, and it didn't long for a number of positive comments to follow on social media.

'Wow, what an awesome capture of mother nature, with a combination of the joker, a rainbow, beauty and a beast,' one person wrote.

'This makes my hair stand on end. Ooh, spooky. Great capture,' agreed another.

A third commented 'that’s one for the cloud appreciation society...great photo.'

The photo was also shared on Facebook over 1400 times.

Budding photographer Jarvis appears to have a promising career beckoning with camera in hand.

In January this year, the youngster was a runner up in the Junior Australian Photographer of the Year category by Australian Photography Magazine.

The Hopetoun local submitted a fantastic shot of a playful sea lion while snorkeling at his favourite beach in the Fitzgerald Biosphere.

He hopes to pursue a career in photography once he finishes school.

The talented teen from Hopetoun in Western Australia loves the unpredictable nature of the ocean
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A slew of celebrities' personal hygiene habits have come into question after it emerged that Ashton Kutcher and Mila Kunis only bathe their children when they can see 'visible' dirt on them.

Now Matthew McConaughey has been dragged into the debate after reports resurfaced of the actor, 51, announcing that hasn't used deodorant in three decades.

The Oscar-winning actor previously revealed that his aversion to body spray came up while he was filming Fool's Gold in 2008, with his co-star Kate Hudson requesting he give himself a spritz while they filmed together.

Intersmeller: Matthew McConaughey was dragged into the Hollywood bathing debate after revealing he hasn't worn deodorant in three decades

Matthew recalled in an interview with Playboy at the time: 'She always brings a salt rock, which is some natural deodorant, and says, "Would you please put this on?" I just never wore it. No cologne, no deodorant.

'The women in my life, including my mother, have all said, "Hey, your natural smell smells, one, like a man, and, two, smells like you."'

Despite being anti-deodorant, Matthew insisted he took his personal hygiene seriously, claiming to take multiple showers a day and brush his teeth up to five times a day.

He just 'doesn't like to smell like someone or something else.'

How to lose a guy in 10 sprays: Matthew's aversion to body spray came up while he was filming Fool's Gold in 2008, with his co-star Kate Hudson requesting he give himself a spritz

Speaking on SiriusXM last week, Matthew's hygiene habits came up again as his Tropic Thunder co-star Yvette Nicole Brown discussed the star's unique scent.

She recalled: 'I remember that Matthew McConaughey said that he did not use deodorant and that he didn't have an odor. So my first thought was, "I'm going to get as close as I can to him to see if he's right."

'He does not have an odour. He smells like granola and good living. He has a sweet, sweet scent. That is just him, and it's not musty or crazy.'

Yum: Speaking on SiriusXM last week, Matthew's hygiene habits came up again as his Tropic Thunder co-star Yvette Nicole Brown discussed the star's unique scent

Matthew isn't alone in his decision to shun deodorant, Cameron Diaz and Bradley Cooper have also claimed never to spray their underarms.

Cameron, 48, previously told E! News: 'Anti-perspirant is really bad for you. Let it go and just trim your armpit hair so it doesn’t hold on to the scent.

'You’re stinky because you use anti-perspirant. It keeps all the stink in.'

Meanwhile, Bradley, 46, stated that the body 'self-cleans', telling Esquire: 'I don’t use deodorant really anymore. I do take a lot of showers, so maybe that helps.

'In the morning and then at night. And after I work out, I’ll take a shower. So maybe three a day.'

Not a fan: Cameron Diaz, 48, previously told E! News, 'Anti-perspirant is really bad for you. Let it go and just trim your armpit hair so it doesn’t hold on to the scent'

Julia Roberts, 53, credited the environment for her decision to shun the spray, telling Oprah Winfrey: 'I don't actually use deodorant. I don't like to share that with a lot of people, but it's just never been my thing.'

On an episode of Kourtney & Kim Take Miami, Kourtney Kardashian, 42, revealed she stopped wearing deodorant because she thinks it's bad for breastfeeding.

While he has not spoken about the reports himself, Brad Pitt's former bodyguard once revealed in a tell-all that the actor, 57, didn’t wear deodorant and 'shaves his armpits just as a girl would,' to minimize any smell.

Interesting: Bradley Cooper, 46, stated that the body 'self-cleans', telling Esquire, 'I don’t use deodorant really anymore. I do take a lot of showers, so maybe that helps'

The debate surrounding Hollywood star's bathing habits has been a hot topic of late after Ashton, 43, and Mila, 38, started a conversation surrounding their own family's hygiene.

During a podcast appearance last month, Ashton told Armchair Expert host Dax Shephard, 46: 'I wash my armpits and crotch daily and nothing else ever.'

Mila said she washes her 'slits and tits' and also revealed that she did not bathe her children Wyatt, six, and Dimitri, four, 'everyday' when they were infants.

Meanwhile Jake Gyllenhaal, 40, shocked fans last week when told Vanity Fair: 'More and more I find bathing to be less necessary.'

He noted: 'I do also think that there's a whole world of not bathing that is also really helpful for skin maintenance, and we naturally clean ourselves.'

Staying away: Julia Roberts, 53, credited the environment for her decision to shun the spray, telling Oprah Winfrey: 'I don't actually use deodorant, it's just never been my thing'

Dax Shepard's wife Kristen Bell, 41, also said she doesn't shower often for environmental reasons, explaining: 'California has been in a drought forever. It's just like, responsibility for your environment.'

'We don't have a ton of water, so when I shower, I'll grab the girls and push them in there with me so we all use the same shower water.'

But not everyone is a fan of the hygiene trend, with Cardi B, 28, expressing her confusion over the movement of celebrities refusing to keep things clean.

The X-Rated rapper seemed as mystified as everyone on Tuesday, when she tweeted 'Wassup with people saying they don’t shower?' alongside a emoji with a raised eyebrow, adding: 'It's giving itchy.'

Joining Cardi in her thoughts about the situation was Game of Thrones star Jason Momoa, 42,.

The actor told Access Hollywood last week that he is not part of the club, saying: 'I'm not starting any trends. I shower, trust me,.'

He added: 'I'm Aquaman. I'm in the f***ing water. Don’t worry about it. I'm Hawaiian. We got saltwater on me. We good.'

Trendsetters: The debate surrounding Hollywood star's bathing habits has been a hot topic of late after Ashton, 43, and Mila, 38, started a conversation surrounding their family's hygiene

Dwayne Johnson has also assured his fans he is not in the same category.

When a Twitter user brought up the subject this week, Dwayne, 49, wrote: 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb.'

In fact the fighter turned movie star, who goes by the nickname The Rock, revealed that he showers three times a day.

'Shower (cold) when I roll outta bed to get my day rollin’. Shower (warm) after my workout before work. Shower (hot) after I get home from work. Face wash, body wash, exfoliate and I sing (off key) in the shower,' he shared.

Keeping clean: Dwayne Johnson also assured his fans he is not in the same category, penning 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb'

Terry Crews, 53, then stood in solidarity with The Rock when he did an interview with Access Hollywood after his third shower of the day

'See, me and Dwayne are right,' he mused. 'I took one in the morning, after the workout, and then I took one before I got here. And then I took one in between acts.

'I love to shower. I love to, because I spend so much time sweating. First of all, if you ain't been sweating, you don't need to shower. But I spend all day sweating, all the time, running and working out, and it ain't nice.

'My wife is like, "Babe, babe, babe." I'm Mr. Old Spice, you know what I mean? So I've got to get clean.'

Chris Evans, 40, was quick to clear up some rumours about his bathing habits after an interview he gave last year about his life in quarantine went viral.

He joked last year: 'I just stay home and I never shower,' but was quick to clear up this month, 'I shower all the time!'

Jodie Turner-Smith, 34, didn't wait to be asked about her cleaning habits with Joshua Jackson, 43, taking to Twitter to pen: 'Before you lot even ask: in this house, we bathe.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Beauty and the Geek star Lachlan Mansell impressed viewers with his radio announcing skills during a challenge on the Nine dating show.

And the 32-year-old has now landed himself a temporary position as a producer on KIIS FM's The Kyle and Jackie O Show.

Lachlan is filling in for producer and on-air personality 'Intern Pete' Deppeler while he's on long-service leave.

New job: Beauty and the Geek star Lachlan Mansell joined The Kyle and Jackie O Show as an assistant producer this week, after he impressed the team with his announcing skills

'It's Lachy here from Beauty and the Geek,' he said in an Instagram video as he arrived at KIIS FM's North Ryde studios on Monday morning.

'[I'm] super pumped to be starting my new role as assistant producer here on The Kyle and Jackie O Show.'

After being introduced on air, Lachlan told listeners: 'I'm enthusiastic. I want to make sure I am well prepared.'

The lifelong revhead also had a number of motorsports lanyards on his desk because he 'wanted to bring some character to my workspace.'

Excited: '[I'm] super pumped to be starting my new role as assistant producer here on The Kyle and Jackie O Show,' he said in an Instagram clip

Beauty and the Geek fans will remember Lachlan impressed the cast and viewers with his abilities during a radio challenge.

The motorsports nut proved his ability to speak off the cuff in an engaging way, with host Sophie Monk and the beauties genuinely astounded by it.

Lachlan was crowned the winner of Beauty and the Geek earlier this month alongside his partner Keira Johnstone.

Winners are grinners: Lachlan was crowned the winner of Beauty and the Geek earlier this month alongside his partner Keira Johnstone

The pair earned the most votes from the other contestants, ahead of Alexander Wojno and Eliza Sowada-Smith, and Josie Werner and George Goldfeder.

Lachlan and Kiera broke down in tears as Sophie announced they'd won the life-changing $100,000 cash prize.

During a follow-up interview with KIIS FM, Lachlan revealed the pair had a platonic relationship during the show.

'It was just a friendship. The closest we got was during the Magic Mike challenge,' he said, noting they'd shared a brief kiss during the task.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than half of Tory voters want Rishi Sunak to replace Boris Johnson when he leaves No 10, a poll revealed last night.

And some 47 per cent of Conservatives who hold this view think the handover should take place in the next 12 months.

The Chancellor sweeps the board among voters in a political and personal 'beauty contest' between the pair.

The British public generally sees him as more intelligent, competent and trustworthy than the Prime Minister.

And while people would prefer to go to the pub with charismatic Mr Johnson – they would rather rely on Mr Sunak to pay back a £20 loan, look after their dog and fix a wobbly shelf.

More than half of Tory voters want Chancellor Rishi Sunak to replace Boris Johnson when he leaves No 10, a poll by JL Partners has revealed

The findings come from research by pollsters JL Partners for the Daily Mail in the wake of claims of a rift between the two men.

Mr Johnson reportedly threatened to demote Mr Sunak to Health Secretary over a leaked letter from the Chancellor demanding more action to ease Covid curbs. But the survey reinforces claims by Mr Sunak's allies that the Chancellor is now unsackable.

The canvassing suggests voters of all parties feel Mr Johnson may not be in Downing Street for long. It is matched by a growing view that Mr Sunak would do better as prime minister.

Six out of ten voters (61 per cent) – and nearly one in two Conservatives (46 per cent) – say the former London mayor has 'run out of steam' since delivering Brexit.

The findings come from research by pollsters JL Partners for the Daily Mail in the wake of claims of a rift between the two men

Overall, 42 per cent say Mr Sunak would be a better PM. Only 24 per cent say the nation should stick with Mr Johnson.

Asked if the Chancellor should take over when Mr Johnson steps down, 56 per cent of Conservative voters say he should, more than three times the number (18 per cent) who disagree.

Of the Tories who want Mr Sunak to succeed Mr Johnson, 11 per cent want him to do so now, while a further 36 per cent want him to do so within a year.

Even more astonishing, nearly four in five (77 per cent) of such voters think the Chancellor should be given the reins of power within three years.

Mr Johnson reportedly threatened to demote Mr Sunak to Health Secretary over a leaked letter from the Chancellor demanding more action to ease Covid curbs. But the survey reinforces claims by Mr Sunak's allies that the Chancellor is now unsackable

That would probably mean Mr Johnson going before the next election, due by December 2024. Among all voters, 40 per cent say Mr Sunak is more likely to win an election – 27 per cent say Mr Johnson.

Meanwhile, the Chancellor thrashes the current PM in a light-hearted personal contest.

Some 21 per cent of men would be content for their partners to have dinner with Mr Johnson. Nearly double – 41 per cent – would be happy for them to dine with the Chancellor.

JL Partners interviewed 1,019 adults on Monday. James Johnson, from the firm, said: 'As tensions flare in Downing Street, Rishi Sunak remains the nation's golden boy... He beats Boris on all policy and character attributes apart from charisma.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jeremy Clarkson has boasted he has 'loads of friends' despite failing his A-Levels in his annual results day tweet.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams.

Today he wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager.

Students were today handed their results based on in-school grading for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

Mr Clarkson wrote: 'If the teachers didn’t give you the A level results you were hoping for, don’t worry. I got a C and 2Us and I’ve ended up happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley.'

His 7.4million followers reacted with hilarity at the latest results day tweet, with one saying 'it's that time of year again lads' while another added 'makes me smile every year…University of life, the best university and woke free'.

The former Top Gear presenter, 61, reveals every year he was awarded a C and two Us in his exams

Today Mr Clarkson (pictured with his Bentley) wrote that he was 'happy, with loads of friends and a Bentley' despite the low grades he was given as a teenager

Mr Clarkson is pictured with his girlfriend Lisa Hogan in September 2017

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds.'

He added: 'And I didn't even get the chance to insist the government gave me three As instead.'

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning.

One wrote: 'The world is alright by me as long as this tweet appears each year.'

Another said: 'It's that time of the year again...'

One said: 'I like this annual tweet, I pop back during the day to see just how many people have zero sense of humour....which is humorous in itself.'

'Thank you for reminding kids again that exams aren’t the only thing that can drive someone to success, Jeremy. It’s such a valuable lesson,' said another.

Another added: 'I was really expecting you to say that you have a slightly bigger than average Lamborghini tractor, this is somewhat disappointing Clarkson..'

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it’s a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades? It just makes it sound like we plucked it out of thin air when in fact we have to judge certain criteria to award grades.'

Anxious teenagers across the UK have today described suffering a sleepless night ahead of their A-level results being published at 8am.

Last year the Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? presenter wrote: 'A level results not great? Don't worry, I got a C and 2 Us and I'm currently building a large house with far reaching views of the Cotswolds'

Students awaiting the grades which will get them to universities from this autumn said they 'didn't sleep a wink' last night, with nearly half of today's results expected to be graded at A* or A after a year of disruption amid school closures during the pandemic.

Clarkson posts the tweet to his 7.4 million followers on A-level results day every year

Among the hundreds of thousands of students and their parents unable to sleep last night, many took to Twitter to share their feelings and spread good luck messages, with one writing: 'Funny how I said I wasn't nervous but here I am awake at 5.45am #alevels2021'.

Another nervous teenager posted: 'Me laughing to cover the fact I can't sleep because I know I'm not gonna get into my dream university and am too nervous'. One tweeted: 'It's results day and after a night of absolutely no sleep I wish the best of luck to everyone, we'll smash it'.

Around 30 per cent of the qualifications are expected to receive an A with 19 per cent getting an A*, it was reported last night. If more students gain top grades then it will be more difficult for top universities to differentiate between applicants, it has been suggested.

It comes after 38.6 per cent of A-levels were graded A or A* last year when exams were first cancelled.

Twitter users were thrilled to find Mr Clarkson's annual tweet on their timelines this morning

Youngsters who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers are likely to face greater competition for a place at leading institutions as there could be fewer selective courses on offer in clearing.

But unions representing school leaders and teachers have urged parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results - and appealing against grades just 'for the sake of appealing'.

Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades after it was revealed nearly half of this morning's results are expected to be A* or A - but the Education Secretary admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers deciding the results again.

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Teachers were less keen on the sentiment of today's tweet, with one adding: 'Really happy for you and I think it’s a good message overall. But could you change the wording about teachers giving the grades'

Robert Halfon, Tory chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The Government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

Writing in the Telegraph, Mr Williamson said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year - it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended this year's grade inflation, saying students 'deserve to be rewarded' after another year of disruption due to the Covid crisis

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Mr Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two teenage boys have been arrested after a father-of-three was stabbed to death on his doorstep while defending his teenage daughter from a group of thugs.

Jamie Markham, 45, was knifed in Chingford, east London, on Monday night by one of the boys who were reportedly swinging metal poles and shouting abuse at his daughter Chloe, 17, according to neighbours.

His heartbroken wife, Candice, was apparently heard screaming when she found the 'kind family man' fatally wounded outside their home.

On Wednesday, a 14-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of his murder and a second boy, also 14, was arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to murder.

Both are now in custody at an east London police station.

Detective Inspector John Marriott, of the Met's Specialist Crime Command, said: 'We believe that James confronted a group of youths causing a disturbance and was stabbed as a result.

'The brutality of this response is beyond shocking and our thoughts are with James' family who have been left devastated by their loss.

'The arrests of these two individuals is a significant development but we still need the public's help to build a full picture of exactly what happened on Monday evening.

'I know that there were a number of people present at the time of the murder. I want them to come forward.

Jamie Markham, 45, (middle) was knifed in Chingford, east London, by thugs who were reportedly swinging metal poles and shouting abuse at his daughter Chloe, 17

Despite the efforts of London Ambulance Service, the father-of-three was pronounced dead at the scene in Chingford Mount

A murder investigation is underway after a man was stabbed to death at the mount in Chingford on Monday evening

'I also believe there will be parents who know that their child was there, or was involved. I am appealing for them to do the sensible thing and get in touch with us.

'A dedicated team of officers is working to piece together the tragic circumstances that led to this murder and to bring those responsible to justice.'

Today, Mr Markham's wife, Candice, told the Mirror: 'The boys were walking around with metal poles. They were swinging them and shouting at my daughter.

'It's just disgusting. It's not the first time - you see them walking around and smashing bottles in the street.'

Despite the efforts of London Ambulance Service, Mr Markham was pronounced dead at the scene in Chingford Mount.

The area has now been cordoned off by police and detectives from the Metropolitan Police's Specialist Crime Command have launched a murder inquiry.

It came as bouquets of flowers were today left in tribute to the father, whose death has left the local community in shock.

Neighbours say they spotted a teenage girl, around 14 years old, who was wearing a grey vest top and leggings, being 'annoyed' by a group of boys she was with as it started raining heavily on Monday evening.

One said she appeared to 'pull a face' and went to fetch her dad who had just finished walking the famiy's pet dog.

A neighbour said 'the entire street could hear the screams' of Mr Markham's partner when he died.

A man, who was sat in his car at the time, said he saw a group of eight or nine teenage boys 'run up and down' the street, but did not see the stabbing.

He said: 'I saw hooligans running up and down this way and that way.

'The police have got my dash cam because I was sitting in the car at the time.

'It was hammering down so you couldn't hear much of anything.

'I was shocked, especially seeing police doing CPR on him. I didn't realise who it even was until later.'

His partner, who also declined to be named, said: 'He was a family guy.

'He never bothered us, he just got on, and kept himself to himself and walked the dogs.

'He would come out of his place and be peacefully on his own. A day or two ago I saw him with his son chatting away.

'Yesterday everyone was just shell-shocked.'

Mr Markham's wife Candice (left with daughter Chloe) said she found the 'kind family man' fatally wounded outside their home

Neighbours have claimed Jamie Markham came out of his flat to defend his daughter

She added: 'It's just heartbreaking when you think of it. His life is gone. Whoever done it, they've ruined the partner's life, the kids' life.

'He was the breadwinner of the family. It gets me that people think this is acceptable. People think that it's normal. I just think what do their family think they do when they get out and about?'

Alice McGill, 78, said she had spoken to neighbours about what happened.

She said: 'All I know is that this girl was hanging out with these boys, one of them said something silly.

'She then went to go and get her father and her father came out and he died.

'It's a tragedy because this young girl is going to have to live with that for the rest of her life.

'It's not her fault. This girl was a proper daddy's girl - the poor, poor girl.'

Kerrie-Ann Lambert, 32, a mum of three, said: 'I was on my way back from the shops when I saw a large group of teenage boys and one girl wearing leggings and a grey vest top.

'It started really chucking it down and I was looking at the girl and I thought, 'wow you're going to get pneumonia'.

'There were loads of boys. There was one girl. It looked like a herd.

'I thought, should I offer her a jacket? I wish I had intervened.

'I thought it was a bit weird because it was one girl with a bunch of boys. I kept an eye on her for 10 minutes because I thought is she happy, is she safe with them? Is she being picked on by them?

'She seemed fine to me at first, but then I think one of the boys said something to her and she pulled a face. She looked like she'd been annoyed and she wanted to go home or something, but I'm not too sure.'

'I went home because it started chucking it down and I had to get dinner on.

'Later I just heard those screams. We all felt distraught and knew someone must have passed away.

'One of the police officers said that people can't come out this way because they're operating on him now.'

The area has now been cordoned off by police and detectives from the Metropolitan Police's Specialist Crime Command have launched a murder inquiry

Ms Lambert added: 'I'm very upset about it. All he was doing was protecting his daughter.

'These boys thought they were big people and decided to play God.

'I've moved here to get away from all of this, it's ridiculous. I let my kids play where there's a swing.

'I'm worried they might see something. It's traumatic. I know no one is going to stab a nine year old or a 10-year-old.

'But it's disgusting. I feel really sorry for that lady and that family. Someone woke up with no dad yesterday.'

'I hope that person feels sorry for what they've done.

'One day you're going to have a daughter and someone is going to say something crap to her, and you're going to know what it's like to want to defend her. It's horrible. I really do hope the police find this person because they deserve to be put away.'

The Met Police said officers were called at 6.20pm on Monday night to reports of a disturbance in Churchill Terrace, Chingford.

They found Mr Markham there suffering with stab wounds but paramedics were unable to save him. His next of kin have been informed and are being supported by specially trained officers.

Detective Inspector John Marriott, said: 'A dedicated team of officers are working to piece together the tragic circumstances that led to this man losing his life.

'The thoughts of all of us are with his family and friends as they come to terms with their loss.

'We have already spoken to a number of key witnesses and recovered CCTV from the area, although I would like to hear from anyone else who witnessed the attack, or a disturbance beforehand.'

Chief Superintendent Richard Tucker, responsible for local policing in Waltham Forest, said: 'The Met remains committed to tackling violence across London and I would like to reassure the community that we will do everything we can to track down those responsible for this attack.

'I understand the concern this incident will cause and I would like to reassure residents that you will continue to see additional officers in the area over the coming days.

'I would urge you to speak with them about any concerns you have.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just seven criminals out of a group of 50 were actually deported back to Jamaica yesterday morning - after the Home Office was hit by a series of last-minute legal challenges.

A charter flight to take the offenders from Stansted airport at 1am on Wednesday was almost empty after dozens of appeals with lodged by human rights lawyers within 24 hours of take-off.

The 43 who evaded removal had collectively been sentenced to 245 years' imprisonment for an appalling range of crimes.

They include two murderers and one man who had been handed 15 years in jail for raping a child.

It has been alleged that two of the offenders had attempted suicide shortly before the flight.

Just seven criminals out of a group of 50 were actually deported back to Jamaica yesterday morning - after the Home Office was hit by a series of last-minute legal challenges (stock photo)

The charter plane is believed to have cost around £300,000, meaning the seven criminals removed cost the British taxpayer more than £40,000 each.

Priti Patel expressed her fury over the debacle, saying the farce allows foreign offenders to 'laugh in the face of the British people'.

Writing for the Daily Mail, the Home Secretary said allowing the criminals to remain in Britain 'should be a stain on the consciousness of our nation'.

The Home Office said 'specialist legal firms' were behind a surge of applications which led to 43 criminals avoiding deportation.

The Home Office said 'specialist legal firms' were behind a surge of applications which led to 43 criminals avoiding being boarded onto a deportation flight to Jamaica (stock photo)

Priti Patel, the Home Secretary, has voiced her 'deep anger and frustration' after murderers, rapists and paedophiles dodged deportation to Jamaica by lodging last-minute legal challenges

The seven who were successfully deported had been sentenced to a total of 46 years in jail for offences including rape, sexual offences against children, assault and possession of offensive weapons.

One had been handed a minimum tariff of 20 years for murder, while another served a long jail term for four counts of rape. His victim was a girl aged under 16.

Labour MPs had campaigned in support of all 50 criminals, with former shadow home secretary Diane Abbott describing the Home Office's efforts to deport them as a 'racist dragnet'.

None of the 50 was born in Britain, although some came to this country as children. The Home Office insisted it had carried out 'extensive checks' to ensure none of them had a claim to UK citizenship after the Windrush scandal, which saw legitimate migrants unfairly targeted.

One of the offenders believed to have been aboard yesterday's flight was Akeem Finlay, who was jailed for six years for glassing a man with a broken bottle in 2011.

Wounds inflicted by Finlay scarred his 20-year-old victim for life. Finlay – now 31, who lived in Croydon, south London, at the time of the offence – came to the UK aged 10.

Investigating officer Detective Constable Ostin Elkins said at the time of Finlay's sentencing for GBH at Blackfriars Crown Court: 'Finlay failed to admit any responsibility for his actions.'

The exact cost of yesterday's charter plane has not been revealed but previous flights have cost around £300,000. It means the seven criminals who were removed yesterday cost the taxpayer more than £40,000 each for the flight (stock photo)

Anti-deportation campaign group Movement for Justice said it believed Finlay was among a group taken from Colnbrook immigration removal centre, near Heathrow airport, for deportation.

Matt Vickers, the Tory MP for Stockton South, condemned Labour MPs for campaigning to stop the deportations.

'I am completely baffled as to why Labour politicians are so eager to keep murderers and child rapists in Britain,' he said. 'The majority of people in this country fully stand by the Home Office's decision to remove criminals who pose a danger to people in this country.'

All the offenders will have been handed at least 12 months in jail to qualify for deportation.

Ministers are required to enforce such deportations under laws passed by Labour in 2007. A charter flight to Jamaica in December saw 23 offenders including murderers and rapists pulled off the plane at the last moment. On that occasion 13 were deported.

Miss Patel writes of the criminals who were due to be deported yesterday: 'Allowing them to remain should be a stain on the consciousness of our nation.'

She adds: 'I am determined to reform our laws... so that foreign criminals who break our laws can no longer abuse our system and laugh in the face of the British people.'

PRITI PATEL: We HAVE to stop these criminals laughing in our face

As Home Secretary, keeping the public safe is my number one priority. A key part of that mission is removing people who come to this country, abuse our hospitality, and commit crimes.

That is what the British people expect – and this Government will always act in the interests of the law-abiding majority.

So I make absolutely no apology for taking action to remove foreign offenders.

And that's what happened yesterday when seven criminals – all Jamaican nationals – were returned home on a charter flight.

Between them, their prison sentences totalled over 46 years.

As Home Secretary, keeping the public safe is my number one priority. A key part of that mission is removing people who come to this country, abuse our hospitality, and commit crimes, writes Priti Patel

They had been convicted of a variety of violent, obscene and abhorrent crimes including rape, sexual offences against children, assault and possession of offensive weapons.

Their criminal acts will have had a devastating impact on their victims.

What sort of message would it send to them – and to the public more widely – if we simply allowed these people back onto our streets?

Quite simply, foreign nationals convicted of such offences must expect to be removed from the UK after serving their time.

Allowing them to remain should be a stain on the consciousness of our nation.

It is fact, that UK laws rightly allow us to deport foreign nationals convicted of an offence in the UK and sentenced to 12 months or more imprisonment where no exceptions stop it.

But it is also a fact that yesterday we should have removed 50 foreign national offenders to Jamaica, not seven.

This is because the current system and laws allowed an influx of legal claims – litigation to stop the removal of 43 offenders whose prison sentences shockingly ran to a combined total of 245 years.

These are offenders whose crimes included murder, attempted murder, rape and sexual offences against children, as well as drugs and firearms offences.

To add insult to the victims of these appalling crimes, many of these legal claims were made a matter of hours before the flight was due to take off, and supported by a chorus of Labour MPs and campaigners – some of whom contrived to claim that their deportation was somehow 'racist' and 'disproportionate'.

I know Daily Mail readers will share my deep anger and frustration that these offenders were able to dodge their return to Jamaica. This system is wrong and broken, which is why I am more deter-mined than ever to deliver the reforms that are so badly needed to fix our broken system.

Through my New Plan for Immigration, we will instil a fair but firm approach that cracks down on abuse of the system and expedites the removal of those who have no right to be here.

It's not a problem we can solve overnight as it will require new laws to be passed in Parliament, and the Nationality and Borders Bill is pivotal to this change.

The British people have had enough – they want to see change.

And I am determined to reform our laws to deliver that change so that foreign criminals who break our laws can no longer abuse our system and laugh in the face of the British people.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A star more than 4,000 light years away has gone through such an epic eruption that it is currently visible with the naked eye from Earth, astronomers said.

Located in the constellation of Ophiuchus, the star's eruption has seen it go from being 12th magnitude object, to 4.8 magnitude on the scale used by astronomers to determine how visible something will be when viewed from Earth.

The naked eye limit for humans is magnitude 6.5, but this can vary depending on light pollution levels and can be as low as 4.6 magnitude in a big city.

The erupting star, RS Ophiuchi is a rare type of stellar phenomenon as we have only discovered 10 in the Milky Way so far, out of 100,000 million stars in our galaxy.

Viewing it with the naked eye will likely require you to be in a low light pollution area, and it will be visible due south after dawn for up to two months, astronomers say.

A star more than 4,000 light years away has gone through such an epic eruption that it is currently visible with the naked eye from Earth, astronomers said

This artist rendering depicts the RS Ophiuchi binary system shortly after the white dwarf (right) has exploded as a nova. The other star is a red giant

RS OPHIUCHI: BINARY STAR SYSTEM WITH AN EXPLOSIVE NATURE RS Ophiuchi is a binary star system about 4,566 light years from Earth. One star in the pairing is a red giant and the other the core of a dead star known as a white dwarf. They orbit each other every 454 days with hydrogen being siphoned from the red giant on to the white dwarf. The binary pair, due to this close orbital period, is a recurrent nova variable type with explosions every 15 years or so due to build up of hydrogen on the white dwarf surface. Eventually the white dwarf will explode in a Type 1a supernova, spelling the end of the binary pair. Name : RS Ophiuchi

: RS Ophiuchi Type : White dwarf, red giant

: White dwarf, red giant Variable : Recurrent nova

: Recurrent nova Distance : 3,900 – 6,500 ly

: 3,900 – 6,500 ly Constellation : Ophiuchus

: Ophiuchus Right ascension : 17h 50m 13.2s

: 17h 50m 13.2s Declination : −06° 42′ 28″

: −06° 42′ 28″ Apparent magnitude : 9.6 - 13.5 (quiet), 4.5 (nova) Advertisement

It is known as a recurrent nova type object and goes off about once every 15 years, with the last in 2006 and the latest detected on August 8, 2021 by Irish amateur astronomer Keith Geary.

As it is 4,566 light years away from the Earth the explosion actually happened 4,566 years ago - it just took that long for the light to reach us.

The regular and repeated novae is the result of the fact RS Ophiuchi being a binary star - a white dwarf in a close orbit with a red giant.

Hydrogen is being regularly siphoned from the red giant on to the surface of the smaller, but much denser white dwarf - the stellar remnant of a near dead star.

A white dwarf has a mass similar to that of the Sun but with a volume hundreds of times smaller, similar to that of the Earth.

Hydrogen builds up on the surface of the white dwarf and after about 15 years it triggers a thermonuclear explosion, violently sending excess material out into space and generating a nova.

The most extreme of these cause the star system to become significantly brighter.

In this case it becomes visible with the naked eye when viewed from the Earth, despite being more than 4,500 light years away from our world.

It is such an intense event that the material being flung from the surface of the white dwarf star travels at 5.8 million miles per hour.

Observations of the outburst have been shared from around the world.

It was also confirmed by the Fermi Gamma Ray Telescope, that spotted a gamma-ray source at the time and location of the explosion.

Over time these regular novas will stop - probably in about 100,000 years - as enough mass will be accumulated by the red dwarf that it will reach critical mass.

The star will fall 'just' within the visible range when viewing without a telescope or binoculars at 4.6 magnitude

Recurrent Nova RS Ophiuchi is currently in outburst at magnitude +4.5/+5.0 over the past weekend... the last outburst was 2006. Look for the novae due south at dusk. More to come! pic.twitter.com/m63Ey7dV7P — Dave Dickinson (@Astroguyz) August 9, 2021

This threshold is called the Chandrasekhar limit. This is where it becomes unstable, explodes in a type 1a supernova and spells the end of the binary pair.

In the meantime though, we are witnessing another, if larger than usual, nova event - not the big one.

Based on previous observations after the rapid burst of brightness, which started on August 8, it will gradually fade over the next two months.

It will finish up at its usual 12th magnitude apparent magnitude, which will require a large telescope to view, rather than with the naked eye.

Radio map and measurements of the outburst of the binary system RS Ophiuchi in 2006

It will be another 15 to 20 years before it builds up enough material for another nova explosion, so around the mid 2030s.

The first recorded nova from RS Ophiuchi was in 1898 and they have been consistently happening every 15 to 20 years since then.

The last one saw a 21 year gap - from 1985 to 2006, so it could be longer than 20 years before we see the next, or it could happen in as little as a decade.

The longest recorded gap between explosions was 26 years from 1907 to 1933, although the 1907 outburst was not observed during the event itself, rather from a dip in brightness seen in archive observations.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A university has launched an investigation into a social media video which shows a white man in blackface apparently dressed as Kanye West.

Durham University was made aware of the video amid claims it had been posted by one of its students.

A whistleblower said the person who posted the video claimed the man who wore black make-up said he was dressed as a chimney sweep, not West, despite him wearing a gold chain and trainers.

Durham University was made aware of the video amid claims it had been posted by one of its students

The white man claims that he was not attempting to imitate Kanye West, pictured, insisting his costume featuring him wearing black make up, a chunky gold chain and a tracksuit was a chimney sweep

She tweeted: 'The person who posted this claims that the guy is dressed up as a 'chimney sweeper.'

'Gold chain + cap + Yeezys = chimney sweeper???'

She also posted a still image showing the man in black make-up posing next to a woman dressed like Kim Kardashian.

Inquiries have established that the person featured in the clip, which appeared to be taken at a fancy dress party, was not a Durham University student, but inquiries were continuing into who posted it online.

A university spokesperson said: 'We have investigated this social media post and it appears that the individual featured is not a Durham University student.

'We continue to look into the circumstances in which the video was posted.'

In a series of tweets replying to the post alerting them to the video, the university said there was no place for racism at Durham.

The university tweeted: 'We condemn this post, which violates the values and behaviours that we uphold as a University community.'

It also said: 'Our students are regularly reminded to display positive and collegial conduct, and exercise responsibility and respect for others, particularly through their social media interactions.'

In September a prospective student had his offer of a place at Durham withdrawn after a series of online comments emerged which the university called 'utterly abhorrent'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alexander Kuranov, 73, a Russian rocket scientist, has been arrested and accused of spying for the West

Russia has detained one of its top hypersonic scientists on suspicion of high treason.

Professor Alexander Kuranov, 73, was held by the FSB counterintelligence service which accuses him of passing secrets to an unspecified NATO country.

He is due in Lefortovo court in Moscow today and is expected to be detained for two months pending investigations.

His arrest comes after Briton David Smith, a security guard at the British embassy in Germany, was taken for questioning on suspicion of passing confidential information to the Kremlin.

Smith - described by neighbours as short, overweight and a man who kept himself to himself - is accused of passing classified terrorism documents to a Russian spy.

His arrest comes as Russia is rushing forward its deployment of new-age hypersonic missiles as part of a major modernisation of the Kremlin's military machine overseen by Vladimir Putin.

Kuranov is a key figure in developing hypersonic technologies in Russia, but the FSB - formerly known as the KGB - believes he passed classified data to a Western intelligence source.

He is the general director and chief designer of the Scientific Research Enterprise of Hypersonic Systems (NIPGS).

Kuranov was one of Russia's top scientists working on its hypersonic missile programme (pictured, a test of the hypersonic Zircon missile)

An FSB source said: 'During the operational-search activities in the capital, the FSB officers detained the general director of the NIPGS Alexander Kuranov.

'Investigators plan to ask the court to ask for his arrest for two months.'

Open sources show Kuranov also to be Professor of the Department of Control Systems and Technologies of St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, and general director of the Hypersonic Systems Research Institute of 'Leninetz' Holding Company .

He is author of over 120 scientific papers, including patents and copyright certificates.

For many years he has been the organiser of the Russian-American International Symposium 'Thermochemical and Plasma Processes in Aerodynamics'

Meanwhile Smith has been arrested in Postdam, near Berlin, accused of accepting a pile of cash to pass classified terrorism information to a Kremlin spy.

Smith, 57, was charged on Tuesday for handing over information obtained from the British embassy in Berlin.

The purported spy worked as a security guard inside the building and would have had access to the counter-terrorism tactics which would be deployed in the event of an attack.

Russia's hypersonic missiles have often been used for bragging rights by Putin, who claims they cannot be stopped by any current technology

Such details would be invaluable to enemy agents looking for weaknesses at an embassy in a city where Russian espionage is rife.

Smith was monitored by MI5, Scotland Yard and German intelligence for months before he was arrested, sources said.

A succession of senior - and often elderly - Russian academics have been detained on suspicion of spying for the West in recent years.

For many years Kuranov was the organiser of the Russian-American International Symposium 'Thermochemical and Plasma Processes in Aerodynamics'.

Russia has this week announced that its state trials on its new Tsirkon or Zircon hypersonic missile will be completed this year.

Its new Project 885M class submarine Severodvinsk is to test-fire the Tsirkon cruise missile around the end of August as part of this process.

Flight tests of its new deadly hypersonic 208-ton 'Satan-2' - known to the Russians as Sarmat- intercontinental ballistic missile will also begin soon.

The 15,880mph hypersonic weapon will become the biggest beast in Vladimir Putin's modernised nuclear arsenal following the state trials.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Do you know Davison? Did you witness the incident in Plymouth? Email Jacob.Thorburn@mailonline.co.uk

Advertisement

The devoted father of a three-year-old girl shot dead by 'incel' maniac Jake Davison was killed as he courageously tried to shield her from incel killer Jake Davison.

Lee Martyn, 43, had protectively put his arm round tiny Sophie, three, as the murderer targeted them moments after murdering his own cancer survivor mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside to randomly select victims.

Sophie was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee who was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One witness said: 'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

They were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts.

Tributes have flooded in for the pair who lost their lives during a six-minute scene of carnage, as it was revealed Sophie was adopted by Lee and his partner two years earlier.

One friend said in tribute: 'You were such a kind selfless gentleman who put everyone else before yourself we have shared many memories together, I will never forget the things in life you have done for me.'

Another wrote: 'I am totally distraught that a good friend's brother and niece have been taken in such an horrific way, my heart is breaking for my friend & his family at this very very sad news.

'Deepest and sincerest condolences to all the deceased & hope those injured make a speedy recovery.'

Davison then aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Davison then walked out of the cul-de-sac down a path, telling a stunned resident: 'Nothing to worry about mate,' before shooting dog walker Stephen Washington, 59.

One witness said: 'I went up there to see if I could help and there was a bloke lying on the grass face down. He was obviously dead, and his two dogs were running free.'

The video shows Davison at this point. He is then seen walking past a house and crosses the road in the direction of Blush hair salon, where he will fatally shoot Kate Shepherd, 66, his fifth victim. This is where the footage ends.

A witness to Ms Shepherd's murder said she was shot 'without a word' from Davison as she was smoking a cigarette outside the salon.

Sophie Martyn, 3, and her father Lee, 43, (pictured above) were shot at random as Plymouth incel gunman Jake Davison entered Biddick Drive and fatally killed the pair who were walking up the road

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife Becky works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts

Jake Davison's mother Maxine was the first to be killed. She and other relatives are claimed to have begged the police and NHS to help him with mental health problems

66-year-old Kate Shepherd was Davison's final victim, and was gunned down by Blush hair salon in Plymouth

Davison first murdered his own mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing schoolgirl Sophie Martyn, her father Lee, 43, and dog walker Stephen Washington. He then crossed a road to a hair salon where he shot and fatally injured Kate Shepherd, 66

Jake Davison then moved on towards a nearby wooded area where he shot and murdered dog walker Stephen Washington, 59, (above)

'Police gave shotgun back to gunman after "anger management class" one month before rampage' Police are tonight facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago. Gunman Jake Davison, 22, murdered his mother Maxine, 51, in her Plymouth home with a pump-action shotgun before going out into the street and killer a further four innocent people. The bodybuilder, who had posted rambling videos about being 'beaten down' on social media, said nothing during the 12-minute rampage through a quiet residential street before turning the gun on himself. Tonight the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said they would investigate Devon and Cornwall Police over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate. The legally held weapon had been taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault last September. It was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot shotgun. Confirming a mandatory referral from Devon and Cornwall Police this morning, IOPC regional director David Ford said announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'. This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing, he said. Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12. 'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun. 'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered. 'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings. 'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.' Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.' According to The Telegraph, Davison had claimed that he had the shotgun for sports use and had the licence reinstated after he attended an anger management course. Advertisement

A 16-year-old boy, who was walking to a supermarket when he saw the murder, said: 'She fell to the floor and he just carried on walking. He didn't say anything to her. I don't know if she worked at the salon or not. A man in a hoodie arrived and held his hands over her stomach wounds. I couldn't believe what I saw.'

Seconds later, Davison turned the gun on himself before armed police can reach him.

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts.

In other developments:

Friends claimed Davison’s mother had begged the NHS and police to give him urgent mental health treatment during lockdown, but failed to get the help he needed;

Neighbours also said his father Mark had previously told the police his son’s gun should be taken away from him;

The police watchdog is also investigating what information Devon and Cornwall Police had about Davison’s mental health, and if it was considered

Boris Johnson said the issue of how the killer came to legally own a gun should be ‘properly investigated’ as he described the mass shooting in Plymouth on Thursday night as an ‘absolutely appalling’ incident

Plymouth residents held a candlelit vigil for the five victims killed in the shooting spree on Thursday;

Tributes have flooded in for the Martins who lost their lives during a six-minute scene of carnage, as it was revealed Sophie was adopted by Lee and his partner two years earlier.

One friend said in tribute: 'You were such a kind selfless gentleman who put everyone else before yourself we have shared many memories together, I will never forget the things in life you have done for me.'

Another wrote: 'I am totally distraught that a good friend's brother and niece have been taken in such an horrific way, my heart is breaking for my friend & his family at this very very sad news.

'Deepest and sincerest condolences to all the deceased & hope those injured make a speedy recovery.'

Neighbours said penultimate victim Mr Washington was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path close to the Davison family home when he was shot by the killer.

Mike Moore, who lives near by said: ‘Both the dogs ran back to Stephen’s home and that’s when the family became concerned.

‘Stephen was well known around here because he was always out with his beautiful dogs. He wasn’t friends with Jake and there’s nothing connecting them so we think it was completely random.’

Within six minutes, officers, some armed only with Tasers, had raced to the scene of the carnage. But they were too late to save the victims, whose bloodied bodies lay in the street.

Davison's body was found 12 minutes after the shooting began.

Yesterday police and social services were facing questions about whether Britain’s worst mass shooting for more than a decade could have been prevented.

Last night the Independent Office for Police Conduct launched an investigation into ‘Devon and Cornwall Police’s decision-making in relation to Davison’s possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate’.

IOPC regional director David Ford said the probe will look at ‘what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed’. The killer’s shotgun and certificate were removed by police in December some three months after an allegation of assault in September 2020.

He is said to have had a row with two youths which was reported to police, to whom he was already known. A family friend also claimed yesterday that Davison had assaulted his own father.

His weapon, which is legal in the UK for sports such as clay pigeon shooting if a licence is obtained, was then returned in early July.

Within hours of the carnage, a disturbing series of YouTube videos emerged in which Davison, under the user name Professor Waffle, fantasised about being the ‘Terminator’ from the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.

He also spoke of his belief in the ‘blackpill’ philosophy of the ‘incel’ community, a fatalistic and misogynistic world view that your position in life cannot change.

The chilling parallels between the shooting in Plymouth and the Sandy Hook and Hungerford massacres In December 2012, 20-year-old Adam Lanza gunned down 27 people, including his mother, before turning his weapon himself at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Connecticut. Lanza murdered 20 elementary school children, six adults and shot his own mother, Nancy, 52, four times in the head with a rifle while she slept in bed. A 2014 report found Lanza was a deeply troubled young man who obsessed over mass killings as he fell deeper into a pit of mental illness while his mother ignored his struggles. FBI files revealed he had an 'obsession' with historic mass shootings and a 'paedophilia-like' interest in children before he committed the fourth deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States. Documents also showed Lanza had meticulously created a spreadsheet documenting previous mass shootings, including the 1999 Columbine High School shooting. He had acquired National Rifle Association safety permits after attending shooting ranges with his mother, Nancy Lanza. Details on the pair's relationship remain unclear, but one a medical professional said Nancy was never allowed into Adam's room. It was on August 19, 1987 that loner and gun fanatic Michael Ryan went on a shooting rampage in Hungerford, a market town in Berkshire. Armed with an automatic rifle, a pistol and at least one hand grenade he shot 16 people dead, including his mother, before killing himself. His victims included a police officer who tried to tackle him. At least another 15 people were also injured. His first victim was a woman who was picnicking with her two children in Savernake Forest, 10 miles from the Berkshire town. Less than 10 minutes later, firefighters were called to a house in Hungerford where they found the body of Ryan's mother. Ryan, dressed in combat gear, then made his way, shooting at people as he went on foot, to the town's main shopping area where he indiscriminately shot and killed 12 people. He then managed to evade a massive manhunt by armed police and helicopters until he was tracked down to the empty John O'Gaunt Community Technology College where he barricaded himself in. Negotiators made contact with Ryan after he had fired at circling helicopters. At one point Ryan waved an unpinned grenade at police through a window. He is reported to have told negotiators: 'Hungerford must be a bit of a mess. I wish I had stayed in bed.' The body of the 27-year-old, who had shot himself, was later found inside. Ryan was described by the press as a gun fanatic who had an 'unhealthy' relationship with his mother. The incident led to tighter restrictions on gun ownership with the introduction of the Firearms (Amendment) Act of 1988 but critics said the legislation did not go far enough. On March 13 1996, former Scout leader Thomas Hamilton entered the gymnasium at Dunblane Primary School and opened fire on a class of five and six-year-olds, killing 16 children and their teacher. In a shooting spree which lasted less than three minutes, Hamilton, who was armed with two pistols and two revolvers, fired a total of 109 rounds. A public inquiry into the Dunblane massacre found that Hamilton, a former shopkeeper, had been investigated by police following complaints about his behaviour towards young boys. The incident led to further tightening of gun controls with a ban on owning handguns. Advertisement

His family had desperately applied for professional help with Davison's ADHD according to a close family friend, with the gunman being described as 'introverted' and a 'troubled soul'.

The friend told the Telegraph: 'Jake was always very quiet growing up, almost introverted. He was a troubled soul. He got into guns and he knew everything there was to know about them.

'Maxine and Jake used to be close. You’d always see him helping her with the shopping at Lidl up the road, but then his views changed and he went against women and he became misogynist. They clashed a lot about that.'

Self-described 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and bodybuilder Jake Davison was described as having a 'pump action shotgun'. The weapons are legal in the UK - but only as long as they have a fixed magazine capacity of no more than three cartridges and a valid Shotgun certificate.

The murders came 22 days after he was bragging online about the UK 'having more guns you think' in a post about US-style mass shootings.

Davison also described his fascination with previous atrocities including the Hungerford massacre in 1987 - one of the worst UK gun attacks in history - where an unemployed former labourer shot dead 16 people with semi-automatic rifles and a handgun.

In a chilling Reddit post written just over three weeks ago about the evolution of gun attacks over the past 80 years, Davison wrote: 'There are lot more guns in Europe and the UK then people think'.

MailOnline yesterday revealed the killer was a nihilistic YouTuber who fantasised about being The Terminator, ranted about being a 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and described his affinity with the 'incel' movement linked to mass murder by misogynists in the US and Canada.

Only today did YouTube and Facebook delete his hate-filled accounts.

And one friend of the family wrote on Facebook last night that his relatives, including his mother Maxine, had begged for mental health support for Davison, adding: 'The NHS basically said they are short staffed and that was it.

'The family even asked the police to come out to see him as he was talking acting and acting strange - they didn't do a welfare check. And now six people are dead'.

Devon and Cornwall police chief constable Shawn Sawyer said his social media and claims his family went to the police and the NHS about his mental health would form part of their investigation.

Speaking at a press conference outside Crownhill police station in Plymouth, the senior police officer said the weapon used in the Plymouth shooting was described as a 'pump action shotgun' and confirmed a firearm had been recovered from the scene.

Mr Sawyer said police would look at Davison's social media output as part of the investigation.

He said: 'This is an extraordinarily unusual response by a fellow human being.

'Whether there were mental health issues I cannot say at this time.' He said most witnesses were 'shocked at what was unfolding before them,' but said there was no evidence to suggest Davison was saying anything as he carried out his atrocity.

Police investigating the Plymouth shootings raided the gunmen's father's flat on Thursday.

Armed officers forced their way into the home of Mark Davison, about a mile from where his son Jake killed five people before turning the gun on himself.

Mr Davison was not in at the time - according to a neighbour - but returned later in the evening and spoke to detectives.

He was being comforted by one of his other sons this afternoon and declined to comment about the tragedy.

Plymouth has two gun shops in the centre of the city, Pull The Trigger and Peter's Fishing and Sports, which are both near the city's market.

A member of staff at Peter's Fishing and Sports recalled how Davison had been in last year.

He said: 'I remember the gunman came in just before the first lockdown and was interested in an air rifle we had up on the wall.

'He didn't buy it in the end but spent a few minutes examining it. He didn't have the bushy beard back then and seemed fairly normal, nothing that would trigger any kind of alarm.

'Apparently he was seen walking through the market on Monday. I've seen him around a few times.

'But how he managed to get a license to own a shotgun is a mystery because in order to have a license you have every part of your background scrutinised down to the most minute details. Or at least you're supposed to.'

Mr Washington (pictured above) had been out walking with his 'beautiful' huskies, who rushed back home to raise the alarm with concerned family members

On a Reddit thread, under the question 'What do incels think of their mother', Davison replied: 'Can't stand her'

Davison wrote this post about mass shootings and more guns being in the UK 'than people think' just 22 days before the Plymouth massacre

Davison shot multiple people and then himself last night in the worst shooting atrocity in Britain for 11 years

In rambling and unsettling films made in the weeks before his rampage, he described an obsession with The Terminator and repeatedly mentions to 'incel' movement linked to mass shootings in the US

MailOnline has revealed Davison he was an active YouTuber calling himself 'Professor Waffle', who posted videos of himself working out and most recently ten-minute rants about life being 'rigged against you', humanity being on the 'brink of extinction' and being repulsive to the opposite sex.

He also shared clips from ultra-violent video games and just two days ago 'liked' videos of a M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle being shot.

In his most recent online rant from his bedroom he said: 'You wake up and you stare at the wall and you're thinking um nothing's changed but I'm still in the same position, same period in life, still a f***ing this, that virgin f***ing fat ugly, what'. He added: 'I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something. And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission'.

A fortnight ago, the 23-year-old also spoke of his affinity with the 'incel' movement, which has been linked to a number of mass shootings in the US. The most notorious was by misogynist killer Elliot Rodger, who killed six people in California in May 2014 before he turned the gun on himself. In Canada in 2018 Alek Minassian posted a Facebook message showing his support for Incels before ploughing a van into crowds, killing ten.

'Incel' stands for 'involuntary celibate' and those referring to themselves as such believe their unattractiveness to women is predetermined by his genetics. Some extremist followers believe they are owed sex by women. Davison says repeatedly in his videos that he is repulsive to women, overweight and so is all his family.

He also talks about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Davison also 'liked' a series of videos about guns, and shared posts on Facebook quoting former American president Donald Trump as well pictures of a statue holding a rifle with the US flag in the background.

His Facebook profile suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

He said on July 28: 'People like similar to me, they've had nothing but themselves. And then they've socially had it tough, probably grew up in a s*** background, like, like… How can you have drive and willpower, you know, when you've been defeated a million times? It's you wake up and you're like 'what the f***?', you know, when you've when you've worked so f***ing hard – so f***ing hard – and you see mother***ers who work nowhere near as hard as you.

'For the most part it's just been me against the world. It's just been me fighting an uphill battle with a big f***ing rock on my back, you know, while I'm seeing mother***ers that don't deserve half of anything, now they're getting a free road to the top'.

He added: 'I think any as long as you're breathing air… It's like in the Terminator, right, you know, fate is nothing, you know, the whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything's rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction, you know, these machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted.

'But yet humanity still tries to fight to the end! And I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something.

'And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission, you know'.

Obsessions of a maniac who called himself the Terminator: Plymouth gunman posted videos on YouTube of himself pumping iron and ranting about his life before going on murder spree

Staring intensely into the camera, Jake Davison signed off his final video on YouTube with the chilling words: 'I am a Terminator.'

Within weeks, the 22-year-old virgin would enact his bloody fantasies with appalling consequences.

In a 12-minute rampage, the gunman murdered his own mother and four strangers, including a three-year-old girl.

The gun massacre – the worst in a decade in the UK – left Plymouth residents questioning how a loner with seemingly serious mental health problems was allowed to have a firearms licence.

Shockingly, it emerged yesterday that the behaviour of the apprentice crane operator had been of concern for some time to those close to him, including his mother Maxine and father Mark – who had reportedly begged the NHS for help and even allegedly contacted the police saying he should not be allowed to keep a gun.

Within hours of the shootings, disturbing videos emerged online in which the 17-stone weightlifter moaned about being 'defeated in life' and talked about the violent sci-fi films starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Jake Davison who shot multiple people and then himself last night was a YouTuber who ranted about being a 'fat ugly virgin'

He said: 'The whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything is rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction.

'These machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted, but yet humanity still tries to fight to the end.

'I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes I'm a Terminator or something and despite reaching almost total system failure, he keeps trying to accomplish his mission.'

Recording his final video on July 28, Davison said: 'I'm beaten down and defeated by f****** life. That drive I once had, that's gone.'

The loner had described himself as an 'incel' – a reference to the 'involuntary celibate' movement, a radical group of misogynistic young males who spend their lives ranting online about women and are of growing concern to police.

Recording videos in a small bedroom he likened to a 'prison cell', Davison spent his days agonising over why he had never had a girlfriend or even been kissed.

Obsessed with sex, he fired off scores of messages to incel groups asking why he was constantly rejected on dating sites and bemoaning his lack of experience of love as a teenager.

Incels and 'black pill' links to Plymouth gunman: Misogynist movement who believe they are 'owed sex' and have been behind several mass shootings in the US including 2020 machete attack classed as terrorism An incel, which is an abbreviation of an involuntary celibate, refers to a group of men who advocated for violence against women because they believe they are unjustly denied sexual or romantic attention. Essentially, they blame women for refusing to have sex with them and believe in responding with rape and violence. Those who identify as an incel interact with each other on online forums where they discuss their hatred of women, hatred of feminism, how to get away with rape, and specific women to target. In 2014, self-proclaimed Incel Elliot Rodger (pictured) declared a 'War on Women' and went on a killing spree near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Since then, Incels have been linked to a number of violent attacks, and are increasingly described as a terrorism threat. In February 2020, a machete attack in a Toronto massage parlor became the first incident of alleged Incel violence to be prosecuted as an act of terrorism. Jake Davison talked about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Dr Joseph Downing, a fellow in nationalism at LSE who studies security and terrorism, told MailOnline: 'The incel attacks and jihadi attacks share many commonality. In all cases it's the chicken and egg problem. 'Is it somebody who acts like this because of their predisposition to violence who found the incel movement, or is it the incel movement that gave that individual the idea to go and commit violence? 'Many think it's about extremist propaganda and the ability to access it and be radicalised, but I'm on the side of that it doesn't really matter. 'These people go and seek extremist ideologies because they're predisposed to do that kind of thing. So whether it's Andre Breivik or jihadis or the incel movement it doesn't matter. 'The incel movement is pretty nuts. When you go down the rabbit hole they say stuff like women are forcing me to be celibate and should cater it upon themselves as their feminine duties to give sexual favours to men. 'But it doesn't really say much about acts of violence. It's not really an ideology that goes as far as say radical Islam. 'They're more of an abstract nihilistic, misogynistic kind of group. So there is a commonality with other forms of extremist violence. 'It's more the person is predisposed to to that kind of behaviour and they go and seek out some kind of extremist ideology. 'The individual is just not interested in the other information out there, they want to find the radical ideology.' He added: 'I don't think people like him will encourage similar acts of violence - in this case we lose the fact that what he's done is really mysterious. 'The majority of people you could just never sway to do that kind of thing. But there may well be other individuals who will go out and commit acts of violence and say it's inspired by him, for example. 'Some may say yes I was inspired by him and incel and stuff like that, but I don't think people are swayed, some just have that psychopathic tendency to extreme violence or they don't.' Advertisement

Revealing he had not spoken to a girl since he was 17, Davison considered himself a virgin loser with nothing to live for.

He wrote of his loneliness and despair, saying he had been 'forgotten about'.

'I used to be OK with being a virgin too, but when you get older and the inferiority complex kicks in and the feeling of despair and missing out occurs,' he said.

'Try being an unemployed, autistic, poor, sexually frustrated male with tons of health issues, no social circle and being stuck in government housing with my mother for years on end, having missed out on so much in life.

'Not being able to do the hobbies and things I enjoy as I don't have a car, I am socially isolated and a black sheep who barely interacts with anyone other than a few people at work.

'It's not just sex and teen romance I feel I missed out on, I feel I missed out on the entire teenage experience. Since leaving school I don't have any friends.'

Born in Plymouth, he was raised with his older brother and sister by their single mother Maxine, with whom he had a difficult relationship, writing online: 'Feel my mother has played a role in [me] being a male virgin.'

Diagnosed with autism as a child, Davison was sent to Mount Tamar special school in Plymouth, where he was said to have been a 'disruptive' influence on his peers.

Jess Wallace recalled: 'My boyfriend went to school with him and said he was pretty shy and quiet and would talk about how cool Americans are, and the idea of having a gun collection.'

Another woman related to a former classmate said: 'He was well-known for his anger issues.'

After leaving school, Davison described feeling positive as he embarked on a career working in construction scaffolding before an ankle injury sent him spiralling into depression. He admitted online that his 'mental, physical and emotional health' had been deteriorating for two years.

He wrote of his frustration at being unable to get a doctor's appointment and revealed he tried a cocktail of supplements and steroids and even considered drugs like cocaine.

Consumed by self-loathing, the recluse posted regular questions such as 'Should being ugly be considered a disability?' and recorded scores of videos and selfies discussing his weight issues and fear of being too fat to get a girlfriend.

Lonely and bored, he described himself as a 'computer addict with nothing else to do for many years'.

He wrote: 'When you have been a recluse for as long as I have, you search up and go on pretty much every subject on the internet. I can't think of a subject I haven't dabbled in on the internet – technology, politics, space, exploration, astronomy, LGBT transgender movies, comics, video games, military, special forces guns, weapons, tanks, jets, nuclear power, futurism, transhumanism, drugs, biology, history.'

In a desperate search for like-minded individuals, he signed up for IncelTV on YouTube.

Spurred on by others in the community, Davison said he had 'overdosed' on 'black pill' – an incel philosophy centred on the belief that success with the opposite sex is determined by genetics.

He wrote: 'Inferiority complex of being a virgin for almost 23 years and the panic of getting older is crippling.' Incel culture has been associated with killings and acts of violence, particularly in the US, where Davison had fantasised about living.

Elliot Rodger became a spiritual figurehead of the incel movement when he murdered six people in Isla Vista, California, in 2014 aged 22 – the same age as Davison.

Before his rampage, Rodger had posted a video on YouTube saying he wanted to take revenge on women for rejecting him.

Within hours of Davison's killings, other incel internet users had built what was described as an online 'shrine' to him yesterday.

Shortly before the attacks, Davison called for a 'Government-funded incel social programme or rehab centre' to get them to do group activities 'to build confidence and self-esteem and getting them out of their depressed mindset'.

Among his ideas were group therapy, activities such as rock climbing and 'taking away computers, phones, internet to detox from social media and the internet'.

But trapped in his bedroom during lockdown, Davison's despair only grew.

Yesterday it emerged that he had liked nearly 800 videos on YouTube pointing to an obsession with US gun culture, violent video games and weightlifting.

He boasted to followers that he held a shotgun licence, writing: 'It would be good if there were more [shooting] ranges and clubs too.

'I have a section SGC (shotgun certificate) but would properly have a FAC (firearms certificate) as well if there were more ranges... as soon as I get a car, which should not take too long, I will apply for my FAC.'

Within recent weeks, Davison's thoughts had turned to death and knives. He wrote online: 'Machetes are awful weapons... most are cheaply made and lack the cutting power to do any real damage like actual swords do.

'If you actually look at machete attacks, videos and news reports, more often than not they only manage to cut and lacerate skin.

'They rarely have the weight and sharpness to cut through bone and skull. They are good for cutting through bush, not cutting limbs and heads... best sword for zombie would be a two-handed great sword which would cut limbs clean off and penetrate skull easily.'

In another post on 'mass shootings' he referred to the Texas clock tower shooting in America in 1966 and the Hungerford massacre in Berkshire in 1987.

Davison wrote: 'There are a lot more guns in Europe and the UK than people think.'

Yesterday, neighbours revealed the Davison family's desperate pleas for help.

Donna Croft said: 'His poor mum has only just got cleared of cancer. His sister was a harmless soul, she was in the same class as my son.

'The dad even begged the mental health team to assess him but they basically said they couldn't be bothered and said they were too short of staff to come out.

'So not have only the mental services on this country let these poor families down, they could [have] prevented this to happen.

'People like that need 24/7 help. How he got a gun to kill these people is crazy.'

His Facebook profile and logo'd T-shirts suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

Six minutes of utter carnage: How the Plymouth gunman's sickening rampage unfolded and left five innocent people dead

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a Plymouth suburb on Thursday is Britain's worst for more than a decade

It began shortly before 6.11pm on Thursday when Davidson kicked down the door to his own home and launched into an argument with his mother, Maxine, who he then shot

Witnesses described watching in terror as Davidson, 22, went out into the street and began shooting indiscriminately at unsuspecting passersby and those who tried to help the injured

Davidson killed Maxine, 51, Sophie Martyn, three, her father Lee, 43, Stephen Washington, 53, and Kate Shepherd, 66, before turning the gun on himself. Mother and son Michelle and Ben Parsonage survived

The rampage lasted for just six minutes – 12 until the gunman's body was found - but it left five innocent people and their killer dead and the whole nation in shock.

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade.

The first warning residents had in the cul-de-sac of Biddick Drive was when Davison, 22, burst into the house he shared with his mother and began shouting on Thursday evening.

However, the heated argument quickly became murderous.

His killing spree began shortly before 6.11pm, when terrified neighbours made a flurry of 999 calls to Devon and Cornwall Police's control room.

They told operators they could hear gunfire and there was a man with a pump-action shotgun killing people at random.

One witness, Sharron Turner, 57, who lives nearby, said Davison kicked in the door of a property – now known to be his own home – where he turned the gun on his 51-year-old mother, Maxine, who had cancer.

'Firstly, there was shouting, followed by gunshots – three, possibly four to begin with,' she said. 'This was when the shooter kicked in the door of a house and randomly started shooting. He ran from the house shooting as he ran.'

Some in his line of fire had lucky escapes.

On his way out, still clutching the weapon, Davison, who was dressed in black and grey, told a stunned passer-by: 'Nothing to worry about, mate.'

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade

But an instant later he gunned down a girl of three, Sophie Martyn, who was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee, 43.

Mr Martyn was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One retired resident who lives opposite and watched the murders from his kitchen window, said he 'couldn't believe what I was seeing'.

The shocked local added: 'We were sat in our kitchen when we heard shots in the street, so we looked outside.

'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

'This is on the pavement across the road from my house. You don't witness a murder, two people killed right in front of you, every day. He was just shooting indiscriminately.'

By now armed police were on their way. But Davison, a crane driver whom relatives claimed had mental health problems but was unable to get help in lockdown, had not finished.

Still on Biddick Drive, he aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Ben's brother, Jordan, confirmed his brother and mother had been caught up in the carnage.

In a message posted on social media later, he said: 'Just a little update... Ben is now home and going to make a full recovery.

'My mum has to have an operation on her arm and is expected to make a full recovery.'

Peggy Holliday, an intern at the National Marine Aquarium in Plymouth, was walking to a shop when she heard screaming. There were also gunshots, which she thought initially were fireworks.

She said: 'A couple of the gunshots went off and I ran opposite a pub and the owner came out and he shouted at me, 'Get in here, get in here now!'

'I forward-rolled into the pub and I literally clung underneath one of the pool tables for dear life and I froze.

'I said, 'There's shooting, it's violent, it's terrifying'. It literally felt like a living nightmare. It felt like I was being hunted.'

Davison, who held a licence for the shotgun, entered a nearby strip of open land known to locals in the Keyham area of Plymouth as the 'dog park', where he shot Stephen Washington, 59, who was walking his two husky dogs. He died at the scene.

His friend Caitlin Greyling, 19, added: 'Paramedics were working on the woman. I could see them moving up and down as they did compressions on her chest.

'After a while they stopped and I thought maybe she has been saved, but she hadn't.' Police later confirmed Mrs Shepherd had died at Plymouth's Derriford Hospital.

Davison then doubled back to garages at the back of the hairdressers, where he put the gun to his own head and killed himself.

Another witness said: 'He just looked around, turned the gun on himself and fired it. I couldn't believe what I was seeing. It was like a horror movie.'

By then, police including armed officers from the nearby naval base had arrived in Biddick Drive, where they discovered a scene of carnage.

They quickly traced Davison's steps and found his body. He was pronounced dead at 6.23pm.

Survivor Bert Pinkerton told the BBC he had walked past the gunman, who had a 'vacant stare', adding: 'The bloke was walking towards me. I could smell the gunfire. It could have been me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A mother charged over the deaths of her young son and daughter in a horror crash on the M1 has been pictured for the first time.

Mary McCann is charged with two counts of death by dangerous driving after her son, Smaller, 10, and daughter, Lilly, four, were killed in a crash with a lorry near Milton Keynes on Monday night.

The children's aunt, Margaret McCann, 26, said the family were on the way back from a party in London when the horror crash occurred.

Margaret said Mary, 35, of Bamford Avenue, Derby, is a mother of four.

Her other daughter Marina McCann, 13, was not in the car as she stayed in London with her relatives while Elegance, two, was strapped in a car seat in the car and survived the crash.

She added: 'We are absolutely broken. The kids were like our own children, we raised them together with Mary and we were all so close.

'My son Jimmy is so upset, the cousins were all the best of friends, how am I ever going to explain it to him?'

Mary McCann has been remanded in custody to appear at Crown Court on September 6.

Mary McCann is charged with two counts of death by dangerous driving after her son, Smaller, 10, and daughter, Lilly, four, were killed in a crash with a lorry near Milton Keynes on Monday night

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children (left, Smaller, right, Lilly) on social media

Their mother's Facebook page showed an image of smaller next to a birthday cake and 10th birthday balloon from earlier on Monday

There was also a post of a birthday cake showing it was Smaller's 10th birthday on the day he died

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes.

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday.

Investigating officer Sergeant Dominic Mahon, of the serious collision investigation unit at Bicester, Oxfordshire, said: 'My thoughts remain with the family of the two children who sadly died at this extremely difficult time.

'We are appealing for anyone who may have witnessed this collision or anyone who may have dashcam footage that may have captured what happened, or either of the vehicles prior to the collision, to please get in touch.'

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children on social media.

One wrote: 'Life is cruel to take them away from my lovely brother. Best old father in the world, he put them first no matter how hard he hit they were his life please god give him the strength.'

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday (file photo)

The children's aunt said: 'RIP my perfect little niece and nephew. Aunt Elizabeth's old pet Smaller and me little frilly Lilly.

'Love you always and forever and never in this lifetime will you ever be forgotten, always loved.'

A family friend put: 'Mortal divine RIP beautiful angels. So sorry for your loss, their poor mommy and daddy.'

A cousin wrote: 'Can't believe I'm even writing this but rest in peace to my two beautiful little cousins Smaller and Lilly.

'I love you with all my heart. I love you so much this don't even feel real. What has this world come to, hearts in bits. RIP my babies.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: EXCLUSIVE: Travis Barker leans on girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian for moral support after he flies for the first time in nearly 13 YEARS since surviving deadly plane crash in 2008

Travis Barker spotted jetting off with Kourtney Kardashian. The 'All The Small Things' singer is seen on a plane for the first time since Learjet 60 crash.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Judi Love has recalled the terrifying moment that she woke up on top of her baby daughter while they were co-sleeping.

The comic, 40, divulged the details of the scary incident on Monday's episode of Loose Women as the panel were discussing whether its cruel to leave your baby to cry.

'I was lying on my baby... I just remember crying for hours,' the star recalled of the traumatic experience.

'I just remember crying for hours': Judi Love revealed on Monday's episode of Loose Women the terrifying moment that she woke up on top of her baby while they were co-sleeping

Judi, who has a son, 11, and a 16-year-old daughter, explained in full: 'So, I had her in the bed with me and I must have been in and out of sleep and I woke up and that exhaustion...It was an exhaustion that I've never experienced before in my life.

'I woke up and I remember looking at the cot thinking "a cot? Who's had a baby?" It had clean gone out of my mind that I'd had a baby.

'And then I was like "what is that?"... I was lying on my baby. It was literally for like 10 seconds and I jumped up cause she was kind of moving and I grabbed her.'

'I just remember crying for hours,' Judi admitted as the other panelists gasped at the story.

'It had clean gone out of my mind that I'd had a baby': She divulged the details of the scary incident while the panel were discussing whether it was cruel to leave your baby to cry

Judi is a single parent to her two children and mostly keeps them out of the spotlight.

However, she previously discussed her relationship with her son on Loose Women in the wake George Floyd's death.

She explained: 'As a black parent, having to have that conversation with my son at seven years old and explaining to him, "you're a young black boy, and you might be put in a situation where you are judged solely on the basis of your skin" is heartbreaking.”

Is co-sleeping safe? Advice and tips from The Lullaby Trust Co-sleeping advice Babies should be slept in a clear sleep space, which is easy to create in a cot or Moses basket. We know however that families also bed share, and so recommend making your bed a safer place for baby whether you doze off accidentally, or choose to bed share. Our advice on co-sleeping with your baby will tell you how. For safer co-sleeping: Keep pillows, sheets, blankets away from your baby or any other items that could obstruct your baby’s breathing or cause them to overheat. A high proportion of infants who die as a result of SIDS are found with their head covered by loose bedding. Follow all of our other safer sleep advice to reduce the risk of SIDS such as sleeping baby on their back Avoid letting pets or other children in the bed Make sure baby won’t fall out of bed or get trapped between the mattress and the wall When not to co-sleep It is important for you to know that there are some circumstances in which co-sleeping with your baby can be very dangerous: Either you or your partner smokes (even if you do not smoke in the bedroom) Either you or your partner has drunk alcohol or taken drugs (including medications that may make you drowsy) Your baby was born premature (before 37 weeks) Your baby was born at a low weight (2.5kg or 5½ lbs or less) Never sleep on a sofa or armchair with your baby, this can increase the risk of SIDS by 50 times You should never sleep together with your baby if any of the above points apply to you or your partner. Source: The Lullaby Trust Advertisement

It comes after it was revealed on Friday that Judi will be joining this year's Strictly Come Dancing line up.

During the announcement on Loose Women show, she said: 'I don't have any moves yet. I'm so nervous it's so out of comfort zone, but what an opportunity to learn a new skill.

'I've known a few weeks. My friends were asking who it was but I couldn't say anything. I'm overwhelmed with excitement.

'I don't know his name but the one with long hair I'd like to be paired with. This is something very new for you I am thrilled.'

'I just remember crying for hours,' Judi admitted as the other panelists gasped at the story which came out while they were debating whether you should leave babies to cry alone

The comedian said in a statement: 'I think I am still in shock that I will be part of this amazing show.

'I’ve watched it for many years and admired the phenomenal abilities of these dancers and celebrities that have taken part and dedicated themselves to learning a new craft.

'I’m truly looking forward to pushing myself in something that I could have only dreamed of doing and now it’s actually coming true! I can’t lie I’m soooo nervous but excited at the same time!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has reportedly called it quits on her romance with Pete Davison after five months of dating.

And Phoebe Dynevor has been taking her mind off her recent romance woes with a sun-soaked girly trip to Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week.

The actress, 26, who played Daphne Bridgerton in the series, looked radiant as she sipped on white wine during a sailing trip with pal Sabrina, 29, who played Siena Rosso.

Fun: Newly-single Phoebe Dynevor soaked up the sun and sipped on white wine during a holiday in Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week... after 'splitting from Pete Davidson'

In another snap Phoebe put on a stylish display in a backless blue patterned dress as she posed on the boat while accessorising with huge sunglasses and a headband.

The pair then beamed together as the blue ocean stretched out behind them, with Sabrina looking stylish in a pink slip dress and black and white bikini.

She captioned the glowing snaps uploaded to her Instagram: 'Belly full of wine, hair full of salt'.

Views: The pair posed together as the blue ocean stretched out behind them, with Sabrina looking stylish in a pink slip dress and black and white bikini

Beauty: In one snap Phoebe put on a stylish display in a backless blue patterned dress as she posed on the boat while accessorising with huge sunglasses and a headband

The holiday comes amid reports that she and Pete have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating.

The str and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon.

However a source has now claimed that the duo have split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship.

Claims: The holiday comes amid reports that she and Pete have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating (pictured at Wimbledon in the UK in July)

A source told The Sun: 'Pete and Phoebe's romance was a real whirlwind and from the start they were both totally committed.

'It was pretty telling when Phoebe headed to Croatia with her mates this week rather than going to see Pete in America.

'It was wild while it lasted... But the distance has put a strain on them. They will remain close but unless something drastic changes their relationship won't recover.'

The source continued that both of the stars have very busy schedules at the moment, with Phoebe filming Bridgerton series two in the UK and Pete working on Saturday Night Live in the US as well as filming a movie called Meet Cute.

All over? The star and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon (pictured at the tennis)

It is also thought that travel restrictions have added a further pressure to their romance as it isn't easy to just 'jump on a plane' and see each other.

MailOnline has contacted Phoebe and Pete's representatives for further comment.

Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April.

In exclusive pictures obtained by MailOnline the duo were seen enjoying a stroll in Stoke-on-Trent during his visit to the UK.

Busy: A source has claimed that the duo split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship and added that they both having busy schedules making it hard to see each other (Phoebe is pictured on Bridgerton)

It has been previously reported that Pete fell for her after watching her raunchy love scenes on Bridgerton.

The Saturday Night Live star is said to have told pals he thought the actress was 'hot as hell' over her character Daphne's intimate scenes with Simon, The Duke of Hastings (Regé-Jean Page).

A Los Angeles based friend of Pete's told The Mirror: 'Pete just loved Bridgerton and just got totally tripped out by Phoebe.

'She was totally his type - fresh faced, youthful, innocent looking beauty.

'We all joked with him about the naughty scenes, and of course he confessed he found them hot. He binge watched the show and felt it was his destiny to meet her.'

Cosy: Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April

Sun: Earlier this week Phoebe and Sabrina both shared more snaps of their Croatia trip to Instagram

Star: Sabrina plays the part of Siena Rosso in Bridgerton (pictured) who has a relationship with Daphne's brother Anthony

MailOnline contacted a representative for Pete Davidson for comment at the time.

Earlier this week Phoebe and Sabrina both shared more snaps of their Croatia trip to Instagram.

In snaps, Phoebe wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with Sabrina.

The pair also enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

New role: She is also currently filming The Larkins, which is a remake of the popular 90s drama Darling Buds Of May alongside Bradley Walsh (pictured on set last month)

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

Filming on the second series of Bridgerton was recently delayed yet again after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

Farewell: Phoebe is currently working on series two of Bridgerton (pictured with Regé-Jean Page who bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ashlee Simpson hit a fashion high note as she enjoyed a day with her family on Sunday.

The Pieces Of Me songstress, 36, exuded style in a black lace tank top tucked into a pair of high-waist blue jeans.

Ashlee was spotted strolling through Los Angeles in the company of her husband Evan Ross, 32, and their daughter Jagger, six.

Jean-ius! Ashlee Simpson hit a fashion high note as she enjoyed a day with her family in Los Angeles on Sunday

The hitmaker looked stunning with her blonde locks slicked back into a ponytail, putting her done-up complexion on full show.

She glammed up the look with gold hoop earrings, necklaces, and a quilted green bag.

The Autobiography hit-maker finished off the look with a pair of peep toe gold-accented flats.

Her doting husband carried their eldest child together as they strolled down the pavement together.

Family first: Her doting husband carried their eldest child together as they strolled down the pavement together

Evan and Ashlee tied the knot in August 2014 in a ceremony officiated by the groom's superstar mother who also sang at the reception.

Along with little Jagger they also share an infant son called Ziggy whom they welcomed into the world last October.

Ashlee also has a 12-year-old son called Bronx Mowgli Wentz with her ex-husband Pete Wentz who shot to fame as part of Fall Out Boy.

Golden girl: She dressed up the look with dazzling hoop earrings, necklaces, and gold-accented flats

A few years ago Ashlee and Evan dished to Us Weekly about the process of co-parenting Bronx with Pete and his girlfriend Meagan Camper.

'I think the fact that there is a lot of respect amongst all of us. That makes it easier. And we're all really close friends. It's easy, we got really lucky with that,' said Evan.

Ashlee meanwhile gushed that her ex and his girlfriend were 'wonderful' and that she 'lucked out' in her circumstances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Shocking moment black BMW barrels into parked vehicles leaving driver, 31, with life-changing injuries and three children in car needing hospital treatment

BMW sledges upside down in a cloud of dust and is torn to shreds in a collision in Bradford. A family with three kids were present in the vehicle and survived the crash.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Jodie Comer breaks down as she and co-star Stephen Graham deal with the Covid pandemic in hard-hitting first trailer for new Channel 4 drama Help

New Channel 4 drama 'Help' starring Jodie Comer and Stephen Graham look sat the start of the covid-19 pandemic
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: SARAH VINE: Joe Biden's decision to withdraw all US troops from Afghanistan is the single most anti-women act a leader can commit

People headed to Kabul airport as citizens looking to flee Afghanistan as Taliban rebels
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: EXCLUSIVE: Inside the lavish engagement party which saw at least SIX guests leave with Covid as the happy couple 'go to ground' after backlash and condemnation by rabbi - and their attending parents are pillars of Melbourne's community
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kevin Clifton chatted to the Loose Women on Monday about appearing on Strictly Come Dancing with Stacey Dooley.

When asked whether the two of them got on on the BBC One show the professional dancer, 38, gushed about his documentary maker girlfriend, 34, recalling: 'We got on really well and she put loads of hours in.'

The pair were rumoured to be romantically linked as the series progressed, and eventually became official, and have been living together throughout the coronavirus pandemic.

Comeback: Kevin Clifton, 38, chatted to the Loose Women on Monday about appearing on Strictly Come Dancing with Stacey Dooley, 34, along with a possible judging role on the show and returning to musical theatre

Talking about their time on the show, he continued: 'She realised she was not as good as the others so started doing 8am - 10pm.'

He was asked by Kaye Adams to explain how Stacey 'manifested' his new role as Cosmo in Singin' In The Rain.

He recalled: 'We were watching Singin' In The Rain on Christmas Day and Stace doesn't really know much about musical theatre like I do , it's not really on her radar.'

Throwback: Professional dancer, 38, gushed about his documentary maker girlfriend as he recalled that they 'got on really well'; pictured on the show in 2018

Stacey had apparently told Kevin that he should play the role of Cosmo when there was next have a production of the show.

He said on the show: 'I said, "yeah well I would love to, I'd die to play that role, it's such an iconic role"'

He continued: 'And the Make Em Laugh routine that he does I've watched on YouTube so many times'

He went on to reveal that only a couple of weeks later his agent called him to ask about what he thought of playing the role of Cosmo.

Kevin said that he wasn't sure whether he had got the role but Stacey was apparently 'sure' that he'd got it and that 'it was meant to be.'

New production: He was asked by the panel to explain how Stacey Dooley 'manifested' his new role as Cosmo in Singin' In The Rain

Dream character: He revealed on the show that he told Stacey that he would 'die' for the role of Cosmo

The performer went on to say that he's more appreciative of being on stage now, after the pandemic, and that he began to question what his purpose was when he couldn't get up on stage.

Talking about his appearance he said: ‘I used to worry about things like that, I used to wish I was taller, or I wish I had eight abs. I think as I’ve got older I’ve started feeling more comfortable in my skin.'

On whether he misses the enormous audience at Strictly compared with the smaller crowd on stage he said: 'You only see the studio audience. I loved the show, it’s been a massive part of my life and I still love and there’s still a part of me that says never say never, even going back to it in a different role.'

'If anyone wants to move aside I will happily be a judge on strictly come dancing'

Coincidence? Kevin then revealed that only a couple of weeks later his agent called him to ask about what he thought of playing the role of Cosmo

Hard times: The performer went on to say that he's more appreciative of being on stage now, after the pandemic. He began to question what his purpose was when he couldn't get up on stage

Joking with the panel, he said: 'Maybe Stacey can manifest it for me!'

Kevin is currently taking to the stage as Cosmo Brown alongside Steps star Faye Tozer, 45, who plays Lina Lamont.

The professional dancer performs high-energy routines during the show, which uses more than 14,000 litres of water on stage every night, with the story combining the charm, romance and wit of the 1952 film.

Meanwhile, Stacey is taking new steps in her career also, with the star reportedly set to host a new BBC cookery show, after being 'axed' from her makeover series Glow Up for breaking strict advertisement rules.

The television personality is said to have landed the presenting job for Hungry For It- a series which will search for up-and-coming talent in the culinary world.

It will be a second chance for Stacey, who was reportedly secretly let go from her Glow Up hosting gig after 'furious' BBC bosses discovered she had broken the broadcaster's rules by starring in a beauty ad.

Cute: Kevin said he hasn't ruled out taking up a judging role on Strictly, joking with the panel: 'Maybe Stacey can manifest it for me!'

The new series of the BBC One show is starting to gear up again as the full line up of new famous faces have been announced.

Joining the star-studded line up is presenter AJ Odudu, along will comedian Robert Webb, Olympian Adam Peaty, Dragon's Den star Sara Davies, and actress Nina Wadia.

Eastenders' Rose Ayling Ellis will be taking to the dancefloor with Corrie's Katie McGlynn, BBC Breakfast host Dan Walker, England rugby union star Ugo Monye, and TV presenter Rhys Stephenson.

Other famous faces include Loose Women panellist Judi Love, CBBC presenter Matilda Ramsay and McFly's Tom Fletcher.

Who will win the glitterball? The new series of the BBC One show is starting to gear up again as the full line up of new famous faces have been announced
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nicole Scherzinger made sure her week got off to a glamorous start on Monday when she shared a sizzling new series of Instagram selfies.

Showing off her new shorter hairstyle, the Pussycat Doll, 43, put on a fierce display for her followers, working her best angles while wearing nothing but a plush white robe.

Looking to the week ahead with a positive mindset, the star captioned her post: 'Savage. Let's get it Monday. New week. New mood. New mana.'

Wow: Nicole Scherzinger, 43, made sure her week got off to a glamorous start on Monday when she shared a sizzling new series of Instagram selfies debuting shorter hair

Nicole looked beautiful wearing a full face of expertly-applied makeup in the snaps.

The Don't Cha hit-maker's glossy hair appeared a good few inches shorter than usual, and the star flashed her fans a playful wink.

In the second photo shared by Nicole at the beginning of the week, she shot a sultry stare down the camera's lens.

Although this is the first time Nicole has shown off her new shorter hairstyle on social media, the raven-haired beauty was seen rocking the new look after Sunday's taping of The Masked Singer in LA.

Best angles: The Pussycat Doll put on a fierce display for her followers, working her best angles while wearing nothing but a plush white robe

Nicole wrote: 'Savage. Let's get it Monday. New week. New mood. New mana'

The Pussycat Doll left the series' studio wearing a sparkly green dress and show-stopping yellow heels.

She has been involved with The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019.

The show is based on the Korean show King of Mask Singer, which initially premiered in 2015.

The performer regularly appears alongside fellow panellists Ken Jeong, Robin Thicke and Jenny McCarthy in all of the episodes, with Nick Cannon serving as a host.

Joel McHale has appeared in every season of the hit Fox show since its inception.

New look: Nicole's hair was looking significantly shorter in the photos shared by her on Monday (pictured in July)

During an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Nicole expressed that she was heavily invested in The Masked Singer's success for a very personal reason.

She remarked, 'with doing a lot of these talent-searching shows, I do get very emotional because music is the best way of communication and connection to me'.

The actress also gave the media outlet her take on why the program has become so well-known with audiences and lauded the series' unorthodox take on competition shows.

'I think that's what's so bizarre and so special about our show is that you're looking at these crazy costumes and these faces that don't move. And yet you're moved by these contestants, you're moved by their performances,' she said.

The hit-maker also expressed that she saw The Masked Singer as a way for the performers to let out their deepest feelings without fear of ridicule.

'I feel like with that mask on, it gives them the courage to let go more, but they're really revealing all from the inside out,' she noted.

Nicole concluded by expressing that she was happy to be one of the program's main figures and stated that she enjoyed a close relationship with her collaborators.

'It doesn't even feel like a job. It's the best job in the world. I get to go to work with the panellists, who are my close friends that I adore and love,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Products featured in this Mail Best article are independently selected by our shopping writers. If you make a purchase using links on this page, we may earn an affiliate commission.

If you love to nose into the shopping bags of fellow beauty fanatics or want to know where it's worth spending your cash, you'll be pleased to hear LOOKFANTASTIC has just revealed its top 20 bestselling products from the first half of 2021.

Self-care items boomed in the first half of the year thanks to the lockdown and it seems that we are still after those products that encourage us to take some time out for ourselves.

The increased downtime gave us all more hours of pampering to treat ourselves, and Olaplex was king of the hair treatments, dominating the bestsellers list with a whopping seven out of the top 20 spots.

Here, we reveal the top 20 bestselling brilliant beauty, hair and skin picks from LOOKFANTASTIC. And if you want to see what the hype is about for yourself and haven't yet tried LOOKFANTASTIC, we've also got a 20 per cent discount code for new customers. Just enter 20NC at the checkout. The code is valid until August 15 and exclusions apply. Enjoy!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two-time Oscar-winning filmmaker Ben Affleck celebrated his 49th birthday on Sunday by reuniting with his three children in LA's Pacific Palisades neighborhood.

The Berkeley-born, Cambridge-raised triple threat wore a blue T-shirt, black jeans, and sneakers for the low-key family outing.

Ben fathered daughter Seraphina, 12; son Samuel, 9; and daughter Violet, 15; from his decade-long marriage to former Daredevil leading lady Jennifer Garner, which ended in 2018.

Family time: Two-time Oscar-winning filmmaker Ben Affleck celebrated his 49th birthday on Sunday by reuniting with his three children in LA's Pacific Palisades neighborhood

Last Thursday, TMZ reported that Affleck might be planning an 'out-of-town trip' with his ex-fiancé Jennifer Lopez, whom he first dated between 2002-2004.

The Justice League action star reportedly began texting the Bronx-born 52-year-old in February before making their rekindled romance public in late April.

'Bennifer' were last seen Wednesday grabbing dinner at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's alongside her 13-year-old daughter Emme (from her third marriage to Marc Anthony).

Celebrating Daddy! The Berkeley-born, Cambridge-raised triple threat wore a blue T-shirt, black jeans, and sneakers for the low-key family outing

Amicable exes: Ben fathered (from L-R) daughter Seraphina, 12; son Samuel, 9; and daughter Violet, 15; from his decade-long marriage to former Daredevil leading lady Jennifer Garner, which ended in 2018

Jetting off? Last Thursday, TMZ reported that Affleck might be planning an 'out-of-town trip' with his ex-fiancé Jennifer Lopez, whom he first dated between 2002-2004

Lopez and Affleck have also been house hunting Toluca Lake and Beverly Hills properties in the $40M and $80M range - according to TMZ.

The two-time Grammy nominee officially ended her two-year engagement to Fox Sports commentator Alex Rodriguez on April 15, and has since wiped him from her social media.

JLo is The Way Back actor's first public relationship since Ana de Armas ended their year-long fling in January over the phone.

Down low: The Justice League action star reportedly began texting the Bronx-born 52-year-old (pictured Sunday) in February before making their rekindled romance public in late April

Still going strong! 'Bennifer' were last seen Wednesday grabbing dinner at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's alongside her 13-year-old daughter Emme (from her third marriage to Marc Anthony)

Getting serious: Lopez and Affleck have also been house hunting Toluca Lake and Beverly Hills properties in the $40M and $80M range

Things are going to be awkward when Ben and the Cuban 32-year-old have to reunite in January to promote their roles as a couple in Adrian Lyne's erotic thriller Deep Water.

But first, Affleck reunited with BFF Matt Damon to co-write, co-produce, and co-star in Ridley Scott's 14th century revenge drama The Last Duel, which hits US/UK theaters October 15.

Adam Driver and Jodie Comer also star in The Last Duel, which will have its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival in September.

Good Will Hunting duo: The Way Back actor reunited with BFF Matt Damon (L) to co-write, co-produce, and co-star in Ridley Scott's 14th century revenge drama The Last Duel, which hits US/UK theaters October 15
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woman was arrested after two children were tragically killed in a horror smash involving a car and a lorry which blocked a 20-mile stretch of the northbound carriageway of the M1 today.

The smash involved a white Vuaxhall Astra and a Scania HGV, and the two children, aged four and ten, were passengers in the Astra.

A woman has been arrested on suspicion of causing death by dangerous driving and driving a motor vehicle when above the prescribed drink-drive alcohol limit.

A woman was arrested after two children were tragically killed in a horror smash involving a car and a lorry which blocked a 20-mile stretch of the northbound carriageway of the M1 today

Another child in the car and the car driver were rushed to hospital, but Thames Valley Police said a short time ago that both have now been discharged after treatment.

Next of kin have been informed and are receiving support from specially trained officers.

The lorry driver escaped shocked but unhurt in the crash which happened just before midnight between junction 14 at Milton Keynes and junction 15 at Northampton.

The incident led to the northbound carriageway being shut for eleven hours to allow crash investigators to make their reports on how the tragedy happened.

The smash involved a white Vuaxhall Astra and a Scania HGV, and the two children, aged four and ten, were passengers in the Astra (stock image)

The southbound carriageway was also closed overnight, but opened again at around 7am this morning, while the northbound carriageway was opened shortly before 10.30am this morning.

Sgt Dominic Mahon, of the Serious Collision Investigation Unit at Bicester, said tonight 'My thoughts remain with the family of the two children who sadly died at this extremely difficult time.

'We are appealing for anyone who may have witnessed this collision or anyone who may have dash cam footage that may have captured what happened or either of the vehicles prior to the collision to please get in touch.

'You can make a report by calling 101 or online, quoting reference 43210356500.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A factory worker had to have a nail removed from his scrotum after he accidentally shot himself with a nail gun.

The unidentified 27-year-old man, from Italy, was rushed to hospital after his horrific pneumatic gun injury.

But when doctors first looked at his scrotum, they could not see any sign of the nail — despite him being in obvious agony.

There was no clear wound in his skin, forcing medics to use an ultrasound to find the hidden 1.8cm nail.

Urologists noticed a thin white line behind his right testicle and whisked him away for surgery in case it was the missing nail.

Their suspicion proved true, with the nail stuck between the top of his testicle and his penis.

Remarkably, he suffered no lasting damage to his right testicle or epididymis — the tube that stores sperm.

The nail was removed safely and the man, of Ancona, was discharged from hospital the next day.

A package centre worker had to have a missing 3/4in (1.8cm) nail removed from his scrotum after he shot himself with a nail gun in Ancona, Italy

Only one other similarly grisly scrotal injury caused by a nail gun has been reported in medical literature.

Doctors from Verona, Italy, revealed a man punctured his scrotum with a nail in 2017.

Workers rely on the tool in construction, particularly in framing and sheathing, where 70 per cent of the injuries occur.

There have also been occasional cases of chest or head injuries, which can prove to be fatal.

Scrotum ultrasounds are usually used to locate tumours and identify any source of pain in the testicles.

HOW DOES ULTRASOUND WORK? An ultrasound scan, sometimes called a sonogram, is a procedure that uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of part of the inside of the body. A small device called an ultrasound probe is used, which gives off high-frequency sound waves. You can't hear these sound waves, but when they bounce off different parts of the body, they create 'echoes' that are picked up by the probe and turned into a moving image. This image is displayed on a monitor while the scan is carried out. Source: NHS Advertisement

In this case, the procedure was used to detect the nail, which would have otherwise remained inside the man.

Writing in Radiology Case Reports, Dr Maria Pia Pavia said the case 'highlighted the value and role of scrotal ultrasonography in case of closed scrotal trauma'.

She said it showed all cases of injuries with sharp objects should be reviewed with ultrasounds by urologists — even if foreign objects cannot be seen from outside the wound.

Experts have said the man was lucky to have escaped without more permanent damage.

Dr Fardod O'Kelly, consultant paediatric and adolescent urological surgeon at the Becaon Hospital in Dublin, told MailOnline: 'Nail guns are essentially responsible for sharp projectiles which penetrate various parts of the body at high speed — up to 930 miles per hour depending on the gun type.

'To put that into context you need about 100 miles per hour to penetrate skin, and about 135 miles per hour to fracture bones.

'The other issue is the shock wave which is produced when a projectile comes to a "sudden" stop.'

Dr O'Kelly added: 'The patient in this report was a little unusual as he... had no obvious signs of a puncture wound on the scrotal skin.

'He was extremely fortunate in many ways that the nail and ensuing shock wave didn’t rupture the testis which may have required the testis to be removed, or injured the urethra which could have left scarring and a large operation to repair.

'Or even punctured the femoral vessels in the groin region which are not too far away and could have had serious consequences for him.

'Any degree of penetrating injury — provided the patient is stable — should always be imaged with at least an ultrasound, and subsequently explored in an operation.

'Had this patient not been explored, he would likely have developed a significant abscess (pocket of infection/pus) from the nail, which would potentially have made him very unwell, and would also require a surgical procedure.

'It is not likely that he would have been able to get away without having this dealt with one way or another.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

taliban fighters are going door-to-door and forcibly marrying girls as young as 12 and forcing them into sex slavery as they seize vast swathes of the Afghanistan from government forces.

Jihadist commanders have ordered imams in areas they have captured to bring them lists of unmarried women aged from 12 to 45 for their soldiers to marry because they view them as 'qhanimat' or 'spoils of war' - to be divided up among the victors.

Fighters have then been going door-to-door to claim their 'prizes', even looking through the wardrobes of families to establish the ages of girls before forcing them into a life of sexual servitude.

The women and girls' brutal treatment is just the latest sign of Afghanistan's military collapse, which has prompted the Afghan president to sack his top commander.

One female journalist described fleeing a city in northern Afghanistan - which she did not name - and going into hiding with her uncle for fear the Islamists would hunt her down and execute her.

The 22-year-old said she fled under the noses of Taliban gunmen while disguised beneath a burqa and went with her unclear to a nearby village - but was forced to flee again after informants told the militants of her presence.

Now holed up in a remote location somewhere in the country's north, she said she fears for her life and the safety of her family - 'Will I ever go home? Will I see my parents again? Where will I go? How will I survive,' she said.

Meanwhile terrified locals who fled the city of Kunduz - captured by the Taliban last week - have told of reprisal attacks carried out by jihadist fighters who hunted down anyone linked to the government and beheaded or executed them.

The Taliban has now captured nine of Afghanistan's 34 provincial capitals and placed most of the country's largest cities under siege in a lighting-fast assault that has seen government forces largely capitulate.

Hundreds of thousands of Afghanis have been displaced from their homes in recent weeks by fighting, with fears that could swell to millions if entire country falls (pictured)

Displaced Afghans head into Kabul from the northern provinces after leaving their homes behind

Women and their children are seen near the Spin Boldak border crossing between Pakistan and Afghanistan

The fighting has sparked an internal refugee crisis, with many civilians fleeing Afghanistan's regions to the capital Kabul (pictured) in the hopes of being protected from the Taliban

Displaced Afghans reach out for aid from a local Muslim organization at a makeshift IDP camp in Kabul,

Women who have fled fighting in Afghanistan wait to receive food aid in the capital of Kabul, one of the few major cities in Afghanistan that is not under Taliban attack

A child is pictured sleeping on its mother's shoulder at a refugee camp in the Afghan capital of Kabul

Girls as young as 12 are being taken from their homes and forcibly married to Taliban fighters in areas of Afghanistan they now control as part of the 'spoils of war' (file image)

The Taliban has captured nine of Afghanistan's 35 regional capitals in less than a week, with the cities of Pul-e Khumri and Faizabad in the country's north falling into the Islamist's hands overnight

'Sometimes I have to pick up a gun', says female Afghan governor Salima Mazari is one of only three female governors in Afghanistan, having been appointed to lead the northern Charkint district - close to the city of Mazar-i-Sharif - in 2019. Born and raised in Tehran after her parents fled Soviet invasion in 1979, she was schooled at the University of Tehran and held a post at the the International Organization for Migration before returning home. There, she helped to establish fighting units in her mostly-rural district after requests for reinforcements to the central government were ignored. So far she has recruited 600 locals to fight, many of them farmers who had not previously taken up arms. Many of them, including Mazari, are from the Hazara community - most of whom are Shia Muslims, who the Sunni Taliban consider a heretical sect. That, plus the fact that she is a woman, has made the district a target - meaning Mazari herself has taken up arms and joined the frontlines. Aged in her 40s, Mazari has already survived several Taliban ambushes and attempts to affix explosive mines to her car. But they have not deterred her. Of the three Afghan districts run by women, hers is the only one that the Taliban has never fully captured - though half of it is currently in the hands of the militants, and attacks are becoming more common. That is despite the fact that it is located in the country's north - traditionally an anti-Taliban stronghold but that has been rapidly overrun by the militants in recent days. Mazari vowed: 'If we don't fight now against the extremist ideologies and the groups that force them on us, we will lose our chance to defeat them. 'They will succeed. They will brainwash society into accepting their agenda.' Advertisement

The journalist, who spoke anonymously for fear the Taliban will find her, told The Guardian that her life was upturned in two days as fighters approached her home in the north of the country last week.

She described fleeing under the noses of Taliban fighters attacking the city with rockets and rifles, hiding underneath a chadari or full Afghan burqa.

Accompanied by her uncle, she fled to a nearby village but was soon informed that locals had tipped off the Taliban about her arrival - and that everybody would be slaughtered if fighters arrived and found her there.

The pair fled again, this time walking two hours on foot to an even-more remote location where she is now holed up. She has had no contact with her parents since she fled, after all telephone lines in the city were cut.

Having seized a handful of regional capitals, most in the north of the country, the Taliban now have the city of Mazar-i-Sharif in their sights - with President Ghani flying there today to rally troops and confer with local warlords in the hopes of preventing a rout.

Ghani met with Atta Mohammad Noor, Mazar's strongman leader, and Abdul Rashid Dostum, a notorious anti-Taliban warlord who served in Soviet ranks, to plan the city's defence after skirmishes on its outskirts on Tuesday.

The Afghan president also sacked his top commander, Gen. Wali Ahmadzai, and replaced him with Gen. Hibatullah Alizai after a series of battlefield defeats that has left the army stunned and bloodied.

While Ghani attempts to mount a defence against the Taliban, the war is already consumed the lives of hundreds of thousands of Afghanis forced to flee Taliban guns, bombs, and persecution.

The Taliban has rapidly captured territory in Afghanistan, starting in April when Joe Biden said he would keep an promise made by Donald Trump to have all US forces out of the country by September 11.

With US forces now all-but gone, the jihadists have made rapid gains - sweeping through rural areas and overrunning poorly-defended government outposts.

President Ashraf Ghani initially played down the threat, saying he had deliberately withdrawn troops into cities which would be easier to defend.

But that tactic appears to have backfired, with nine regional capitals having fallen to the Islamists in less than a week and most large cities within the country besieged.

In areas that the Islamists have captured, women have been barred from going to school, working, or leaving their homes without a permit, activists have warned.

Last month, reports emerged that fighters had ordered imams and tribal elders to prepare lists of all women aged 15 to 45 who were unmarried or widowed so they could be married to their fighters.

But, writing for Bloomberg, columnist Ruth Pollard said that has now extended down to girls as young as 12.

'Now the Taliban are going door-to-door in some areas, compiling lists of women and girls aged between 12 and 45 years for their fighters to forcibly marry,' she wrote.

Taliban fighters are permitted to do this under their strict interpretation of Islam which views women as 'kaniz' or 'commodities', according Omar Sadr, professor of politics at the American University of Afghanistan.

Taliban fighters are pictured in the city of Farah, one of nine they have seized in less than a week as they push to retake the country

While the Taliban have portrayed themselves on the international stage as reformed moderates, those on the ground say fighters (pictured) are brutal extremists

Taliban fighters patrol inside the city of Farah having captured it from government forces two days ago

Taliban fighters calmly patrolled the streets of Farah on Wednesday, but those who have fled fighting in these cities have reported reprisal attacks and beheadings carried out by the militants

Farah is just one of nine provincial capitals the Taliban now controls, having seized them in just six days

Two Taliban fighters stand guard in the city of Farah, the capital of Farah province, after seizing it two days ago

Fresh refugee crisis looms as people flee in the face of the Taliban The Taliban is sweeping across Afghanistan, seizing territory and cities from the government - some of which have been given up with barely a fight. Hundreds of thousands of people have fled as the militants closed in, with the UN estimating that 400,000 were displaced in the first few months of this year including 244,000 who have fled their homes since May when fighting began ramping up. Most have remained within the country, heading into government-controlled areas in the hopes of finding safety there, with many ending up in the capital Kabul. Some 200 crossed the border into Iran at the weekend, the UN says, joining millions of other Afghan refugees who have fled to the country starting four decades ago with the Soviet invasion. Others have headed south towards the border with Pakistan, but with the Taliban in control of the main crossing and Pakistan saying it will not accept more refugees, it is unclear how many have crossed. Pakistan is already home to at least 2.5million displaced Afghans, though the true toll is thought to be much higher once undocumented refugees are included. Amid warnings from US intelligence that Kabul could fall within a month, it is feared millions more Afghans could head to the border if the Taliban retake full control. While 90 per cent of refugees end up in Iran and Pakistan, significant numbers also head through Iran to Turkey - leaving them on the doorstep of Europe. Kemal Kilicdaroglu, leader of Turkey's main opposition party, warned last month that up to a million could arrive as fighting gets worse and said Brussels plans to 'bribe' them to keep them out of Europe - a move that his party opposes. Notis Mitarachi, Greek migration minister, warned today that Europe 'is not ready' for another migrant crisis on the scale of 2015 when millions arrived in just a few months, saying the continent 'does not have the capacity' to absorb more people. 'We are concerned about the implications of the deterioration in Afghanistan and that's why it is very critical and very important for the European Union to be proactive in preventing such a crisis,' Mitarachi said. But as he spoke, Germany and the Netherlands said they were suspending the deportation of Afghan migrants back to their home country - something Mitarachi warned could encourage more people to come. Advertisement

That means, following a battle, women are treated as 'qhanimat' or 'spoils of war' to be divided up among the victors.

'They don't even have to marry them, it is a form of sex slavery,' he said, adding that it also constitutes a form of 'ethnic cleansing' as other cultures are forcibly assimilated into the Taliban's Pashtun group.

Assessments of the security situation are increasingly grim, with US intelligence sources warning the heavily-defended capital of Kabul - one of the few cities not currently under attack by the Taliban - could fall in as little as a month, handing control of the country back to the Islamists.

American officials had previously said Kabul could hold out for between six months to a year after US forces withdrew, but have now dramatically downgraded that assessment after a series of victories for the Taliban.

Those involved in providing security for American diplomats in Kabul told the Washington Post that they are now contingency planning for how to get their staff out in the event that security collapses within 90 days.

Others put the time-frame even shorter, saying a collapse is possible within just 30 days.

India has already withdrawn its diplomatic staff from Mazar-i-Sharif, flying them out on Tuesday after fighting broke out on the city's outskirts.

In an attempt to halt the Taliban advance, Ghani flew to the city Wednesday and met with Atta Mohammad Noor, Mazar's strongman leader, and Abdul Rashid Dostum.

Earlier in the day, Dostum had been pictured loading on to an aircraft in capital Kabul along with hundreds of his loyal commandos before flying into Mazar where he will join the fighting.

The warlord returned to Afghanistan from his base in Turkey last week to help appraise the security situation, and his flight to Mazar comes just two days after Taliban fighters captured one of his sprawling mansions in Jawzjan province - uploading videos of themselves walking around inside.

Even as the government's focus shifted to the north, battles continued to rage in the west and south of Afghanistan - with clashes underway in the major cities of Herat, Lashkar Gah and Kandahar.

In Kandahar, fierce clashes erupted between Taliban insurgents and security forces, with heavy fighting being reported near the city's prison, which the militants have been trying to reach for weeks.

Prisons are prime targets for Taliban attacks, because they typically house members of the group who can be freed and bolster the ranks.

Some 220 Taliban fighters are thought to have been freed from prisons in Kunduz and Zaranj alone, TOLO News estimated.

While the Taliban has been keen to present itself on the international stage as a legitimate government-in-waiting, claiming to have abandoned the radical practices of its past, those on the ground tell a very different story.

But even as the Taliban routed government forces, US President Joe Biden gave no hint of delaying his deadline to withdraw all American troops by August 31, instead urging Afghan leaders to 'fight for themselves' on Tuesday.

'I do not regret my decision' to withdraw US troops after two decades of war, he told reporters in Washington.

The Afghan air force has been uploading videos showing attacks on Taliban fighters in an attempt to bolster morale and turn the tide of the war, with few battlefield victories to report

Footage taken by the beleaguered Afghan air force has been posted online, showing Taliban fighters being blown to bits in an attempt to boost morale among government troops

The flaming wreckage of a Taliban vehicle is seen in footage taken by the Afghan air force and posted online in an attempt to rally government forces that are otherwise being pushed back on all fronts

Afghan displaced people who fled from their homes during the fighting carry their belongings in a public park in Kabul

Afghan displaced children who fled from their homes during the fighting take shelter in a public park in Kabul

Some 400,000 Afghans have fled their homes since the start of the year, with thousands sheltering in Kabul

And as fighting raged, US diplomats were desperately trying to breathe life back into all but dead talks between the Afghan government and Taliban in Doha, where Washington's special envoy Zalmay Khalilzad was pushing the hardline Islamists to accept a ceasefire.

Biden has stressed that Washington would continue to support the Afghan security forces with air strikes, food, equipment and money for salaries.

'They have got to want to fight. They have outnumbered the Taliban,' he said.

The Taliban have appeared largely indifferent to peace overtures, and seem intent on a military victory to crown a return to power after their ouster 20 years ago in the wake of the September 11 attacks.

The insurgents appeared to be consolidating their hold over captured cities in the north, with rifle-toting militants patrolling the streets of Kunduz on foot and in armored humvees as smoke rose from smoldering shops destroyed during the fight for the city.

After conquering most of the north, the Taliban have now set their sights on region's biggest city, Mazar-i-Sharif - long a linchpin for the government's control of the area - after capturing Sheberghan to its west, and Kunduz and Taloqan to its east.

Mazar saw some of the bloodiest fighting during the Taliban's scorched earth rampage through the country in the 1990s, with rights groups accusing the jihadists of massacring up to 2,000 civilians - mostly Shiite Hazaras - after capturing the city in 1998.

The Taliban flag is raised over the main square in Pul-e-Khumri, capital of Baghlan province, after the Islamists seized it from government forces late on Tuesday

A Taliban fighter poses with locals in Pul-e-Khumri after it became one of nine cities seized by the group so far

Taliban fighters patrol inside the city of Farah, capital of Farah province, after capturing the city earlier this week

Afghanis stand near a burnt car inside the city of Farah after it was destroyed in fighting with government forces

Hundreds of people gather at the border crossing of Spin Boldak, which connects Afghanistan with Pakistan and has been closed since last week

Men wait with their cars at the Spin Boldak border crossing with Pakistan, amid reports that it will reopen on Thursday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CATHERINE ST-LAURENT

ROLE: FORMER CHIEF EXECUTIVE, SENIOR ADVISER

Canadian-born Catherine St Laurent, who lives in Seattle, was head-hunted by the couple from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to become Harry and Meghan's 'chief of staff'

Canadian-born Catherine St Laurent, who lives in Seattle, was head-hunted by the couple from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to become Harry and Meghan's 'chief of staff' and executive director of Archewell, their new non-profit organisation, last April.

But it emerged in March she had left the post with insiders saying she 'wanted out' after performing tasks outside of her contract and having to 'fulfil a great many functions for the Harry, 36, and Meghan, 39.'

She has now said working for the couple was an 'incredible experience' in an interview with The Cut, saying: 'They are incredibly talented and creative leaders. I’m grateful to have had the opportunity to do that, to be able to be with them on their journey.'

She is now working as a senior adviser for the couple.

GENEVIEVE ROTH

ROLE: SENIOR STRATEGIC ADVISER

Alaskan-born Genevieve Roth is the Founder and President of Invisible Hand, a social impact and culture change agency

Alaskan-born Genevieve Roth is the Founder and President of Invisible Hand, a social impact and culture change agency.

More recently, the mother-of-one was made the Senior Strategic Advisor to Archewell, the organisation founded by the Duke and Duchess of Sussex.

She is the former Features Director of Marie Claire Australia and before that, held editorial positions at GQ and Esquire.

She left her job in magazines to serve as the director of creative engagement for the 2016 Hillary Clinton Presidential campaign.

The mother-of-one, whose husband is black, often speaks out about racism in America, and has written at length about the 'racism in her own marriage'.

In an article for Primer, she wrote: 'Race is an issue in our marriage because as a white woman of privilege, I have racist tendencies written in at a cellular level, and that can really gum up the works.'

And in an article for Good Housekeeping, Roth wrote about the notion of white privilege and her heightened understanding of it after marrying her husband, Jordan.

Roth also worked as the executive director of special projects at Glamour magazine, and the producer of the Glamour Women of the Year Awards.

In 2014, Roth helped launch The Girl Project, Glamour's 'global philanthropic initiative' supporting girls' education.

Roth describes herself as an 'expert on the intersection of narrative change, women's empowerment, and social justice.'

Her agency Invisible Hand has created campaigns for clients including Archewell, PBS, The Obama Foundation, The XQ Institute, and The Girl Effect.

A graduate of Emerson College and the Columbia Journalism School Publishing Course, Roth also worked with The White House and Let Girls Learn, a US government initiative launched by former President Barack Obama and wife Michelle.

She was a 2018 Shorenstein Fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School.

JAMES HOLT

ROLE: CHIEF EXECUTIVE

James Holt previously led communications for the Royal Foundation, the charity headed by the Cambridges

James Holt previously led communications for the Royal Foundation, the charity headed by the Cambridges.

Holt has worked at Kensington Palace for several years – as well as for the Liberal Democrats – and is passionate about many of the causes championed by Harry and Meghan.

He acted as Harry and Meghan's UK spokesman and will now take on the role of executive director of the Archewell Foundation.

Holt, a BA Journalism graduate from the University of Lincoln, rose to the position of Head of Media for the Liberal Democrats in 2010 - and stayed in the role until August 2013.

He worked as Special Adviser to the Deputy Prime Minister - Nick Clegg - from June 2013 to January 2014, and moved up to become Head of Government Communications for the Deputy PM until September 2014.

He took on the voluntary position of Director of Communications for Pride in London between March 2016 and November 2017.

In October 2017 he took up the role of Senior Communications Officer for The Royal Foundation of The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and Prince Harry - staying in the role for one year.

He then became Head of Communications at The Royal Foundation for one year, until September 2019.

BEN BROWNING

ROLE: HEAD OF CONTENT

Just days after Meghan and Harry's bombshell two-hour Oprah Winfrey special, the couple announced they were hiring producer Ben Browning to head up their film and television ambitions in the US

Just days after Meghan and Harry's bombshell two-hour Oprah Winfrey special, the couple announced they were hiring producer Mr Ben Browning to head up their film and television ambitions in the US.

He has taken on the role of head of content for Archewell Productions and Archewell Audio after being recommended to the couple by a mutual entertainment industry contact.

Mr Browning has previously worked on films including The Big Sick, Arrival, Room and Late Night and is set to head up Archewell's work with Spotify and Netflix.

Most recently, Mr Browning worked on Promising Young Woman, starring Carey Mulligan, which was nominated for five Oscars.

Mr Browning said in a statement to Forbes: 'From the moment they shared their vision for Archewell as a global production company that will spotlight diverse voices and share uplifting stories, I knew I wanted to help with this unique opportunity.

'It's a thrilling company to be starting.'

REBECCA SANAES

ROLE: HEAD OF AUDIO

The Duke, 36, and Duchess of Sussex , 39, who are currently living in their $14 million mansion in Santa Barbara, have taken on producer Rebecca Sanaes to oversee their podcast business

The interview comes as Prince Harry and Meghan Markle hired a Head of Audio to produce their Archewell podcast - after giving Spotify just 35 minutes of content so far for their £18million deal.

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex who are currently living in their $14 million mansion in Santa Barbara, have taken on producer Rebecca Sanaes to oversee their podcast business, according to Deadline.

She was previously lead podcast producer for Pivot, New York Magazine and Vox Media’s show hosted by Kara Swisher and Scott Galloway and will report to Archewell's head of content, Ben Browning, when she joins the company in August.

Before joining Pivot, she worked in public radio, where she worked on episodes including Why Is Vermont So Overwhelmingly White.

In 2015, Rebecca received the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting HIV/AIDS Fellowship.

NISHIKA KUMBLE

ROLE: HEAD OF SCRIPTED TV

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle have continued their hiring spree at Archewell as they brought on a new Head of Scripted TV Nishika Kumble to work on their Netflix shows

It was announced in August 2021 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle were continuing their hiring spree at Archewell as they brought on a new Head of Scripted TV to work on their Netflix shows.

The Duke, 36, and Duchess of Sussex, 40, have taken on producer Nishika Kumble to oversee their scripted TV programmes with the streaming service, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

She was previously VP development and production at Hollywood actress Rashida Jones' Le Train Train Productions and worked as a producer on the TV series Fargo.

According to the Hollywood Reporter, Kumble will 'work closely' with Netflix to 'create and develop new scripted fare from diverse voices that informs, elevates and inspires.'

CHANEL PYSNIK

ROLE: HEAD OF UNSCRIPTED

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle added another new hire to their growing roster of Archewell employees in July: a former Disney+ executive who has been brought on to oversee their production company's unscripted projects for their incredibly lucrative partnership with Netflix.

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle hired former Disney+ executive Chanel Pysnik to head up nonfiction content for Archewell Productions in July

News of the couple's new hire was revealed by Deadline - it is likely that LA-based Princeton graduate Pysnik will concentrate on boosting the couple's roster of unscripted and nonfiction projects.

This could well mean that she will play a key role in the couple's first Netflix project - Heart of Invictus, a documentary series about the Invictus Games starring Prince Harry, 36 - which was announced in April of this year and would fall under Pysnik's remit as Head of Unscripted.

While it is unclear how Pysnik landed the role at Archewell, she does have an acquaintance in common with Prince Harry: British soccer star David Beckham.

One of Pysnik's most recent projects for Disney+ was securing a new unscripted series with the sports star, who has been close friends with Harry for years - and attended the Sussexes' wedding with his wife, Spice Girls singer-turned-designer Victoria, in May 2018.

While his series for Disney - entitled Save Our Squad - was only announced in April and has yet to be released, Pysnik reportedly played a role in its creation, and will likely therefore have worked closely with the 46-year-old father-of-four during that time.

The Sussexes have also hired Los Angeles-based Toya Holness (pictured) as press secretary

TOYA HOLNESS

ROLE: GLOBAL PRESS SECRETARY

The Sussexes also hired Los Angeles-based Toya Holness as press secretary In November 2020.

A keen football player, she has worked for the celebrity agency William Morris Endeavor, New York City education department and the video creation company Deluxe.

CHRISTINE WEIL SCHIRMER

ROLE: HEAD OF COMMUNICATIONS

She is considered one of Silicon Valley’s top PR gurus and was hired by Meghan Markle and Prince Harry to boost their global image In November.

Christine Weil Schirmer (pictured) graduated from the same US university as the Duchess

Christine Weil Schirmer, the couple’s new head of communications, also shares a deeper bond with the Duchess – they both graduated from the same US university.

Ms Schirmer, a married mother-of-one who has been lauded for her work with tech companies such as Apple and Pinterest, attended Northwestern University between 1996 and 2000, graduating with a journalism degree.

The 42-year-old was raised in Long Island, New York, to parents Ken and Christine, both librarians, before moving to the San Francisco Bay area as her career took off.

The Duchess has spoken about her time at Northwestern in Illinois, from 1999 to 2003, where she majored in theatre and international studies.

She was a member of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority – a social society for women.

A source told The Mail on Sunday: ‘That sorority was mainly made up of the pretty girls from high school.

'Meghan was heavily involved in the social aspects of the group. It’s quite possible that she and Christine crossed paths at Northwestern, at the very least the university gives them a shared bond.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The great British pub helped boost the UK economy out of lockdown, spearheading a 4.8 per cent increase in GDP in the second quarter of 2021, new figures revealed today.

The country's gross domestic product (GDP) increased by a further 1 per cent in June, creating five consecutive months of growth, following a 0.6 per cent rise in May, the Office for National Statistics said.

Chancellor Rishi Sunak hailed the figures, saying they were the best of any G7 nation.

Lockdown restrictions slowly eased through much of the quarter, with outdoor dining opened again in April and further restrictions were lifted in May.

However, GDP is still around two percentage points below its pre-pandemic peak.

Mr Sunak said: 'Today's figures show that our economy is on the mend showing strong signs of recovery, thanks to our Plan for Jobs and successful vaccine programme.

Chancellor Rishi Sunak hailed the figures, saying they were the best of any G7 nation.

'I know there are still challenges to overcome, but I feel confident in the strength of the UK economy and the resilience of the British people.

'With the fastest quarterly growth rate among the G7 economies we have exceeded expectations, and I'm pleased to see the UK bouncing back.'

However the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) inserted a note of caution into the economic picture, saying business investment remained low.

Suren Thiru, its head of economics, said: 'Strong growth in the second quarter may be the high point for the UK economy with economic activity likely to moderate in the third quarter as staff shortages, supply chain disruption and consumer caution to spend limits any gains from the lifting of restrictions in July.

'Against this backdrop, policymakers must guard against complacency over the underlying strength of the recovery.

'A comprehensive rebuild strategy to turbocharge growth post-Covid is needed, alongside a clear plan for dealing with any future virus response, to give firms the confidence to start firing on all cylinders again.'

Another major contributor to the growth was GP surgeries across the country.

The number of people visiting their doctors for non-Covid complaints rose, increasing the consumption of health services by 5.1% in the second quarter.

This was also helped by Government spending on Test and Trace and the vaccination programme, the ONS said.

Deputy national statistician for economic statistics Jonathan Athow said: 'The UK economy has continued to rebound strongly, with hospitality benefiting from the first full month of indoor dining, while spending on advertising was boosted by the reopening of many services.

'Health services also showed growth, with many more people visiting their GP.

'GDP is still around two percentage points below its pre-pandemic peak.'

Energy usage dropped as summer arrived in the UK, the ONS said.

Economists at Pantheon Macroeconomics had expected GDP to grow by 0.6 per cent in June, and 4.7 per cent across the quarter.

The Bank of England, meanwhile, had predicted growth of 5 per cent across the quarter.

However, the surge of the Covid-19 Delta variant and the boom in the number of people self-isolating undermined some of this growth.

Nevertheless, the data marks a major improvement from the first months of the year.

In the first quarter the economy contracted by 1.6 per cent as it battled with prolonged lockdowns.

That data covered the period to the end of March, so did not include the reopening of outdoor hospitality in April and indoor hospitality a month later.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 110-year-old cook book which includes a tongue-in-cheek recipe on 'How To Cook A Husband' has been uncovered during a house clearance after decades gathering dust.

The cooking manual called '250 Tried Recipes for Everyday Use' features numerous recipes supplied by housewives around the UK back in 1911, and was discovered in a kitchen of a property that had been left unused since the 1950s in South Derbyshire.

It will now be sold at Hansons Auctioneers in Etwall, Derbyshire, with an estimated price of £30 to £50.

The fascinating publication provides an insight into the basic ingredients and cooking methods used at the time and all instructions are boiled down to one paragraph.

It also includes a cheeky recipe on how best to 'cook a husband' as too many 'are utterly spoiled by mismanagement'.

A 110-year-old cook book which includes a tongue-in-cheek recipe on 'How To Cook A Husband' (pictured) has been uncovered during a house clearance after decades gathering dust

The cooking manual (pictured) called '250 Tried Recipes for Everyday Use' features numerous recipes supplied by housewives around the UK back in 1911

Comical descriptions include 'keeping them in hot water', 'roasting them' or keeping them 'in a stew with irritating ways and words.'

The housewife also suggests 'add a little sugar in the form of what confectioners call kisses' and that 'a little spice improves them'.

The recipe, written by a Mrs Perfect, of Highclere, Stapenhill, Staffordshire, adds: 'If he splutters and fusses do not be anxious - some husbands do this until they are "done".'

She wrote: 'A good many husbands are utterly spoiled in the cooking by mismanagement.

'Some women keep their husbands constantly in hot water, others let them freeze by indifference and carelessness, some keep them in a stew by irritating ways and words, others roast them, some keep them in pickle all their lives.

The book (pictured) was discovered in a kitchen of a property that had been left unused since the 1950s in South Derbyshire

The fascinating publication provides an insight into the basic ingredients and cooking methods used at the time and all instructions are boiled down to one paragraph (pictured)

'You cannot expect them tender and good if mismanaged in this way but they are really delicious when properly treated.'

She continued: 'In selecting a husband do not go to market for him, as the best are always brought to your door.

'See the linen in which you wrap him is properly washed and mended with the required number of buttons and strings tightly sewn on.

'Tie him in the kettle with a strong cord called "comfort" as the one called "duty" is apt to be weak. If he splutters and fusses do not be anxious - some husbands do this until they are "done".

'Add a little sugar in the form of what confectioners call 'kisses', but no vinegar or pepper on any account. A little spice improves them but it must be used with judgement.'

Many of the recipes (pictured) appear to be very basic and sometimes oven temperatures or timings are not deemed necessary

Many adverts (pictured) in the book feature businesses in Tutbury, a village in Staffordshire

The book was recently found in a kitchen during a house clearance at a property that had been left untouched since the 1950s in South Derbyshire.

It will now go under the hammer at Hansons Auctioneers in Etwall, Derbyshire, with a guide price of between £30-£50.

Charles Hanson, owner of Hansons Auctioneers, said: 'This really made me smile. A cheeky and fun culinary surprise to savour on the final page from Mrs Perfect. A recipe for a perfect marriage, perhaps.

'This recipe book is a quirky little discovery and one many keen cooks might like to add to their repertoire.'

The opening page is dominated by 'The Dowager Lady Burton's Recipes' - Gingerbread Cakes, Beef Cheek Pie and White Devil. Pictured, adverts in the book

The opening page is dominated by 'The Dowager Lady Burton's Recipes' - Gingerbread Cakes, Beef Cheek Pie and White Devil.

Many of the recipes appear to be very basic and sometimes oven temperatures or timings are not deemed necessary.

For example, to make Lady Burton's White Devil you simply: 'Cut up any sort of old game and make hot in oven, whip half a pint of cream, add teaspoon of mustard, a pinch of salt and pepper, one tablespoon of Worcester sauce, one also of Harvey sauce.

'Pour over the game and set in the oven until slightly browned.'

Pudding recipes dominate the pages such as Biscuit Pudding, Canary Pudding and Forget-Me-Not Pudding.

Other recipes include Cheese Custard from A E Johnson of Tutbury; Cheese Darioles from Mrs Booth of Foston Hall, Derby, and Milk Jelly from Miss Wharton of Manchester.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Modern-day people in the Philippines have the most Denisovan DNA in the world, a new study reveals.

Researchers in Sweden have found that the Philippine Negrito ethnic group known as the Ayta Magbukon have the highest level of Denisovan ancestry today.

The Ayta Magbukon people, who occupy the Philippines' Bataan Peninsula, have more Denisovan DNA than the Papuan Highlanders, who were previously known as the present-day population with the highest level of Denisovan ancestry.

Ayta Magbukon people have 5 per cent Denisovan ancestry, the experts say, which is around 30 to 40 per cent greater than that of Papuans and Australians.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago.

Although remains of these mysterious early humans have mostly been discovered at the Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains in Siberia, DNA analysis has shown the ancient people were widespread across Asia.

Denisovans and Neanderthals bred with humans around 50,000 years ago, meaning the DNA of the early hominids survives today.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago. Pictured, a reconstruction of a juvenile female Denisovan who lived sometime between 82,000 and 74,000 years ago

The Ayta Magbukon people (pictured) who occupy the Bataan Peninsula, part of the Philippines

THE PHILIPPINE NEGRITO PEOPLE The Philippine Negrito ethnic group is composed of dark skinned people who are ethnically different from other people in the Philippines. The are believed to be the original inhabitants of the Philippines. Their origins are obscure. Some anthologists believe they are descendant of wandering people that formed an ancient human bridge between Africa and Australia. The Negritos of the Philippines are comprised of approximately 25 different ethnolinguistic groups, widely scattered throughout the archipelago, totalling an estimated 15,000 people Source: Factsanddetails / Culturalsurvival Advertisement

Scientists already know that Denisovans interbred with modern humans in the distant past, but the new study identifies the Ayta Magbukon people as the humans with 'the most Denisovan DNA'.

'We made this observation despite the fact that Philippine Negritos were recently admixed with East Asian-related groups – who carry little Denisovan ancestry, and which consequently diluted their levels of Denisovan ancestry,' said study author Maximilian Larena, from Uppsala University in Sweden.

'If we account for and masked away the East Asian-related ancestry in Philippine Negritos, their Denisovan ancestry can be up to 46 per cent greater than that of Australians and Papuans.'

For the new study, published in Current Biology, Larena and colleagues aimed to establish the demographic history of the Philippines.

They analysed about 2.3 million genotypes from 118 ethnic groups of the Philippines including diverse self-identified Negrito populations.

The Negritos of the Philippines are comprised of approximately 25 different groups, widely scattered throughout the archipelago, totalling an estimated 15,000 people.

The sample also included high-coverage genomes of AustraloPapuans and Ayta Magbukon Negritos.

Bataan is a province and peninsula on the Philippine island of Luzon. The Ayta Magbukon people who occupy the peninsula have the most Denisovan DNA from our ancient human ancestors - not those from Papua New Guinea as previously thought

Remains of the Denisovans have mostly been discovered at the Denisova Cave (pictured) in Siberia

The experts found that Ayta Magbukon possess the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world, consistent with an 'admixture event' into Negritos from Denisovans.

Genetic admixture occurs when previously diverged or isolated genetic lineages mix, leaving a characteristic signature in DNA.

The data suggests there were multiple archaic species that inhabited the Philippines prior to the arrival of modern humans, and that these archaic groups may have been genetically related.

This is corroborated by the discovery of a small-bodied hominin, called Homo luzonensis, in 2019 in the Philippines.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago. Pictured is a model of the phylogeny of H. sapiens over the last 600,000 years

Altogether, the researchers say that the findings unveil a complex intertwined history of modern and archaic humans in the Asia-Pacific region.

Distinct Islander Denisovan populations differentially admixed with incoming Australasians across multiple locations and at various points in time.

'This admixture led to variable levels of Denisovan ancestry in the genomes of Philippine Negritos and Papuans,' said study author Mattias Jakobsson, also at Uppsala University.

'In Island Southeast Asia, Philippine Negritos later admixed with East Asian migrants who possess little Denisovan ancestry, which subsequently diluted their archaic ancestry.

'Some groups, though, such as the Ayta Magbukon, minimally admixed with the more recent incoming migrants.

'For this reason, the Ayta Magbukon retained most of their inherited archaic tracts and were left with the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world.'

The researchers plan to sequence more genomes in the future to assess how inherited archaic tracts influenced our biology and contributed to our adaptation as a species.

It is thought that the shared ancestors of Denisovans and Neanderthals, which are unknown in the fossil record, likely split from the ancestors of modern humans around 800,000 years ago

Earlier this year, scientists reported that DNA discovered in Siberia's Denisova Cave suggests early modern humans lived alongside Denisovans and Neanderthals at least 44,000 years ago.

And last October another team reported the discovery of Denisovan DNA in the Baishiya Karst Cave in Tibet.

This discovery marked the first time Denisovan DNA has been recovered from a location that is outside Denisova Cave in Siberia, Russia.

In August 2020, researchers revealed that DNA from an unknown ancient ancestor of humans that bred with Denisovans is still around today.

In February 2020, researchers concluded that a 'super-archaic' human mated with the primitive ancestor of Denisovans and Neanderthals, 700,000 years ago, the earliest known episode of interbreeding between the species.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the shocking moment a huge brawl broke out in Manchester city centre ahead of Manchester United's clash against Leeds at Old Trafford on Saturday.

Six arrests were made after scuffles broke out ahead of Manchester United's opening match of the Premier League season against visitors Leeds United, police said.

Greater Manchester Police said that despite 'isolated incidents of disorder' before kick-off, the event at Old Trafford on Saturday passed 'largely without police incident'.

In chaotic scenes filmed from inside a cafe, groups of men can be seen running around a corner while throwing chairs and throwing punches.

The 21-second clip, uploaded to Twitter, shows one man brandishing a bin as a weapon as he repeatedly smashes it against another fan who has fallen to the ground.

A police officer can then be seen among the crowds as the men disperse in different directions.

Chaotic scenes filmed in Manchester city centre show a bin being brandished as a weapon during a massive street brawl

The footage of the brawl was recorded from inside a cafe in Manchester on Saturday

A group of men exchange blows during brawl ahead of Man Utd and Leeds clash Saturday

A man can be seen in footage online hitting a football fan repeatedly with a bin

The groups of men eventually disperse as a police officers arrives to the scene

Police said that six arrests had been made over the course of the day - five in relation to public order offences and one on suspicion of drug offences.

The force said that work was also under way in conjunction with football investigating officers from both Manchester United and Leeds United to identify people involved in other incidents of disorder.

Chief Superintendent Stuart Ellison said: 'Despite isolated incidents of disorder in the city centre prior to kick-off, today's events at Old Trafford largely passed without police incident and I would like to thank the majority of the public for their cooperation throughout the day.

'Six arrests were made over the course of the day; five in relation to public order offences and one on suspicion of drug offences.

'These suspects remain in custody in cells in Greater Manchester for questioning this evening.

'Today was an important day for a lot of people with the return of capacity crowds at venues that have remained absent for such a long time, and I would like to thank the public, our officers and our partners from all agencies involved who helped make sure today was a safe and enjoyable affair for a vast majority of those concerned.'

A statement from Greater Manchester Police read: 'Patrols in city centre made aware of some isolated incidents of disorder at premises in the area.

'We're working closely with those premises to support licensees at early signs of any disorder and negate it as swiftly as possible.'

Another video shared online shows the moment a police van arrives to a brawl which has spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

Men can be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the fight, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring.

Police warned on Twitter: 'There have been isolated incidents of disorder in the city ahead of this afternoon's game at Old Trafford and we have worked closely with licensed premises to ensure we could act swiftly to negate any incidents of concern and move people on safely.'

A police van arrives to the scene at Piccadilly Tavern in central Manchester

Video shared online appears to show a fight spilling out of the pub ahead of Man Utd v Leeds clash at Old Trafford Saturday

Some 200 police officers are on patrol in Manchester today (Pictured: Arriving to scene of brawl at Piccadilly Tavern)

London Mayor Sadiq Khan watches AFC Wimbledon AFC Wimbledon v Bolton Wanderers

Crowds of football fans smiling and singing before the match at Old Trafford. Today is the first time in 17 months that the Theatre of Dreams will be at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans

Officers will remain in the city for the rest of Saturday to keep disruption to a minimum, the force added

Manchester United fans during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Manchester United fans react during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Aston Villa fans show their support during the Premier League match between Watford and Aston Villa at Vicarage Road

Leicester City fans wave flags on their return to the King Power stadium for their Premier League clash with Wolves

Fans applaud staff from an NHS Trust at half time during the Premier League match at Vicarage Road, Watford

Manchester United fans react during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Cesar Azpilicueta of Chelsea applauds the fans during the Premier League match between Chelsea and Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Wolverhampton Wanderers fans show their support during the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

Chelsea fans watch on as their side take on Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Fans invade the pitch as Everton's French midfielder Abdoulaye Doucoure (unseen) is mobbed by teammates after scoring their second goal during the English Premier League football match between Everton and Southampton at Goodison Park

A Crystal Palace fan gestures towards the Chelsea fans during the English Premier League football match between Chelsea and Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Chelsea fans applaud the players at the end of the Premier League match at Stamford Bridge

Fans show their support prior to the Premier League match between Norwich City and Liverpool at Carrow Road

Chelsea fans return to Stamford Bridge in numbers following a year and a half of lockdown restrictions

Fans of Leicester City celebrate after the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

Norwich City fans in the stands during the Premier League match at Carrow Road

Chelsea fans return to Stamford Bridge in numbers following a year and a half of lockdown restrictions

Fans of Leicester City celebrate after the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

'It's worth a reminder that successful prosecution can lead to a two-year football banning order.'

Officers will remain in the city for the rest of Saturday to keep disruption to a minimum, the force added.

Today is the first time in 17 months that the Theatre of Dreams was at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans.

But scenes of brawls have put a dampener on the otherwise celebratory return of the Premier League.

It comes after police on Friday pleaded with fans to behave responsibly, announcing that 200 officers would be on duty across Manchester.

Chief superintendent Stuart Ellison, Greater Manchester Police's gold commander for public order operations, said: 'It feels like a long time since we last had capacity crowds, but we have worked on hundreds of events in the past and our priority this weekend remains the same.

'The Premier League starts with Manchester hosting the biggest game of the weekend, 70,000 fans returning to Old Trafford to see Manchester United hosting Leeds United.

'That's just one of four matches on our patch on Saturday afternoon.

'Our officers are working extended hours this weekend to help keep the public safe. All that we ask is that you behave responsibly so everyone can enjoy themselves.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

At least eight people were killed at Kabul airport on Monday, including two who were shot dead by US troops, three who were run over by taxiing jets and three stowaways who fell from the engines of a US Air Force plane as it fled an airfield of thousands of desperate Afghan nationals.

The taliban has taken control of Afghanistan and are going door to door in Kabul looking for enemies to kill despite promising the international community they wouldn't breach human rights because they wanted to be formally recognized.

At Hamid Karzai International Airport, there was a stampede of thousands of people - both stranded foreign nationals and Afghan civilians - desperately trying to escape.

The airport is the last place in the city that is being guarded by NATO troops. Thousands of Afghan nationals have rushed there in the hopes of being saved along with the foreigners being flown out, but the chaotic rescue operation collapsed on Monday as troops struggled to control the crowds.

General Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr, the head of the Pentagon's Central Command, met with Taliban representatives in Qatar on Sunday and convinced them to let the US evacuate its citizens and any interpreters and translators it plans to without interference.

It remains unclear how NATO troops will organize the evacuation of Afghan refugees or even get themselves out given the diabolical situation that unfolded on Monday.

There are believed to be 2,500 US troops at the airport with another 3,500 on the way but it's unclear how many American civilians are there, and how many Afghan translators and interpreters are to be flown out.

President Joe Biden - whose days-long silence on the chaos has been deafening - will return to the White House from Camp David on Monday to address the nation at 3.45pm. He has been blamed for the fast-escalating catastrophe in Afghanistan after declaring in April that all US troops would leave the region by September.

The harrowing scene at the airport on Monday included thousands rushing on to the runway as a US Air Force C-17 cargo jet took off with US citizens on board.

Frantic Afghan nationals jumped onto the plane's fuselage in the hope that it would carry them to safety. Shortly after it took off, three were filmed falling from the aircraft to their deaths. Three were run over by the jet's wheels on the tarmac.

American troops halted evacuation flights for 90 minutes afterwards while they cleared the airfield, which had become overrun with thousands of Afghan nationals. They used apache helicopters and fired warning shots into the crowds to try to control them.

Outside the walls of the airport, shots from Taliban fighters rang out.

Scroll down for video

A US soldier points his gun towards and bellows at an Afghan civilian at the Kabul airport on Monday. Two armed Afghans have been killed by American troops at the airport

Footage from Hamad Karzai airport showed hundreds of people running alongside - and in front of - a US Air Force plane preparing to take off

Desperate Afghan nationals tried to run onto RCH 885 as it took off from the airfield on Monday. Some were crushed by the C-17's wheels and others clung to the fuselage as it took off

An apache helicopter clears the airfield at Kabul on Monday after thousands of Afghan nationals ran onto it in a desperate attempt to get on an evacuation flight

Afghan people climb atop a plane as they wait at the Kabul airport in Kabul on Monday

A little girl is thrown over the wall of the airport on Monday as the Taliban started moving through the city of Kabul. The airport is the last part of the city being defended by US troops - more are expected there later today to try to secure it

An Afghan child walks near abandoned military uniforms at Kabul airport on Monday after the Taliban took control of the city

Desperate Afghan families trying to escape Kabul scale the walls of the airport on Monday

FALL OF KABUL: A TIMELINE OF THE TALIBAN'S FAST ADVANCE AFTER 40 YEARS OF CONFLICT Feb. 29, 2020 Trump negotiates deal with the Taliban setting U.S. withdrawal date for May 1, 2021 Nov. 17, 2020 Pentagon announces it will reduce troop levels to 2500 in Afghanistan Jan. 15, 2020 Inspector general reveals 'hubris and mendacity' of U.S. efforts in Afghanistan Feb 3. 2021 Afghan Study Group report warns against withdrawing 'irresponsibly' March Military command makes last-ditch effort to talk Biden out of withdrawal April 14 Biden announces withdrawal will be completed by Sept. 11 May 4 - Taliban fighters launch a major offensive on Afghan forces in southern Helmand province. They also attack in at least six other provinces May 11 - The Taliban capture Nerkh district just outside the capital Kabul as violence intensifies across the country June 7 - Senior government officials say more than 150 Afghan soldiers are killed in 24 hours as fighting worsens. They add that fighting is raging in 26 of the country's 34 provinces June 22 - Taliban fighters launch a series of attacks in the north of the country, far from their traditional strongholds in the south. The UN envoy for Afghanistan says they have taken more than 50 of 370 districts July 2 - The U.S. evacuates Bagram Airfield in the middle of the night July 5 - The Taliban say they could present a written peace proposal to the Afghan government as soon as August July 21 - Taliban insurgents control about a half of the country's districts, according to the senior U.S. general, underlining the scale and speed of their advance July 25 - The United States vows to continue to support Afghan troops "in the coming weeks" with intensified airstrikes to help them counter Taliban attacks July 26 - The United Nations says nearly 2,400 Afghan civilians were killed or wounded in May and June in escalating violence, the highest number for those months since records started in 2009 Aug. 6 - Zaranj in the south of the country becomes the first provincial capital to fall to the Taliban in years. Many more are to follow in the ensuing days, including the prized city of Kunduz in the north Aug. 13 - Pentagon insists Kabul is not under imminent threat Aug. 14 - The Taliban take the major northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif and, with little resistance, Pul-e-Alam, capital of Logar province just 70 km (40 miles) south of Kabul. The United States sends more troops to help evacuate its civilians from Kabul as Afghan President Ashraf Ghani says he is consulting with local and international partners on next steps Aug. 15 - The Taliban take the key eastern city of Jalalabad without a fight, effectively surrounding Kabul Taliban insurgents enter Kabul, an interior ministry official says, as the United States evacuate diplomats from its embassy by helicopter Advertisement

Afghanistan's representative to the UN's security council Ghulam M. Isaczai said 'there are already reports of target killings and looting in the city,' at a meeting of the council on Monday.

'Kabul residents are reported that the Taliban have already started house-to-house searches in some neighborhoods, registering names and looking for people in their target list,' he added.

Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said he was 'particularly concerned' by accounts of human rights violations against the women and girls of Afghanistan who fear a return to the darkest days' in the 1990s when the Taliban ruled and barred girls for getting an education and imposed draconian measures on women.

It's unclear now who America will save from the chaos aside from US citizens and anyone who worked alongside them.

Biden's National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan did a series of TV interviews on Monday where he said evacuation flights were ongoing, but he skirted criticism for the disaster and said: 'When push came to shove, [the Afghan forces] decided not to step up and fight for their country.'

Afghan President Ashraf Ghani has also come under fire for hightailing out of the country last night, in a helicopter full of cash, according to the Russian embassy. His whereabouts remain unknown.

The Taliban declared victory from the presidential palace on Sunday following a blistering advance across the country. Experts and lawmakers have for months warned the Biden administrations that this was exactly what would happen if they continued with the hasty retreat and entrusted the country to the Afghan National Army.

One of the terror chieftains proclaimed from the palace, 'Praise God, I was in Guantanamo for eight years', as he sat at the president's table surrounded by henchmen strapped with AK-47s.

British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said that the U.S. decision to withdraw had 'accelerated' the crisis that risked creating 'a breeding ground for terror.'

However, the Taliban has been on a charm offensive, pledging that no harm will come to any foreign citizens or embassy staff as it seeks formal recognition from the international community.

Almost all major checkpoints in Kabul were under Taliban control by Monday morning and Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority issued an advisory saying the 'civilian side' of the airport had been 'closed until further notice' and that the military controlled the airspace.

Taliban officials said everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decide to stay in the country and promised civilians would not be harmed. The group previously said westerners would be allowed to leave the country but that Afghans would be barred from departing.

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country.

In the capital, a tense calm set in, with most people hiding in their homes as the Taliban deployed fighters at major intersections.

There were scattered reports of looting and armed men knocking on doors and gates, and there was less traffic than usual on eerily quiet streets. Fighters could be seen searching vehicles at one of the city's main squares.

Many fear chaos, after the Taliban freed thousands of prisoners and the police simply melted away, or a return to the kind of brutal rule the Taliban imposed when it was last in power.

They raced to Kabul's international airport, where the 'civilian side' was closed until further notice, according to Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority. The military was put in control of the airspace.

Massouma Tajik, a 22-year-old data analyst, described scenes of panic at the airport, where she was hoping to board an evacuation flight.

Satellite images show the number of people on the tarmac at Kabul airport desperately trying to get onto flights out of Afghanistan on Monday

Thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the airport on foot on Monday to try to get on evacuation flights as the Taliban took over

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians after the Taliban walked into Kabul's presidential palace

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Inside one of the US Air Force jets that took off from Kabul on Sunday after the Taliban took control of the city

Those on board the plane appeared to be US nationals. It's unclear how many remain at the airport waiting to be flown out

US soldiers rest as Afghan people (not pictured) wait to leave the Kabul airport in Kabul on August 16, 2021, after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands of people mobbed the city's airport trying to flee the group's feared hardline brand of Islamist rule

Afghan nationals wait on one of the many grounded commercial aircrafts at Kabul airport on Monday in the hope of being flown out

A volunteer carries an injured man on the tarmac at the airport in Kabul on August 16. The chaos unfolded on Monday as thousands rushed to the airport in a desperate attempt to flee the Taliban after the country's 20 year civil war

There are thousands of Afghan nationals at the airport desperately waiting to be put on any flight out of the city

Thousands of Afghans rush to the Hamid Karzai International Airport as they try to flee the Afghan capital of Kabul, Afghanistan, on August 16, 2021

People climb a barbed wire wall to enter the airport in Kabul, Afghanistan August 16, 2021, in this still image taken from a video

US soldiers stand guard as desperate Afghans try to board flights at Hamid Karzai International Airport

Thousands of civilians rush towards one of the last military planes leaving Kabul (left) the airport was teeming with desperate civilians trying to flee the Taliban (right)

Video posted later appeared to show residents collecting the bodies of three stowaways, who reportedly fell from an airborne plane, from a roof in Kabul

Footage showed desperate Afghans trying to climb onto grounded planes at Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport after the Taliban swept the city

Afghans crowd at the tarmac of the Kabul airport on August 16, 2021, to flee the country as the Taliban were in control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country and conceded the insurgents had won the 20-year war

Desperate Afghan civilians attempt to clamber over the barbed wire-topped wall into Hamid Karzai International Airport on Monday

Men climb over a wall into Hamid Karzai International Airport in scenes reminiscent of the chaos in Saigon in 1975

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Soldiers fired warning shots in the air to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac, a US official said

US troops fired shots into the air at Kabul airport today as desperate Afghans climbed up the outside of airbridges trying to flee as the Taliban took control of Afghanistan

Video posted social media showed hundreds of people trying to climb the outside of airbridges to board commercial liners grounded in Hamad Karzai airport

At least five people have been killed at Kabul airport as thousands of people tried desperately to get on flights out of Afghanistan amid increasingly chaotic scenes. Witnesses said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede

Taliban fighters were seen inside the Afghan parliament on Monday after officials promised civilians would not be harmed and announced everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decided to stay in the country

Victorious Taliban commander claims he 'spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay' in triumphant speech from Kabul palace A Taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a triumphant speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan. Taliban fighters marched into the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos, with US helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War. The Al-Jazeera news channel livestreamed the press conference from inside the palace, which showed a group of Taliban fighters sitting at the president's desk before a fighter claimed he was a former inmate of the US-controlled Guantanamo Bay detention centre in Cuba. A Taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a victory speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan 'Praise God, I was in Guantanamo for eight years,' the man told the broadcaster as henchmen with AK-47s stood around him. Established by George W Bush in 2002, suspected terrorists have been detained without trial and tortured at the facility. Donald Trump signed an executive order to keep the centre open indefinitely in 2018, while in February the Biden administration vowed to shut Guantanamo down. Various reports said that the commander was either Mullah Abdul Qayyum Zakir or Gholam Ruhani. Both of the men were held at Guantanamo Bay and are believed to have returned to the Taliban top brass after being released. Advertisement

After waiting six hours, she heard shots from outside, where a crowd of men and women were trying to climb aboard a plane. She said U.S. troops sprayed gas and fired into the air to disperse the crowds after people scaled the walls and swarmed onto the tarmac. Gunfire could be heard in the voice messages she sent to The Associated Press.

Shafi Arifi, who had a ticket to travel to Uzbekistan on Sunday, was unable to board her plane because it was packed with people who had raced across the tarmac and climbed aboard, with no police or airport staff in sight.

'There was no room for us to stand,' said the 24-year-old. 'Children were crying, women were shouting, young and old men were so angry and upset, no one could hear each other. There was no oxygen to breathe.'

After another woman fainted and was carried off the plane, Arifi gave up and went back home.

Meanwhile, refugees have been massing at the borders as people desperately try to flee Afghanistan before the Taliban's brutal rules are implemented, with pictures from the country's border with Pakistan showing hundreds of people queuing in an attempt to leave.

'Today is a great day for the Afghan people and the mujahideen. They have witnessed the fruits of their efforts and their sacrifices for 20 years,' Mohammad Naeem, the spokesman for the Taliban's political office, told Al Jazeera TV. 'Thanks to God, the war is over in the country.'

Taliban members are seen near Hamid Karzai International Airport as thousands of Afghans rush to flee the Afghan capital of Kabul, Afghanistan, on August 16, 2021

A Taliban fighter stands guard at the Massoud Square in Kabul on August 16, 2021

A member of Taliban forces inspects the area outside Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul

US soldiers stand guard as in the background Afghan people wait at the Kabul airport

Smiling Taliban fighters are seen on the back of a vehicle in Kabul on Monday

A father leads his family towards the airport as crowds of people try to escape Afghanistan on Monday

Hundreds of Afghans desperately scaled the walls of Hamid Karzai international airport in Kabul as they try to flee the country

Pictured: Vehicles are seen on a congested street in Kabul, Afghanistan, in these still images taken from a video uploaded to social media on August 15, 2021

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country even as thousands of Afghans flooded Kabul airport

Desperate civilians try and get into Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul on Monday after the Taliban took over the country

Afghans crowd at the tarmac of the Kabul airport on Monday as American Humvees standby

President Ghani fled the country on Sunday night as the insurgents encircled the capital - saying he wanted to avoid bloodshed - capping a military victory that saw them capture all cities in just 10 days.

In a Facebook post, Ghani said he had left the country to avoid clashes with the Taliban that would endanger millions of Kabul residents. Some social media users branded Ghani, who did not disclose his location, a coward for leaving them in chaos. Al Jazeera reported he had flown to Uzbekistan, citing his personal bodyguard.

'The Taliban have won with the judgement of their swords and guns, and are now responsible for the honour, property and self-preservation of their countrymen,' Ghani said after fleeing.



Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country: 'The situation is peaceful,' one official said. The Taliban controlled 90 percent of state buildings and fighters had been told to prevent any damage, the official added.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

Video from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber today. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs.

Ghani fled from the country on Sunday as the Islamists entered Kabul virtually unopposed, saying he wanted to avoid bloodshed.

Desperate Afghans were seen chasing US military transport aircraft as the evacuation flights took off from Kabul airport on Monday

US soldiers take up their positions as they secure the airport in Kabul after the Taliban walked into the capital, forcing President Ashraf Ghani to flee

Thousands of Afghans gathered at Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport, but all commercial services have been suspended, with only military flights leaving the country as the UK, US and other western countries repatriate their citizens

There were chaotic scenes at Kabul International Airport on Sunday night as thousands of Afghan residents rushed onto the tarmac

Potential passengers can be seen crowding the tarmac at Kabul airport in Afghanistan with people desperate to leave the country any way they can

A U.S. Chinook helicopter flies near the U.S. Embassy as smoke rises in Kabul, Afghanistan, late on Sunday night

How did the Taliban take over Afghanistan so quickly? The Taliban's stunning and rapid takeover of Afghanistan was the result not only of their battlefield strength, but also a sustained push to force surrenders and cut deals. The insurgents mixed threats and lures with propaganda and psychological warfare as they took city after city - some with barely a shot fired - eventually capturing the capital Kabul. How did this happen? Why didn't the Afghan army put up a fight? As foreign troops began their final withdrawal in May, Washington and Kabul were confident the Afghan military would put up a strong fight against the Taliban. With more than 300,000 personnel and multi-billion-dollar equipment more advanced than the Taliban arsenal, Afghan forces were formidable - on paper. In reality, they were plagued by corruption, poor leadership, lack of training and plummeting morale for years. Desertions were common and US government inspectors had long warned that the force was unsustainable. Afghan forces put up strong resistance this summer in some areas such as Lashkar Gah in the south, but they now faced the Taliban without regular US air strikes and military support. Faced with the smaller but highly motivated and cohesive enemy, many soldiers and even entire units simply deserted or surrendered, leaving the insurgents to capture city after city. How did the Taliban take advantage of low morale? The seeds for the collapse were sown last year when Washington signed a deal with the insurgents to withdraw its troops completely. For the Taliban, it was the beginning of their victory after nearly two decades of war. For many demoralised Afghans, it was betrayal and abandonment. They continued to attack government forces but started to combine those with targeted killings of journalists and rights activists, ramping up an environment of fear. They also pushed a narrative of inevitable Taliban victory in their propaganda and psychological operations. Soldiers and local officials were reportedly bombarded with text messages in some areas, urging them to surrender or cooperate with the Taliban to avoid a worse fate. Many were offered safe passage if they did not put up a fight, while others were reached through tribal and village elders. What happened to the anti-Taliban warlords and their militias? With Afghan forces unable to hold off the Taliban advances, many of Afghanistan's famed - and notorious - warlords rallied their militias and promised a black eye to the Taliban if they attacked their cities. But with confidence plunging in the ability of Afghanistan's government to survive, never mind hold off the insurgents, the writing was also on the wall for the warlords. Their cities fell without a fight. Warlord Ismail Khan in the western city of Herat was captured by the Taliban as it fell. Abdul Rashid Dostum and Atta Mohammad Noor in the north fled to Uzbekistan, as their militia members abandoned humvees, weapons and even their uniforms on the road out of Mazar-i-Sharif. But how were the Taliban able to do this so quickly? The Taliban had started putting deals and surrender arrangements in place reportedly long before the launch of their blitz in May. From individual soldiers and low-level government officials to apparently provincial governors and ministers, the insurgents pressed for deals - with the Taliban all but victorious, why put up a fight? The strategy proved immensely effective. The images from their final march to Kabul were not of bodies in the streets and bloody battlefields, but of Taliban and government officials sitting comfortably on couches as they formalised the handover of cities and provinces. According to one reported US estimate less than a month before the fall of Kabul, the Afghan government could collapse in 90 days. But once the Taliban captured their first provincial capital, it took less than two weeks. Reporting by AFP Advertisement

Taliban spokesperson Suhail Shaheen said in a message on Twitter their fighters were under strict orders not to harm anyone.

'Life, property and honour of none shall be harmed but must be protected by the mujahideen,' he said.

Earlier, Mohammad Naeem, the spokesman for the Taliban's political office, told Al Jazeera TV, the Afghan people and the Taliban had witnessed the fruits of their efforts and sacrifices over 20 years.

'Thanks to God, the war is over,' he said.

It took the Taliban just over a week to seize control of the country after a lightning sweep that ended in Kabul as government forces, trained for years and equipped by the United States and others at a cost of billions of dollars, melted away.

Al Jazeera broadcast footage of what it said were Taliban commanders in the presidential palace with dozens of armed fighters.

Naeem said the form of the new regime in Afghanistan would be made clear soon, adding the Taliban did not want to live in isolation and calling for peaceful international relations.

The militants sought to project a more moderate face, promising to respect women's rights and protect both foreigners and Afghans.

Many Afghans fear the Taliban will return to past harsh practices in their imposition of sharia religious law. During their rule, women could not work and punishments such as stoning, whipping and hanging were administered.

Both the United Nations and the United States said last week they had received reports that Taliban fighters were executing surrendering government soldiers.

Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country: 'The situation is peaceful,' one said, adding the Taliban controlled 90% of state buildings and fighters had been told to prevent any damage.

Central Kabul streets were largely deserted early on a sunny Monday as waking residents pondered their future.

'I'm in a complete state of shock,' said Sherzad Karim Stanekzai, who spent the night in his carpet shop to guard it. 'I know there will be no foreigners, no international people who will now come to Kabul.'

People thronged to the airport from late on Sunday with hundreds wandering on the runways in the dark, pulling luggage and jostling for a place on one of the last commercial flights to leave before U.S. forces took over air traffic control.

Dozens of men tried to clamber onto an overhead departure gangway to board a plane while hundreds of others milled about, a video posted on social media showed.

U.S. forces gave up their big military base at Bagram, some 60 km north of Kabul, several weeks ago, leaving Kabul's airport their only way out, to the anger of many Afghans.

'The Americans have no right to hold the airport for their own use, they could have used their own base to take people out,' said one person trying to leave.

There was the prospect of chaos in the skies over Afghanistan too. Its civil aviation authority advised transit aircraft to reroute saying its airspace was uncontrolled.

The Pentagon on Sunday authorized another 1,000 troops to help evacuate U.S. citizens and Afghans who worked for them, expanding its security presence on the ground to almost 6,000 troops within the next 48 hours.

A U.S. State Department spokesperson said early on Monday that all embassy personnel, including Ambassador Ross Wilson, had been transferred to Kabul airport, mostly by helicopter, to await evacuation and the American flag had been lowered and removed from the embassy compound.

Western nations, including France, Germany and New Zealand said they were working to get citizens as well as some Afghan employees out.

In a Facebook post, Ghani said he had left the country to avoid clashes with the Taliban that would endanger millions of Kabul residents. Some social media users branded Ghani, who did not disclose his location, a coward for leaving them in chaos.

In Washington, opponents of President Joe Biden's decision to end America's longest war, launched after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, said the chaos was caused by a failure of leadership.

Biden has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to a plan, initiated by his Republican predecessor, Donald Trump, to end the U.S. military mission by Aug. 31.

Britain's defence minister said British and NATO forces would not be returning to fight the Taliban.

'That's not on the cards,' Ben Wallace told Sky News.

British Defence Secretary Ben Wallace BREAKS DOWN as he admits 'some people won't get back' but vows to fly hundreds of Afghans out in the next 36 hours Ben Wallace choked up today as he vowed to fly hundreds of desperate Afghans out of the country within the next 36 hours - but insisted sending UK troops back in is not 'on the cards'. The Defence Secretary was overcome with emotion as he talked about the consequences of the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army, after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace. He said the crisis had become inevitable after a deal was struck with the extremists and the US pulled out, and the focus was now on evacuating British nationals, interpreters and others who might be subject to reprisals. But he conceded that 'some people won't get back'. 'It is sad the West has done what it has done,' he said. 'Twenty years of sacrifice.. is what it is.' Wallace - who himself served in the military before entering politics - said he felt the issue so deeply because he was a soldier. Defence Secretary Ben Wallace admitted he was 'sad' at the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace Pressed on whether there was any prospect of troops returning to Kabul, Mr Wallace told Sky News: 'No, look that's not on the cards that we're going to go back.' He added: 'The US have made itself clear that they're not intending to stay and as the framework nation that leaves us with difficult choices and I've been pretty much honest about that all the way through this process.' On the airlift of British nationals, he added: 'The military flights are coming in and out, they've just brought in more UK soldiers. 'Border Force is joining us to make sure that we accelerate the process to get more Afghans out, which is our obligation. We flew out 370 staff and British citizens, eligible personnel yesterday and the day before and we'll continue to engage those flights. 'The next group of Afghans to come out will be 782 and we'll make sure we get them in the next 24 to 36 hours out of the country and are continuing to process those people.' He went on: 'My job as as defence secretary is to make sure that we protect not only the UK nationals, but those Afghans we have an obligation to, that is actually why we're in the country. For the last few weeks we've been in the country solely to process those people and to make sure we protect our officials doing that job and we'll continue to do so.' Mr Wallace - who was a captain in the Scots Guards and saw service in Northern Ireland - told BBC Breakfast it will not be possible to get everyone out of Afghanistan, with the previous August 31 evacuation timetable now in tatters. 'With the US' removal of the framework, the military might and the speed of the Afghan government collapse, it's simply not possible for us to send small bands of troops miles into Afghanistan to find people if they're not able to be found,' he said. 'It is a deep regret that we have gone to a position we have, I haven't hidden that over the last few weeks. We are doing everything we can to get those people out.' Asked if translators who have helped British citizens are eligible to come to the UK, he said: 'Yes, they are. People who are eligible are people who have worked for us in what we call public-facing roles, people who've worked for us but are not in public-facing roles, contractors and third parties … and any other special cases.' Outlining the process of checking people who are being flown to the UK from Afghanistan, he added: 'We do have to make sure that some of the people we're bringing back aren't affiliated to either a terrorist organisation or the Taliban, which, I'm afraid, a very, very small number have been. 'They might not have worked for us for 10, 12, 15 years, so we have to see that they are right. We're doing our very best to make sure we do not discriminate against those people who are fully legitimate to come here.' Challenged that the Taliban had 'won', Mr Wallace said: 'I don't know about a win, I think, I acknowledge that the Taliban are in control of the country. You don't have to be a political scientist to spot that's where we're at.' Advertisement

Taliban strengthens its grip on Afghanistan with gunmen patrolling streets of Kabul as militants claim civilians and foreigners have nothing to fear despite thousands trying to flee the country

By Chris Jewers

Victorious Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands of people mobbed the city's airport trying to flee the group's feared hardline brand of Islamist rule.

It took the Taliban just over a week to seize control of the country after a lightning sweep that ended in Kabul as government forces trained for years and equipped by Britain, the United States and other Western nations at a cost of billions of dollars, melted away.

As the militants declared victory and claimed peace had been brought to the country, at least five people were killed in Kabul airport and another three reportedly died falling from a plane, while hundreds tried to forcibly enter aircraft leaving the Afghan capital, witnesses said.

One witness said he had seen the bodies of five people being taken to a vehicle. Another witness said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede.

U.S. troops, who are in charge of the airport, earlier fired in the air to scatter the crowd, a U.S. official said, but officials were not immediately available to comment on the deaths.

Pictured: Taliban fighters stand guard along a roadside near the Zanbaq Square in Kabul on August 16, 2021. Victorious Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands of people mobbed the city's airport trying to flee the group's feared hardline brand of Islamist rule

Pictured: Pakistan's soldiers check the documents of stranded Afghan nationals wanting to return to Afghanistan at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border crossing point in Chaman on August 16, 2021

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Meanwhile, refugees have been massing at the borders as people desperately try to flee Afghanistan before the Taliban's brutal rules are implemented, with pictures from the country's border with Pakistan showing hundreds of people queuing in an attempt to leave.

'Today is a great day for the Afghan people and the mujahideen. They have witnessed the fruits of their efforts and their sacrifices for 20 years,' Mohammad Naeem, the spokesman for the Taliban's political office, told Al Jazeera TV. 'Thanks to God, the war is over in the country.'

President Ashraf Ghani fled the country on Sunday night as the insurgents encircled the capital - saying he wanted to avoid bloodshed - capping a military victory that saw them capture all cities in just 10 days.

In a Facebook post, Ghani said he had left the country to avoid clashes with the Taliban that would endanger millions of Kabul residents. Some social media users branded Ghani, who did not disclose his location, a coward for leaving them in chaos. Al Jazeera reported he had flown to Uzbekistan, citing his personal bodyguard.

'The Taliban have won with the judgement of their swords and guns, and are now responsible for the honour, property and self-preservation of their countrymen,' Ghani said after fleeing.



Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country: 'The situation is peaceful,' one official said. The Taliban controlled 90 percent of state buildings and fighters had been told to prevent any damage, the official added.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

Video from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber today. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs.

Video (pictured) from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber today. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs

British Forces from 16 Air Assault Brigade arrive in Kabul, Afghanistan, to provide support to British nationals leaving the country, as part of Operation PITTING after Taliban insurgents took control of the presidential palace in Kabul, August 15

Government forces collapsed without the support of the US military, which invaded in 2001 after the September 11 attacks and toppled the Taliban for its support of Al-Qaeda.

But the United States ultimately failed to build a democratic government capable of withstanding the Taliban, despite spending billions of dollars and providing two decades of military support.

Russia said its ambassador to Afghanistan will meet with the Taliban in Kabul on Tuesday and that it will decide on whether to officially recognise the new government.

China on Monday said it is willing to develop 'friendly relations' with the Taliban after the Islamist hardliners seized control of Afghanistan.

'China respects the right of the Afghan people to independently determine their own destiny and is willing to continue to develop... friendly and cooperative relations with Afghanistan,' foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters.

Pashtana Durrani from non-profit organisation Learn Afghanistan told BBC Breakfast on Monday that the Taliban have so far been unclear about how they intend to rule Afghanistan now they are in power.

'In some places they are very nice to people and then there are places where they have been slitting throats,' she told the morning show. 'So I don’t want to trust them and I’m not trusting them for their word.

'But at the same time, the first thing that they did yesterday – they stripped us of our flag. They brought down the flag. The second thing that they did, is they are in the process of changing the name of Afghanistan.

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

Pictured: Mullah Baradar Akhund, a senior official of the Taliban, seated with a group of men, makes a video statement, in this still image taken from a video recorded in an unidentified location and released on August 16, 2021

Russian ambassador to meet Taliban in Kabul Tuesday Russia said its ambassador to Afghanistan will meet with the Taliban in Kabul on Tuesday and that it will decide on whether to recognise the new government based on its conduct. 'Our ambassador is in contact with the Taliban leadership, tomorrow he will meet with the Taliban security coordinator,' foreign ministry official Zamir Kabulov said in an interview with the Ekho Moskvy radio station on Monday. He said the talks between Moscow's ambassador, Dmitry Zhirnov, and the Taliban would centre on how the group plans to provide security for the Russian embassy in the Afghan capital. On Sunday, as the Taliban completed its military takeover of Afghanistan, Kabulov said that Russia had no plans on evacuating its embassy - though on Monday he said that 'part' of its staff would be 'evacuated'. Kabulov also said that Moscow will decide on recognising the new Taliban government based 'on the conduct of the new authorities'. 'We will carefully see how responsibly they govern the country in the near future. And based on the results, the Russian leadership will draw the necessary conclusions,' Kabulov said. In recent years, Russia has sought to reach out to the Taliban and has hosted Taliban representatives in Moscow several times, most recently last month. Moscow is closely watching for a potential spillover of the instability into neighbouring ex-Soviet Central Asian countries where Russia maintains military bases. Reporting by AFP Advertisement

'And at the same time we are being stripped of our political rights, our mobility rights, our social rights. So these are some immediate things that we know are going to happen, or are in the process of happening,' she said.

After police and other government forces gave up their posts in Kabul on Sunday, Taliban fighters took over checkpoints across the city and entered the presidential palace.

Militants with rifles slung over their shoulders were also seen walking Monday through the streets of the Green Zone, the formerly heavily fortified district that houses most embassies and international organisations.

The Taliban sought to reassure the international community that Afghans should not fear them, and they will not take revenge against those who supported the US-backed alliance.

In a message posted to social media, Taliban co-founder Abdul Ghani Baradar called on his fighters to remain disciplined after taking control of the city.

'Now it's time to test and prove, now we have to show that we can serve our nation and ensure security and comfort of life,' he said.

The Taliban's capture of the capital had occurred, as in many other cities, without the bloodshed that many had feared.

But there were desperate scenes at Kabul's airport on Monday as people tried to board the few flights available.

'We are afraid to live in this city,' a 25-year-old ex-soldier said as he stood among huge crowds on the tarmac. 'Since I served in the army, the Taliban would definitely target me.'

The United States had sent 6,000 troops to the airport to ensure the safe evacuation of embassy staff, as well as Afghans who worked as interpreters or in other support roles.

Other governments had also organised charter flights.

The US government said Monday it had secured the airport, but there was still chaos with witnesses reporting American soldiers firing in the air to warn off crowds.

Authorities then cancelled all remaining commercial flights because of the chaos.

'There will be no commercial flights from Hamid Karzai Airport to prevent looting and plundering. Please do not rush to the airport,' the Kabul airport authority said in a message sent to reporters.

The United States had earlier released a statement with more than 65 nations urging the Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

Pictured: Taliban forces patrol in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16, 2021. Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country as they took control in little over a week

After police and other government forces gave up their posts in Kabul on Sunday, Taliban fighters took over checkpoints across the city and entered the presidential palace. Pictured: Taliban fighters in Kabul, August 16, 2021

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres urged the Taliban and all parties to 'exercise restraint' and said the rights of women and girls, who suffered under the previous Taliban regime, must be protected.

The Taliban imposed an ultra-strict interpretation of sharia law during their 1996-2001 rule.

This included banning girls from schools and women from working, while people were publicly stoned to death for adultery.

As people scrambled to escape Afghanistan, neighbouring Pakistan's state-run airline said on Monday it has halted all flights to Afghanistan's capital of Kabul because of the 'uncertain security situation' there.

Spokesman Abdullah Hafeez said Monday that Pakistan International Airlines decided to protect passengers, the crew and the planes after consulting the Afghan civil aviation authorities.

Pakistan's interior minister said on Sunday the country had closed the Torkham border point with Afghanistan after the Taliban took control of the Afghan border facility.

Sheikh Rashid Ahmed said the decision to close the Torkhan border was taken due to due to an extraordinary situation on the other side. Ahmed told the local Geo television that the border was closed when Afghan police surrendered to the Taliban.

Ahmed said the Chaman border point with Afghanistan remains open.

Pakistan has already said that it cannot bear any load of new Afghan refugees in the wake of crisis in the war-torn country. Pakistan is about to complete fencing along the long, porous border, saying the step has been taken to check the militants' movement across the border.

Al Jazeera broadcast footage of what it said were Taliban commanders in the presidential palace with dozens of armed fighters.

Taliban spokesman Mohammad Naeem said the form of the new regime in Afghanistan would be made clear soon, adding the Taliban did not want to live in isolation and calling for peaceful international relations.

'We have reached what we were seeking, which is the freedom of our country and the independence of our people,' he said. 'We will not allow anyone to use our lands to target anyone, and we do not want to harm others.'

Many Afghans fear the Taliban will return to past harsh practices in their imposition of sharia religious law. During their 1996-2001 rule, women could not work and punishments such as stoning, whipping and hanging were administered.

Both the United Nations and the United States said last week they had received reports that Taliban fighters were executing surrendering government soldiers.

A Taliban leader the insurgents were regrouping from different provinces, and would wait until foreign forces had left before creating a new governance structure.

The leader, who requested anonymity, said Taliban fighters had been 'ordered to allow Afghans to resume daily activities and do nothing to scare civilians'.

Central Kabul streets were largely deserted early on a sunny Monday as waking residents pondered their future.

'I'm in a complete state of shock,' said Sherzad Karim Stanekzai, who spent the night in his carpet shop to guard it. 'I know there will be no foreigners, no international people who will now come to Kabul.'

The militants sought to project a more moderate face, promising to respect women's rights and protect both foreigners and Afghans.

Taliban stands guard outside the Hamid Karzai International Airport as people walk to the airport to flee the country after rumors that foreign countries are evacuating people even without visas, in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16, 2021

Taliban members patrol the streets of Afghan capital Kabul on August 16, 2021, as the Taliban takes control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

A Taliban fighter sits on his motorcycle along a roadside at Shahr-e Naw in Kabul on August 16, 2021

Western nations, including the UK, France, Germany and New Zealand said they were working to get citizens as well as some Afghan employees out. Russia said it saw no need to evacuate its embassy for the time being while Turkey said its embassy would continue operations.

Britain's Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said the military side of Kabul airport was secure and that Britain was doing everything it could to evacuate British citizens and Afghans with links to Britain.

'Our target is... about 1200 to 1500 exit a day in the capacity of our airplanes, and we'll keep that flow,' he said.

Britain has relocated its embassy to Kabul airport from the city. Asked what he would feel to see the Taliban flag flying over the former British embassy building in Kabul, Wallace said: 'Symbolically, it's not what any of us wanted.'

MP Tobias Ellwood, former captain in the British Army and chairman of the defence select committee, criticised the West for pulling out of Afghanistan.

Appearing on Sky News, he said: 'The world is now a little bit more dangerous because they've now taken control of the country, and the West should really hang its head in shame after abruptly abandoning Afghanistan to a civil war after two decades of effort.'

He added: 'This is not a good day for the West at all, and China will be observing things very, very closely indeed. They are already making alliances with the Taliban and glossing over the human rights atrocities that are likely to unfold.'

The European Union said it is working with member states to find quick solutions for the relocation of local Afghan staff and their families to a safe place, a spokesperson said.

'The matter is extremely urgent, we take it very seriously and continue to work hard, together with EU member states, on implementing rapid solutions for them and ensure their safety,' the spokesperson for the bloc's executive Commission told Reuters.

The Commission does not give figures for their local Afghan staff for security reasons.

German parliamentary sources said on Monday that chancellor Angela Merkel's government is planning to deploy soldiers to Afghanistan to help with the evacuation of German nationals and Afghans in danger from the Taliban.

The government is planning to seek a mandate from parliament to allow the deployment of as many as 'several hundred soldiers', the sources told AFP, citing a briefing by Merkel to leaders of parliamentary groups late Sunday.

Several dozen French citizens are to be repatriated by plane from Afghanistan, French Armed Forces minister Florence Parly told France Info radio.

Sweden said it had completed the evacuation of all its Swedish embassy staff from Kabul on Monday, and is now working on plans to get local employees and those who have supported its activities out of the country.

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called for the Taliban to uphold human rights and said the world was watching: 'It's going to be all about the actions, not the words.'

U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres urged all parties to exercise the utmost restraint, and expressed particular concern about the future of women and girls.

In Washington, opponents of President Joe Biden's decision to end America's longest war, launched after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, said the chaos was caused by a failure of leadership.

Biden has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to a plan, initiated by his Republican predecessor, Donald Trump, to end the U.S. military mission by Aug. 31.

Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell blamed Biden for what he called a 'shameful failure of American leadership'.

Naeem said the Taliban would adopt an international policy of two-way non-interference. 'We do not think that foreign forces will repeat their failed experience.'

The US government has insisted in recent days that its two decades of war in Afghanistan was a success, defined by quashing the Al-Qaeda threat.

President Joe Biden also said he was determined there was no choice but to withdraw American troops, as he would not 'pass this war' onto another president.

But Washington was left shocked by the rapid collapse of the Afghan government, and critics have said the United States' reputation as a global power has been badly tarnished.

'America's credibility as an ally is diminished,' said Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's former ambassador to the United States.

A U.S. State Department spokesperson said early on Monday that all embassy personnel, including Ambassador Ross Wilson, had been transferred to Kabul airport, mostly by helicopter, to await evacuation and the American flag had been lowered and removed from the embassy compound.

Hundreds of Afghans invaded the airport's runways in the dark, pulling luggage and jostling for a place on one of the last commercial flights to leave before U.S. forces took over air traffic control on Sunday.

'This is our airport but we are seeing diplomats being evacuated while we wait in complete uncertainty,' said Rakhshanda Jilali, a human rights activist who was trying to get to Pakistan, told Reuters in a message from the airport.

Crowds thronged into the airport as morning broke and U.S. forces fired into the air to stop people surging onto the tarmac to try to board a military flight, a U.S. official said.

Dozens of men tried to clamber onto an overhead departure gangway to board a plane while hundreds of others milled about, a video posted on social media showed.

There was the prospect of chaos in the skies over Afghanistan too. Its civil aviation authority advised transit aircraft to reroute saying its airspace was uncontrolled.

The Pentagon on Sunday authorized another 1,000 troops to help evacuate U.S. citizens and Afghans who worked for them, expanding its security presence on the ground to almost 6,000 troops within the next 48 hours.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kit Harington recently discussed how he was previously unfamiliar with his character in the upcoming Marvel film Eternals.

The 34-year-old actor appeared on Thursday's episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and revealed that he had to perform a web search on Dane Whitman when he received the part.

The Game Of Thrones star is currently set to appear in the forthcoming Marvel Cinematic Universe entry, which will be made available to the public in the near future.

Doing his research: Kit Harington revealed that he had to Google Dane Whitman after being cast in Eternals on Thursday's episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon

Harington told the show's host that, when he was initially cast in Eternals, he was simply informed about the character that he would be portraying.

He recalled: 'I didn't get sent a script. I just got sent, "This is who you're playing." So I was like, "Okay."'

The performer then revealed that he had to look the superhero up on the Internet, as he had never heard of the swordsman.

'I just had to Google the character. This is you know, a hell of a way to kind of work out who you're playing,' he noted.

Being blunt: Harington revealed that he did not receive a script, stating: 'I just got sent, "This is who you're playing."'

One way or another: The Game Of Thrones star expressed that 'a hell of a way to kind of work out who you're playing'

Harington then humorously drew a parallel between the superhero and the person he portrayed on Game Of Thrones, Jon Snow.

'I Googled him. He's a character called Dane Whitman, and I realized he has a sword and rides a horse. And I was like, I know this guy. I've been this guy,' he said.

Although he pointed out that the two sounded similar conceptually, the actor noted that Whitman was 'quite different, so it's exciting.'

Fallon then pressed Harington to reveal if Harry Styles would be appearing in the forthcoming flick, about which the performer remained tight-lipped.

One more time: Harington drew a parallel between Jon Snow and Dane Whitman, stating that he 'realized he has a sword and rides a horse. And I was like, I know this guy'

Tight lips: When Fallon pressed the actor to reveal if Harry Styles would appear in the forthcoming feature, the performer did not give a definitive answer

Development on Eternals began in 2018, and its director, Chloe Zhao, was confirmed to be helming the project that September.

The upcoming superhero film will serve as one of the first entries in the MCU's recently-started Phase Four.

Several actors were added to the feature's cast the following year, including Angelina Jolie, Salma Hayek and Kumail Nanjiani, among numerous others.

Shooting had begun by the summer of 2019, with new cast members being added over the course of production.

Keeping it going: Production on Eternals had begun by the summer of 2019 and new cast members were added during the filming process

The film's crew later moved to England in 2020 to capture further scenes, and principal photography ended that February.

Eternals' first teaser was released this past May and was met with a positive reception from both critics and fans.

The film was initially set to be released in November of last year, although it was delayed several times due to the onset of the global pandemic.

Eternals is currently set to be made available to the public on November 5th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They received the lowest score of the week on Sunday night's episode of The Block.

And after being criticised for their 'bland and generic' guest bedroom, Mitch Edwards and Mark McKie were reportedly so furious they wanted to quit the show.

The stylish granddads wanted to leave after being harshly criticised during the first room reveal, but a producer convinced them to stay, reports New Idea.

Drama: After being criticised for their 'bland and generic' guest bedroom, The Block favourites Mitch Edwards and Mark McKie were reportedly so furious they wanted to quit the show

A source claimed: 'Mitch and Mark were furious at how they were treated during the first week of judging - so much so they wanted out.

'Not even they expected this season to be so cut-throat.'

Mitch and Mark received the lowest score during Sunday's guest bedroom reveal.

Want out: The stylish granddads wanted to leave after being harshly criticised during the first room reveal, but a producer convinced them to stay, reports New Idea

Judges Shaynna Blaze, Darren Palmer and Neale Whitaker criticised the couple for their 'bland' styling and the size of the room.

'I actually feel quite claustrophobic in here, it feels very, very small. Oppressively small actually,' Neale said.

'That is not the kind of rookie error I would expect from Mitch and Mark.'

Bottom: Mitch and Mark received the lowest score during Sunday's guest bedroom reveal

Neale added: 'I'm finding this a little bland. But I feel this room is quite generic and that's not a word I would ever have used with Mitch and Mark.'

The feedback landed Mitch and Mark at the bottom of the leader board with 22.5 points.

Meanwhile, at the other end of the spectrum were Ronnie and Georgia Caceres, who landed the top score of 24.5.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Professor Adam Finn, who sits on the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) — the Government on Covid vaccine policy, says the number of serious cases among young people has been increasing in recent weeks

The panel advising the Government on Covid vaccine policy U-turned to allow over-16s to have a jab because of a rise in the number of infected children getting seriously ill, one of the experts claimed today.

Ministers announced the rollout would be extended to 16- and 17-year-olds last week, after the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) changed its tune on the policy.

Previously, health chiefs were against inoculating teenagers amid fears over myocarditis — a rare heart condition being linked to Pfizer and Moderna's vaccines.

But Professor Adam Finn, who sits on the JCVI, said the number of serious cases among young people in recent weeks merited a change in approach.

NHS data shows around 20 Covid-infected children aged between six and 17 are being admitted to hospital every day currently.

For comparison, the rate was in single figures until the start of July, when the third wave began to spiral rapidly. There were two days in May where no youngsters were hospitalised.

The tiny numbers of children who become seriously ill is the main argument used by critics of No10's decision to expand the roll-out to youngsters.

Data also suggests around one in 15,000 teenage boys given Pfizer's jab will develop myocarditis — which can lead to heart failure.

It has raised concerns about the risk-benefit ratio for children, especially boys, who may be up to 14 times more likely to be struck down with the complication.

But other scientists agree with the UK's move to vaccinate children, saying cases of the condition appear to usually be mild.

Any increase in prevalence tips the risk-benefit balance in favour of jabs because the dangers posed by Covid are skewed higher.

Professor Finn, a paediatrician at Bristol University, said while most young people will only have the virus in a mild form, the vaccines will be effective at preventing serious cases.

NHS data shows around 20 Covid-infected children aged between six and 17 are being admitted to hospital every day currently

Since May, men aged 16 to 29 have made up 5.5 per cent of all male hospitalisations, while women in the age group have made up six per cent, according to data from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC)

Teenage boys are 14 TIMES more likely to suffer rare heart complication from Pfizer's Covid jab, study warns amid growing calls for No10 to rethink plan to inoculate 16 and 17 year olds Pfizer's Covid vaccine may pose more of a risk to boys, a study claimed today amid growing calls for No10 to rethink plans to dish out jabs to children. New research has suggested boys are 14 times more likely to be struck down with a rare heart complication called myocarditis. The data, from the US, will likely fuel an already fierce debate over Britain's decision to press ahead with inoculating all 16 and 17-year-olds. Last week, the Government's advisory panel ruled older teenagers should be given their first dose. Ministers plan to invite them before they head back to schools and colleges in September. But health officials have yet to make concrete plans for children to get top-ups. They want to wait for more safety data about myocarditis before pressing ahead. Real-world data from the US, which has been vaccinating children for months, have shown teenage boys to be at a higher risk. It prompted one member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which green-lighted the move to jab children, to admit different advice for boys was 'theoretically on the cards'. There is already precedent for just giving vaccinating just one gender, with the HPV jab offered only to girls until 2018. Advertisement

Professor Finn told BBC Breakfast: 'We're going cautiously down through the ages now into childhood and it was clear that the number of cases and the number of young people in the age group — 16, 17 — that were getting seriously ill merited going forward with giving them just a first dose.'

He said the JCVI would advise 'when and what' the second dose for that age group would be after assessing more data.

He added: 'Most young people who get this virus get it mildly or even without any symptoms at all.

'But we are seeing cases in hospital even into this age group — we've had a couple of 17-year-olds here in Bristol admitted and needing intensive care over the course of the last four to six weeks — and so we are beginning to see a small number of serious cases.

'What we know for sure is that these vaccines are very effective at preventing those kind of serious cases from occurring.'

NHS England said nearly 16,000 people in the 16- to 17-year-old age group have already received their vaccine over the weekend, just days after JCVI guidance was updated.

Extending the jabs rollout further down to the 12- to 15-year-old age group has not been ruled out.

Professor Danny Altmann, an Imperial College London immunologist, said he thinks doing so would be 'a good thing'.

He told Times Radio the more unvaccinated people there are, the more lungs there are 'for virus to percolate in, therefore it's got to be a good thing to be vaccinating more children down through the age range'.

He said children who have the virus but do not have symptoms are 'as dangerous to the spread as anybody else'.

He said: 'From a medical scientific point of view, I'd say there's nothing special about the virus in their lungs that can't transmit through to their families, through to their schoolteachers, through to their colleagues.'

Research yesterday, published in JAMA Cardiology, suggested boys are 14 times more likely to be struck down with the heart complication after Pfizer's jab — which will be given to British children.

The study was based on an analysis of just 15 children. Only one was a girl.

The findings echoed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) data, which suggests the risk is up to nine times higher among teenage boys.

All 15 experienced chest pain, which started a couple of days after being vaccinated and lasted for up to nine days.

None were struck down with a serious bout of myocarditis or required intensive care. All were discharged within five days.

It comes after Sir Andrew Pollard, the JCVI's chair, said pupils who are not unwell should not have to isolate after being in contact with a Covid case in the classroom.

Sir Andrew, who helped to create the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine and is a professor of paediatric infection at the University of Oxford, said that as long as children who are contacts are not ill, they should continue to be in school getting their education.

He told the All Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus on Tuesday: 'Given that children have relatively mild infection compared to adults, apart from the exceptions who are largely going to be vaccinated in the current programme anyway, we probably should be moving to a situation where we're clinically-driven.

'If someone is unwell, they should be tested, but for those contacts in the classroom, if they're not unwell then it makes sense for them to be in school and being educated.'

The latest schools infection survey from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) showed that 0.27 per cent of primary school pupils, 0.42 per cent of secondary school pupils, and 0.27 per cent of secondary school staff tested positive for coronavirus on the day of testing in June.

Statisticians said the survey of 141 schools in England showed prevalence of infection among pupils sampled in school was consistently lower than prevalence among children in the wider community.

The patients arrived at the hospital with elevated troponin levels, an indicator of heart injury - but their hearts recovered significantly during short hospital stays

Public Health England (PHE), which co-leads the study, said the latest results confirm 'schools are not hubs on infection'.

Dr Shamez Ladhani, consultant paediatrician at PHE and study lead, said: 'The latest results show that infection and antibody positivity rates of children in school did not exceed those of the community.

'This is reassuring and confirms that schools are not hubs of infection.

'Keeping community infection rates low remains critical for keeping children safe and schools open safely.'

Professor Mark Woolhouse, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh, said there is now a 'wealth of evidence from around the world that schools are not the main driver of Covid epidemics'.

He said the latest ONS survey 'does not raise any immediate concerns about the re-opening of schools after the summer holidays' and added that the future inquiry into coronavirus should consider whether there was ever any need to close schools, saying he believes the epidemiological evidence suggests the answer may be no.

From August 16, children under the age of 18 will no longer be required to self-isolate if they are contacted by NHS Test and Trace as a close contact of a positive Covid case.

Instead they will be informed they have been in close contact with a positive case and advised to take a PCR test.

Guidance issued at the end of term states that schools no longer need to perform contact tracing after being notified of a positive case.

Close contacts will now be identified through the Test and Trace programme.

Previously, children were required to isolate for 10 days if another pupil in their bubble — which could be an entire year group — tested positive for Covid.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woman who posted a lit firework through her ex-boyfriend's letterbox in a revenge attack has been spared jail.

Hannah Linklater, 23, got drunk while with her friend Louise Burgess, 27, and lit the device before pushing it into the hallway of Joel Johnson's home, Manchester Crown Court heard.

Linklater is said to have been bitter after spending much of the £7,000 left to her by her late mother on the failed and 'toxic' three-year relationship.

Mr Johnson, 46, was woken by the commotion and managed to stamp out the fuse before the firework could explode.

He escaped uninjured with only minor damage being caused to his carpet at his property in Burnage.

An investigation into the attack in March 2020 revealed the couple were known to police after Linklater accused Mr Johnson of assault and he accused her of harassment.

Hannah Linklater (right), 23, got drunk with her friend Louise Burgess (left), 27, and lit the device before pushing it into the hallway of Joel Johnson's home, Manchester Crown Court heard

Officers recovered text messages detailing hostilities between them.

Linklater, of Burnage, and Burgess, of Bolton, had faced jail after admitting arson at Manchester Crown Court.

But each were given two-year prison sentences suspended for 24 months after a judge said there were 'exceptional circumstances.'

Both were also each ordered to complete 150 hours unpaid work, attend a 'women's problem solving court' and were banned from contacting Mr Johnson indefinitely under the terms of a restraining order.

Linklater, who was meant to be celebrating her birthday, wept in the dock as Judge Hilary Manley told her and Burgess: 'To put a lit firework through the letterbox of somebody's home is a wicked and dangerous thing thing to do.

'Fortunately the damage done was minimal although it could have course have been very serious indeed. The motive was revenge a borne out of anger and rejection by the victim this case.

'I accept you were affected by the volatility and toxicity of this relationship but your foolish and dangerous actions have led you on your 23rd birthday to the dock of a crown court.

'But you each feel and demonstrate remorse and there is lack of maturity and difficult backgrounds.'

Earlier the court heard the couple had began dating when she was 17 and Johnson was 40.

She had been left £7,000 by her late mother and had been awarded a damages payout following an assault and she used the money to set up home with Johnson.

Linklater (pictured) is said to have been bitter after spending much of the £7,000 left to her by her late mother on the failed and 'toxic' three-year relationship with Mr Johnson

But the relationship became 'abusive and toxic' with both making counter allegations against each other and it ended in 2018.

The following year Linklater contacted police three times to claim Johnson had beaten her up during arguments whilst he accused her of stalking him over a period of nine months - although no action was taken.

Simon Barrett prosecuting said: 'At approximately 11.20pm on March 5, 2020 Joel Johnson was asleep in the front upstairs bedroom of his address when he was awoken by the sound of Hannah Linklater who had attended at his address and was shouting that she was going to smash up a car.

'About 25 minutes later Joel Johnson heard a car pull up outside his address. The driver of the car was Hannah Linklater.

'The front seat passenger, later identified as Louise Burgess got out of the car and walked towards his front door with her hood up and concealing her appearance.

'Joel Johnson heard the letter box open before Louise Burgess returned to the car which drove off.

'When he went to top of the stairs to check what had happened he could see that the carpet at the bottom of the stairs was on fire.

'Joel Johnson was able to stamp out the fire and noticed that a firework was jammed in the letter box.

'Later that day Joel Johnson saw the occupants of the car at some shops where Hannah Linklater laughed at him and said that she would: 'do his mum's next.' The fire service were not required to attend at the property. Damage caused was fire damage to the carpet.'

The two women were arrested the following June but both made no comment in police interview.

Linklater, of Burnage, and Burgess, of Bolton, had faced jail after admitting arson at Manchester Crown Court (Pictured)

Linklater had convictions for common assault and theft from 2014 whilst Burgess was of previous good character.

In mitigation Linklater's lawyer Miss Sara Haque told the hearing: 'She had never effectively dealt with the loss of her mother when she went into a relationship with the victim in this case.

'She had inherited a small amount of money from her late mother and had also been the victim of an assault and recovered compensation but all that money had gone into the house and home she shared with Joel Johnson.

'The relationship became toxic and abusive and when it ended she was left with nothing.

'She had become besotted with Mr Johnson and she could not walk away from their relationship after it ended despite knowing it was not good for her or him.

'The offence did cause risk of harm but the actual harm caused was limited. her was not likely to have suffered serious psychological harm. A firework is unlikely to cause the same level of risk as a petrol bomb.

'Whilst there must have been some planning to go to the address it was an offence which was very much of the moment that was impulsive and unsophisticated.

'She is extremely vulnerable and has been a victim of emotional and physical abuse.

'She is very much the manifestation of what causes females often to end up within the criminal justice system in relation to themes of abuse and trauma.'

For mother of two Burgess, defence counsel Rachel Cooper said: 'These two had a very intensive friendship. As far as Miss Burgess understood Mis Linklater was in abusive relationship and she heard and saw things which supported that.

'She shouldn't have got involved in this and it wasn't her battle but she got involved in a misguided attempted at providing protection and assistance.

'It was a spur of the moment offence and she immediately regretted her actions. She is grateful no harm was caused.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eminem's 19-year-old child has come out as non-binary.

The teenager made the announcement in a TikTok video last week and asked fans to 'call me Stevie (they/she/he)'.

Eminem legally adopted Stevie, formerly known as Whitney, in 2005, after the rapper, 48, briefly reconciled with Stevie's mother Kim Scott, 46.

Announcement: Eminem's 19-year-old child has come out as non-binary and asked fans to 'call me Stevie'

In a video posted on the social media site, Stevie shows their journey to non-binary- an umbrella term for people whose gender identity doesn't sit comfortably with 'man' or 'woman'.

Audio of the teenager crying with joy is played at the start of the video before a montage of photos is shown to document their transformation over the years.

The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her pronouns' captioned before transitioning into photos alongside the pronouns 'they/ her' 19 seconds in.

Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'.

Family: Eminem legally adopted Stevie, formerly known as Whitney, in 2005 after the rapper, 48, reconciled with Stevie's mother Kim Scott (pictured in 2015)

Non-binary: The teenager made the announcement in a Tik Tok video and asked fans to 'call me Stevie (they/she/he)'

Tight bond: The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father as he said in an interview in 2004: You’ve got Daddy. And I’m here'

Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing', and has used the hashtags '#genderfluid #bi and #nonbinary' in several posts.

The post was liked by their sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim.

According to The Sun, the teenager's new name was referenced in their grandmother Kathleen Sluck's obituary last month.

It read: 'Kathleen was a exceptional mom to her two daughters; Kim and Dawn; and was overjoyed to become a grandmother to her grandchildren; Alaina, Adam, Hailie, Stevie, P.J., and Parker.'

Profile: Stevie's Tik Tok bio reads '19, any pronouns'

Journey: The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her' pronouns captioned

Self-acceptance: The photos transition to the pronouns 'they/ she' 19 seconds in

Self-love: Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'

Gender fluid: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Acceptance: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Stevie came out as bisexual in 2017, and at the time their Instagram bio requested to be referred by the pronouns she/ they.

The teenager said in a now deleted post: 'Happy national coming out day!' I am bisexual???? I would like to say you’re perfect the way you are and that love is love!?????????? be yourself!'

Stevie's biological father is Eric Hartter, a tattoo artist, who died of a suspected drug overdose in 2019, after a history of substance abuse and brush ins with the law.

Kim had Stevie six months after her divorce from the rapper in 2001. Eminem was already father to Hailie at the time.

Family: Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child (pictured with Kim in 2004)

Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and previously spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child.

The Slim Shady hitmaker also has an adopted daughter Alaina, 28, whose mother is Kim's late twin sister Dawn. Dawn died of a drug overdose in 2016.

The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father in a Rolling Stones Interview in 2004, where he also spoke about Kim's history with substance abuse.

'You can never let a child feel like it’s her fault for what’s goin’ on,' he said.

Supportive: Stevie's sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim, has shown her support by liking their sibling's TikTok posts (pictured)

'You just gotta let her know: "Mom has a problem, she’s sick, and it’s not because she doesn’t love you. She loves you, but she’s sick right now, and until she gets better, you’ve got Daddy. And I’m here".'

Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, reports TMZ.

It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering.

The ex-wife of the rapper was grieving the death of her mother and penned a heartbreaking tribute saying she wished she'd died instead of her - four days before she 'attempted to take her own life'.

Grieving: Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, it has been reported (pictured in her last public sighting in August 2018)

Heartfelt: The family have been devastated by the loss of Kim's mother Kathy Sluck who passed away last month, here is Kim's tribute

Her mother Kathy Sluck passed away on July 23 at the age of 65 and her funeral took place in Michigan four days six days later. It is not known how she died.

Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later during their famously stormy romance.

They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile.

Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity.

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

For weeks, he's been riding out the waves of public anger by keeping a low profile as he tries to avoid political wipeout.

So it's no surprise that Matt Hancock has sneaked off to Cornwall – where he was spotted splashing around in the surf on a body board.

The disgraced former health secretary, 42, was forced to quit the Cabinet in June when CCTV from his Whitehall office was leaked of him kissing his married aide Gina Coladangelo in breach of Covid social-distancing guidance.

In the wake of the scandal, he reportedly told his wife Martha that their marriage was over and announced he would be spending time away from the spotlight to focus on his three children.

For weeks, Matt Hancock (pictured) been riding out the waves of public anger by keeping a low profile as he tries to avoid political wipeout

The former health minister has sneaked off to Cornwall – where he was spotted splashing around in the surf on a body board

Mr Hancock's children were with him on the beach at Pentireglaze Haven this week, where they also enjoyed some rock-pooling

The disgraced former health secretary, 42, was forced to quit the Cabinet in June when CCTV from his Whitehall office was leaked of him kissing his married aide Gina Coladangelo in breach of Covid social-distancing guidance

In the wake of the scandal, Hancock reportedly told his wife Martha that their marriage was over and announced he would be spending time away from the spotlight to focus on his three children

Hancock was replaced as health secretary by Sajid Javid, who has taken a more aggressive approach on relaxing pandemic restrictions

Hancock is reportedly still in a relationship with his former aide. Miss Coladangelo, 44, also has three children with her husband Oliver Tress, who founded Oliver Bonas, the homeware chain

Pictured: Hancock enjoyed some rock-pooling on the beach at Cornwall with his three children on Friday

Hancock's holiday comes amid reports he may already be plotting his ministerial comeback

Mr Hancock's children were with him on the beach at Pentireglaze Haven this week, where they also enjoyed some rock-pooling.

Later Mr Hancock, dressed in a red baseball cap, swimming shorts, a T-shirt and Crocs, politely humoured requests for selfies from other holidaymakers.

Mrs Hancock, 44, was seen separately in the same resort, wearing her wedding ring.

Hancock's wife Martha (pictured) was spotted separately at the same resort in Cornwall where the family are holidaying

Pictured: Martha Hancock on holiday in Cornwall on Friday

Mr Hancock, dressed in a red baseball cap, swimming shorts, a T-shirt and Crocs, was also pictured politely humouring requests for selfies from other holidaymakers

He maintained a suitable social distance from fellow holidaymakers requesting selfies while out for a stroll

Last month, the Tory backbencher was pictured moving boxes, suitcases and clothes out of his marital home in London

Last month, the Tory backbencher was pictured moving boxes, suitcases and clothes out of his marital home in London.

He is reportedly already plotting his ministerial comeback.

Miss Coladangelo, 44, also has three children with her husband Oliver Tress, who founded Oliver Bonas, the homeware chain.

Matt Hancock stepped down from his Cabinet role last month after CCTV footage was leaked of him breaching Covid social distancing rules by kissing his aide Gina Coladangelo (left)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Demand for train travel will return to pre-pandemic levels – even though it is lagging behind the growth in car use, a minister said yesterday.

The number of journeys being made by train is 57 per cent of what it was before Covid, while car use has fully recovered, Department for Transport figures show.

Asked if train passenger numbers will return to normal, rail minister Chris Heaton-Harris replied: ‘I think we will, but I don’t think there’ll be the numbers at the same times of day that there used to be.’

The number of journeys being made by train is 57 per cent of what it was before Covid, while car use has fully recovered, Department for Transport figures show [File photo]

Before the pandemic, the rail network saw a surge in demand from commuters at the weekday morning and evening peaks, but was often quiet during other periods.

Asked if train passenger numbers will return to normal, rail minister Chris Heaton-Harris replied: ‘I think we will, but I don’t think there’ll be the numbers at the same times of day that there used to be'

Mr Heaton-Harris said: ‘We’re going to be sweating the assets in a very different way. The leisure market is recovering strongly. Probably for the first time in the railway’s history you’re getting as many people travelling on Saturdays and Sundays as during the week – and in lots of places more.’

He also said ‘rail has to compete for its market’ because it was competing with ‘a host of factors’ such as cars and virtual meetings.

He added: ‘We are going to have to be flexible, innovative. We have a resilient, reliable, spotlessly clean railway with excellent people working on it, with great customer service. We need to set about winning our market back.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tom Watson privately hopes for a second shot at a peerage under Sir Keir Starmer, his allies have said.

A source close to the former Labour deputy leader said Mr Watson is desperate to return to Parliament and thinks he has more of a chance if proposed by Sir Keir.

His failed attempt last year was part of three rejected peerages, all put forward by Jeremy Corbyn – alongside aide Karie Murphy and former Speaker John Bercow.

Last year Mr Watson was rejected by the House of Lords appointments commission, reportedly over Operation Midland, after his role in plugging false claims by convicted fantasist Carl Beech

‘He thinks he has more of a chance a second time round,’ the source said of Mr Watson, pointing out that he would now be on a less controversial list.

Last year Mr Watson was rejected by the House of Lords appointments commission, reportedly over Operation Midland, after his role in plugging false claims by convicted fantasist Carl Beech.

Now chairman of UK Music, Watson nevertheless misses Parliament, the source said.

Another insider praised Mr Watson’s experience but said the decision was up to Labour.

The source said Mr Watson and Sir Keir formed a bond when the ex-deputy leader backed Sir Keir’s second referendum plans while he was Shadow Brexit Secretary.

In 2012, Mr Watson told the Commons there was ‘clear intelligence’ about the existence of a ‘powerful paedophile network’ at Westminster.

His failed attempt last year was part of three rejected peerages, all put forward by Jeremy Corbyn

Mr Watson later said of the victims of Operation Midland: ‘I understand why they are angry and I understand why some of the anger is targeted at me.’

He added: ‘I did my best… I am genuinely very, very sorry that the inquiries didn’t go the way they did.’

Mr Watson could not be reached for comment, but one ally of Sir Keir warned the Labour leader about a ‘political minefield’ if he revived talk of a Watson peerage.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Gordon Ramsay enjoys family beach day with adorable son Oscar, 2, and glamorous wife Tana in Cornwall

Gordon Ramsay took to Instagram to show fans his mansion in Rock, Cornwall where he is currently on holiday with family.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'No drugs, no alcohol, no cigarettes:' Donald Trump reveals most important advice he told his kids during chat with 11 year-old scrap metal heiress aboard her multimillionaire felon dad's private jet - and youngster is interviewing Michelle Obama next

'No drugs, no alcohol, no cigarettes' Donald Trump dishes his best parenting to : Adam Weitsman's daughter, 11 year-old scrap metal heiress aboard her multimillionaire felon dad's private jet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hollywood veteran Mark Harmon was spotted picking up a vintage truck as he stepped out in Los Angeles just weeks before his 70th birthday.

The NCIS star, who plays special agent Leroy Gibbs on the hit CBS show, was pictured at a garage in the San Fernando Valley last week after being dropped off by his wife of 34 years, Mork & Mindy actress Pam Dawber, 69.

While the actor, who is reported to make a whopping $525,000 per episode, could certainly afford a snazzy set of wheels, he appears to have a more low-key style, preferring the classics.

The 69-year-old, who turns 70 on September 2, was seen inspecting a white, vintage Ford F-250 pickup truck before getting in and speeding off.

Mark Harmon was spotted picking up a vintage truck as he stepped out in Los Angeles just weeks before his 70th birthday

The NCIS star was pictured at a garage in the San Fernando Valley last week to pick up his vintage Ford F-250 truck

Harmon, who turns 70 on September 2, was seen inspecting the truck before getting in and speeding off

The 69-year-old could certainly afford a snazzy set of wheels, reportedly making $525,000 per episode, but appears to have a more low-key style, preferring the classics

He added to his down-to-earth charm as he arrived in a baggy checkered shirt, khaki style pants, and sneakers.

The outing comes as Harmon is set to reprise his role in the long-running police procedural series in its upcoming 19th season premiering in September.

The action drama has been ranked as TV's most watched series and attracts an average of 12 million viewers per episode.

But plans to renew NCIS had been up in the air for months following reports in February that Harmon intended to leave his role.

After playing the lead character for 18 years, the actor was reportedly planning to retire from the show.

CBS told Harmon and the executive producer they would likely cancel the series if he left, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

Harmon was dropped off at a garage by his wife of 34 years, Mork & Mindy actress Pam Dawber (not pictured)

The outing comes as Harmon is set to reprise his role in the long-running police procedural series in its upcoming 19th season premiering in September

The Hollywood veteran arrived in a baggy checkered shirt, khaki style pants, and sneakers

The actor then started negotiations to return, though it's unclear whether he will come back full-time or appear in a limited number of episodes.

In June, it was announced Katrina Law and Gary Cole had signed on to star as series regulars in the new season following the departure of Emily Wickersham, who played NCIS Special Agent Eleanor Bishop.

Although he has agreed to return this season, Harmon is reported to have a severely diminished presence and said to appear in just a handful of episodes as Special Agent Gibbs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Tesco worker wears suit and tie to announce to staff and customers in store that he's quitting... after bosses insisted on a FORMAL resignation

This was the hilarious moment a Tesco employee handed in his formal resignation with an elaborate display. The worker is seen standing atop a stool as another employee reads aloud his resignation letter as shoppers...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Stephen Colbert reveals he was CUT from Barack Obama's 60th birthday bash after ex-president's 500 person guestlist was condemned for setting a bad example - but late night host says he went to Martha's Vineyard anyway

Stephen Colbert reveals he was invited then uninvited to Barrack Obama's 60th birthday party.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An anti-vaxxer nurse in Germany has allegedly injected up to 8,600 people with saline solution instead of a Covid-19 vaccine.

The Red Cross nurse may have given thousands of elderly patients in northern Germany a fake jab in the early Spring, a police investigation found.

Authorities on Tuesday urged thousands of people who received their first jab at a vaccination centre in Friesland - a rural district near the North Sea coast - to get another shot of the Covid-19 vaccine after making the discovery.

Police said the unnamed suspect had aired sceptical views about vaccines in social media posts but that their motive was unclear.



An anti-vaxxer nurse (not pictured) in Germany has allegedly injected up to 8,600 people with saline solution instead of a Covid-19 vaccine, a police investigation found (file photo)

'I am totally shocked by this episode,' Sven Ambrosy, a local councillor, said on Facebook as local authorities issued the call to around 8,600 residents who may have been affected.

While saline solution is harmless, most people who got vaccinated in Germany in March and April - when the suspected switch took place - are elderly people at high risk of catching the potentially fatal viral disease.

Police investigator Peter Beer, speaking earlier at a news conference covered by German media, said that based on witness statements there was 'a reasonable suspicion of danger'.

It was not immediately clear whether the suspect had been arrested or charged in the case, which according to broadcaster NDR has been handed to a special unit that investigates politically motivated crimes.

Local police declined to comment outside of normal working hours.

It comes as German Chancellor Angela Merkel said the state would stop paying for Covid-19 tests for unvaccinated residents by October in an effort to encourage more people to get the jab.

Merkel said free testing will end on October 11 because all citizens are now eligible for the vaccine.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel said the state would stop paying for Covid-19 tests for unvaccinated residents by October in an effort to encourage more people to get the jab (file photo)

Around 55 per cent of Germans are fully vaccinated, but the pace of inoculations has slowed and Merkel has said she wants to see at least 75 per cent of the population jabbed.

Germany had made the tests free for all in March to help make a gradual return to normal life possible after months of lockdown.

From October, unvaccinated residents will have to pay for their own tests but teenagers, children, and people who cannot get the jab for medical reasons will be exempt.

The government will also require people to be either vaccinated, test negative or have a recovery certificate to enter indoor restaurants, participate in religious ceremonies and do indoor sport.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Asda has sacked an illiterate trolley porter after 30 years for breaking a no-smoking rule in a car park - but he claims he couldn't read the store's warning signs.

Long-serving Mark Misell, 47, lost his job of three decades after he was caught having a cigarette in a trolley bay while at work in Essex on May 25 this year.

But Mark - who can't read or write - claims he didn't understand the store's policy on smoking in the car park due to his learning difficulties.

He has now gone into a union-backed battle with his supermarket bosses to try and get his job back.

Long-serving Mark Misell, 47, lost his job of three decades after he was caught having a cigarette in a trolley bay while at work on May 25 this year

The GMB Union alleges that Asda's decision to fire Mark - who worked as a porter at the store in Shoeburyness, Essex (pictured) - amounted to 'disability discrimination'

His reps at GMB Union claim that there was 'no way in which he [Mark] was able to read any of Asda's policies'.

They allege that Asda's decision to fire Mark - who worked as a porter at the store in Shoeburyness, Essex - amounted to 'disability discrimination'.

Mark, from Southend, is now working with his union to appeal what he claimed was a 'farcical' disciplinary process and overturn the decision to fire him.

At the internal disciplinary hearing on May 25, it was heard that Mark could be left homeless if he lost his job.

But Mike Goodchild, who oversaw the meeting, later ruled that Mark's actions amounted to gross misconduct and he was fired without notice.

A document from the meeting states that Mark admitted to smoking in the trolley bay and understood the store's rules against smoking in non-designated areas.

But Mark - who is now jobless - has claimed that Asda bosses did not take into account his learning disabilities, which apparently affected his understanding of the no-smoking policy.

Speaking through his union, Mark said: 'Michael has made assumptions about my understanding of policy, and my mental health, where he could not have been able to do so, and that this led to him making the wrong decision as an outcome to the disciplinary.

'This has put me at a disadvantage due to my disabilities and is disability discrimination due to my learning disabilities not being taken into consideration.'

Keith Dixon, GMB Union regional organiser, said: 'There was no attempt to take into consideration Mark's mental health.

'This is another example of ASDA's discrimination against those working for the business who have disabilities.

'Gone are the days when Asda would respect their workforce and support those with disabilities.

Mark - who can't read or write - claims he didn't understand the store's policy on smoking in the car park due to his learning difficulties

'It is becoming common practice for colleagues with disabilities to be challenged upon their work rate, work speed or matters to which they have no control.

'Asda must adhere to the Equality Act 2010 and start to make reasonable adjustments for employees with disabilities.'

Mr Dixon said that Mark had been an extremely popular member of staff and had significant support from several customers of the store.

He added: 'Since Mark's dismissal customers from Asda have contacted GMB London Region to air their thoughts upon the way in which Asda have treated Mark.'

He said the union had now passed the matter onto its legal teams with a view to bringing the case to an employment tribunal.

Asda has been contacted for a comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Meghan Markle 'desperately wanted' to attend Barack Obama's 60th birthday party but was not included on the guest list, Prince Harry's biographer has claimed.

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex did not attend the lavish do thrown by the former US president at his seven-bedroom £8million holiday home in Martha's Vineyard on Saturday. It included John Legend and Chrissy Teigen, Meghan's friend CBS This Morning host Gayle King, George Clooney and Jay-Z and Beyoncé.

And according to royal expert and author Angela Levin, who wrote Harry: Biography of a Prince, it is thought that Barack and Michelle, 57, never included Harry, 36, and Meghan, 40, on the 475 strong guest-list.

Angela told The Sun: 'I am told that despite claiming she was unable to attend, Meghan desperately wanted to be the special guest at the Obama's amazing party. But the fact is, Harry and Meghan were never even on the original list.'

Meghan Markle 'desperately wanted' to attend Barack Obama's 60th birthday party but was not included on the guest list, Prince Harry's biographer has claimed

Meanwhile she added that the Obamas wanted to take a 'step back' from the couple out of respect for the Queen.

'I'm sure that if they say we can only deal with one brother and his wife — you cannot have both because they are so far apart now — they will go towards William.

'The Obamas clearly always regarded Harry highly, but I am sure they can see through Meghan.

They may stay around, but they won't be as pally as they once were.'

Angela Levin, who wrote Harry: Biography of a Prince, it is thought that Barack and Michelle, 57, never included Harry, 36, and Meghan, 40, on the 475 strong guest-list (pictured, in 2015)

The Obamas also have a long-standing relationship with Harry, having bonded with him over his Invictus Games - for which they starred in a video with the prince and the Queen to help promote it in 2016

The Obamas first met Her Majesty back in 2009 at the G20 summit, and in 2011 the monarch hosted them on a three-day State visit.

When the Duke of Edinburgh passed away in April, aged 99, Obama posted a glowing tribute on Twitter, writing: 'Through his extraordinary example, His Royal Highness Prince Philip proved that true partnership has room for both ambition and selflessness – all in service of something greater.'

His wife also tweeted: 'Our thoughts are with Her Majesty the Queen, the Royal family, and the British people.'

Speaking about the Queen during her 2019 book tour, Michelle described her as 'wonderfully warm, funny, elegant and kind and considerate in really interesting ways'.

The Obamas didn't invite Prince Harry and Meghan Markle to Barack's 60th birthday party because 'they will go towards William' amid the family's rift, according to Angela. Pictured, Prince Harry, US President Barack Obama, First Lady Michelle Obama, Prince William, Kate Middleton pose as they attend a dinner at Kensington Palace on April 22, 2016 in London

Despite both Meghan and Harry currently being on parental leave after welcoming their daughter Lilibet in June, the Duchess used her 40th birthday as an opportunity to launch her new 40x40 initiative, designed to encourage women back into work post-pandemic

In 2016, they attended a dinner with Prince William and Kate Middleton at their home, where they were photographed meeting Prince George, then three, who was in his dressing gown ready for bed, before having dinner with the Cambridges and Harry.

Obama publicly threw his support behind Prince William's Earthshot Prize in October, writing on Twitter: 'It's going to take a lot of big-thinking and innovation to save the one planet we've got – and that's why @KensingtonRoyal's leadership on climate change can make a real difference.'

The Obamas also have a long-standing relationship with Harry, having bonded with him over his Invictus Games - for which they starred in a video with the prince and the Queen to help promote it in 2016.

The following year Harry interviewed Barack in Toronto for his guest edit of BBC Radio 4's Today programme, during which they discussed the risks of social media and the corrosion of civil discourse.

Meghan also made a point of attending Michelle's talk at the London Southbank Centre in December 2018, with the two women reportedly getting together backstage afterwards for a 'power meeting' to discuss their shared passion for girls' education.

When the Obamas returned to the UK in 2016, they made a point of visiting Kensington Palace where they met Prince George, then three, who was in his dressing gown ready for bed, before having dinner with the Cambridges and Harry

Despite both Meghan and Harry currently being on parental leave after welcoming their daughter Lilibet in June, the Duchess last week used her 40th birthday as an opportunity to launch her new 40x40 initiative, designed to encourage women back into work post-pandemic.

But while a host of celebrities - including Hillary Clinton - were asked to support the project, which asks people to donate 40 minutes of their time to mentoring, the Obamas were seemingly not invited to participate.

And Angela notes that 'it must be irritating for the Obamas' that the concept is similar to Barack's 60x60 birthday appeal, where people were asked to donate 60 dollars, or even six dollars, to a charitable cause.

The comments come after royal expert Camilla Tominey claimed Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's 'conspicuous' absence from Barack Obama's 60th birthday party could be a sign their 'special relationship' is over.

Despite Obama insisting the event had been scaled back from a guestlist of 500 because of the spread of the Indian Delta variant of Covid, a staff member told DailyMail.com that 300 to 400 people were in attendance.

Page Six, which broke the news of Harry's multi-million pound book deal, reported Harry and Meghan were 'not planning to attend' and suggested the Duke might whisk his wife away for her own birthday celebrations, as she turned 40 on August 4.

Camilla Tominey suggested that ordinarily, you would have expected Harry and Meghan to be 'front and centre' of the Obamas' guest list, however some people within Democrat circles have suggested the Sussexes' attempts to 'ape everything the Obamas have done' since they quit the Royal Family may have 'jeopardised their once special relationship'.

Writing in the Daily Telegraph, she said: 'Despite the Obamas not attending the Sussexes' wedding that year, it was thought that the newly California-based couple would be shoo-ins at Obama's 60th, as prominent 'progressives' and new-found members of the US metropolitan liberal elite.'

She claimed a source revealed the Obamas 'didn't like Harry attacking his family' during his and Meghan's explosive interview with Oprah Winfrey in March.

'They value family and certainly aren't the type of people who would want their children talking to the press,' the insider added.

Meghan made a point of attending Michelle's talk at the London Southbank Centre in December 2018, with the two women reportedly getting together backstage afterwards for a 'power meeting' to discuss their shared passion for girls' education

Former First Lady Michelle Obama also shed light on her and her husband's feelings on the public outpouring - during which they accused the monarchy of not supporting them and suggested Prince Charles and Prince William are 'trapped' in the system - in an interview with Access Hollywood.

'My hope is that, when I think about what they're going through, I think about the importance of family and I just pray that there is forgiveness and there is clarity and love and resolve at some point in time. Because there's nothing more important than family,' she said.

The Sussexes have followed a similar trajectory to the Obamas since quitting royal life, having signed a multi-million dollar deal with Netflix to produce their own documentary series.

Harry has also signed a lucrative four-book deal with Penguin Random House - the same publishers used by Obama for his memoir A Promised Land in November last year. In 2018 Michelle published her life story, Becoming.

Tominey suggested the Obamas may be fearful that an association with the Sussexes risks attracting negative publicity.

She added that Harry and Meghan bad-mouthing the royals during their Oprah interview 'arguably will not have gone down particularly well with a couple that have always put 'family first.''

Following the Oprah interview and Harry's book news, some royal commentators have criticised the Sussexes for dishing yet more royal dirt.

There is concern within the Firm that the release of one of the books is reportedly due to come after the death of the Queen - though Harry's lawyers have said the claim that he is waiting for his grandmother to pass away before releasing one of them is 'false and defamatory'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Jay Leno, 71, had 'no fear' while UNTETHERED during climb out nose of a plane flying 147mph because it was so low: 'I would've just fallen in the water'

Jay Leno surprised pilots as he held onto the nose of an airplane mid flight. Flight instructor Albert Benjamin captured the footage of the famed comedian. Spike Feresten of Spike's Car Radio was also on board.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This was the moment her fans had waited 13 years for. But even as she won a legal victory over father Jamie this week, effectively seeing him relinquish control of her career and life, many are now starting to wonder just what Britney Spears’ freedom will look like.

For the past three weeks, among increasingly shrill posts about her state of mind, she’s published topless images and videos from the same photo session five times.

She says she dances on her own for three hours a day, every day, and posts video after video on Instagram of herself twirling around. Anyone who doesn’t like it — or wonders when she might tour or make music again — is told to ‘f*** themselves.’

As she puts it: ‘If you don’t want to see my precious ass dancing in my living room or it’s not up to your standards... go read a f*****g book !!!!’

For the past three weeks, among increasingly shrill posts about her state of mind, Britney has published topless images and videos from the same photo session five times

Britney Spears with father Jamie Spears in a photo she posted on Instagram on June 21, 2015, with caption: Happy Father's Day, daddy! Love you!!

In another post Britney, 39, mused: ‘Maybe I’ll just be nice and plant here and keep my dreams alive by thinking about visiting St Tropez with Cher and eating ice cream... she was one of my favorite [sic] singers as a kid and I loved to dress up as her.’

She also talks about taking a bath at 2am and getting locked in her bathroom, and seems obsessed by the idea that the paparazzi doctor pictures of her to make it look as if she has cellulite.

Worth at least £43 million, with two teenage children and two marriages behind her, the sad fact is that, even though she may be free at last, Britney is a different person to the assured young woman of 20 years ago when she was made famous by hits including Baby One More Time and Toxic.

Last night her father Jamie, 69, confirmed that he will be stepping aside as her conservator — an arrangement that has been in place since 2008 after she suffered a nervous breakdown.

In June, she described to a court how she was afraid of Jamie, cried every day and was legally enslaved by the conservatorship which prevented her from having a baby or getting married

Yet those who imagined this would herald the waving of a white flag and a ceasefire in the Spears family, after months of bitter words and accusations, will be disappointed.

For, in a series of bombshell statements, Jamie Spears has laid bare the reasons why he’d taken the dramatic step of seeking the conservatorship in the first place and the deep problems that still exist today. He had asked to be put in charge of Britney’s finances, career and personal life after a court deemed she was in no fit state to look after herself and vulnerable to exploitation by ‘predatory individuals’.

But Britney saw things differently. In June, she described to a court how she was afraid of Jamie, cried every day and was legally enslaved by the conservatorship which prevented her from having a baby or getting married.

She asked the court to get rid of him in a motion which was due to be heard in September and vowed not to perform as long as he remained in charge.

However, Jamie has agreed in documents that he will step aside in an ‘orderly transition’ when the time is right — and says that he was making arrangements for this to happen at least a year ago.

He’d stepped down from being the ‘conservator of her person’ due to his own illness in 2019 — he suffered a life-threatening ruptured colon — and now agrees to step down as ‘conservator of her estate’ when various matters are resolved. He insists he loves his daughter, has never controlled her and has only ever wanted what was best for her.

He denies her claims that she was forced to perform and sent to mental health facilities.

In a legal document filed in court in Los Angeles on Thursday he described Britney’s long-term ‘addiction and mental health issues’ that meant ‘she needed to be legally protected from herself’.

This is the first time Britney’s addiction issues have ever been officially addressed.

To illustrate, he detailed the cost of her current regime of medication — for which he pays — which runs to at least $10,000 a month.

His lawyer wrote: ‘If the public knew all the facts of Ms Spears’ personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the conservatorship they would praise Mr Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him. But the public does not know all the facts and they have no right to know, so there will be no public redemption for Mr Spears.’

In his filing, he wrote: ‘When this conservatorship was initiated 13 years ago, Britney Jean Spears was in crisis, desperately in need of help. Not only was she suffering mentally and emotionally, she was being manipulated by predators and in financial distress. Mr Spears came to his daughter’s rescue to protect her... no one knew Ms Spears better and no one loved her as much as a parent would.’

While he acknowledges that Britney often felt ‘constrained’ by the arrangement, ‘for the past 13 years the conservatorship has worked as intended’, supporting her when she was able to work, and allowing her to withdraw when she could not.

‘It protected her from disaster, protected her and her reputation from harm and facilitated the restoration of her career.’

Jamie Spears says individuals, including Britney’s mother Lynne, from whom he is divorced, have made ‘false allegations about the true state of affairs’ and that there are no grounds for suspending or removing him.

‘It appears that Lynne has not accepted the full extent to which Ms Spears has had addiction and mental health issues, or the level of care and treatment she needs,’ the document says.

He contests the petition for his removal but adds: ‘As Mr Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.

Britney said last month that she hopes to sue her father for ‘conservatorship abuse’

Britney’s new lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, hailed Mr Spears’ statement as ‘another step towards justice’

‘Regardless of his formal title Mr Spears will always be Ms Spears’ father, he will always love her unconditionally and he will always look out for her best interests.’

He adds that her medication plans, including entering a mental health facility in 2019, were all approved in writing by Britney and that she was not forced to go in, was allowed out for visits and to see her children and had her mobile phone.

He said all medical matters were decided by lawyer Jodi Montgomery from March 2019 as he was unwell, however ‘it is unclear whether Ms Spears knows or remembers the extent to which Jodi Montgomery, Sam Ingham and the medical team were involved in everything she is complaining about’.

The lawyer also referred to Britney’s fractured relationship with her mother, saying they’d been estranged for her entire adult life, but claimed she pays for Lynne’s mansion in Louisiana, including utility bills and maintenance, which costs $150,000 a year.

The document adds: ‘Mr Spears and the rest of the team of professionals must remain vigilant on a daily basis in this conservatorship because problems can, and do, arise at any moment given Ms Spears’ medical issues and celebrity status.

‘Mr Spears has not coerced Ms Spears to do anything. Mr Spears has tried to do everything in his power to accommodate Ms Spears’ wishes whether regarding her personal life family or career, while... protecting her from others seeking to take advantage.’

Britney’s new lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, hailed Mr Spears’ statement as ‘another step towards justice’.

Mr Rosengart said: ‘We are pleased, but not necessarily surprised, that Mr Spears and his lawyer finally recognise that he must be removed. We are disappointed, however, by their ongoing shameful and reprehensible attacks on Ms Spears and others.

‘We look forward to continuing our vigorous investigation into the conduct of Mr Spears, and others, over the past 13 years, while he reaped millions of dollars from his daughter’s estate, and I look forward to taking Mr Spears’ sworn deposition in the near future.’

Britney said last month that she hopes to sue her father for ‘conservatorship abuse’. The only certainty is that months, if not years, of legal wrangling lie ahead — with Britney footing the bill.

Additional reporting: Daniel Bates in New York
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A Serbian hermit who lives in a cave has received his Covid-19 vaccine after he discovered the pandemic was raging - and has encouraged anti-vaxxers to get the jab too.

Panta Petrovic, 70, only discovered there was a pandemic when he ventured out of his tiny mountain cave home and visited the nearby town of Pirot last year.

But despite choosing social distancing as a lifestyle choice, Petrovic got jabbed as soon as Covid-19 vaccines became available.

'[The virus] does not pick. It will come here, to my cave, too', the 70-year-old said in his cave on the forested Stara Planina mountain in southern Serbia.

Petrovic said he 'doesn't understand the fuss' some vaccine sceptics make, and underlined that he believes in a process that aims to eradicate diseases.

'I want to get all three doses, including the extra one. I urge every citizen to get vaccinated, every single one of them.'

Panta Petrovic, 70, only discovered there was a pandemic when he ventured out of his tiny mountain cave home and visited the nearby town of Pirot last year

Serbian hermit 70-year-old Panta Petrovic rests in his bedroom in his cave on the forested Stara Planina mountain in southern Serbia

Despite choosing social distancing as a lifestyle choice, Petrovic got jabbed as soon as Covid-19 vaccines became available

Until the 1990s, Petrovic worked in France as a technician for overseas cargo ships but decided to return home to Serbia after 18 years abroad. He remarried on multiple occasions, a life he called 'hectic'

Until the 1990s, Petrovic worked in France as a technician for overseas cargo ships but decided to return home to Serbia after 18 years abroad. He remarried on multiple occasions, a life he called 'hectic'.

During this time, life became tough when war erupted. He decided to leave his family home in Pirot and move to the suburbs - but instead of living in a home, he constructed a tree house 26ft off the ground.

The 70-year-old gave up his career as a mechanical engineer fifteen years ago in a bid to distance himself from the grind of modern life, initially moving into a tree house he built himself.

Now, the cave Petrovic calls home is accessible only by a steep climb that is not for the fainthearted. It is equipped with an old rusty bathtub which he uses as a toilet, some benches and a stack of hay that serves as a bed.

Always a nature lover, he gradually found out that isolating from society brings him freedom he never tasted before.

'I was not free in the city. There is always someone in your way - you either argue with your wife, neighbours, or the police', Petrovic told AFP while peeling vegetables for lunch.

'Here, nobody is hassling me', the man added with a smile, revealing his decaying teeth.

Petrovic mostly feeds on mushrooms and fish from the local creek, but also hikes downtown in search of leftover food in the bins. And his visits to the town have become more regular recently.

Serbian hermit Panta Petrovic gives a phone call with a cellphone in front a cave outside the southern Serbian city of Pirot

Petrovic mostly feeds on mushrooms and fish from the local creek, but also hikes downtown in search of leftover food in the bins. And his visits to the town have become more regular recently

The cave Petrovic calls home is accessible only by a steep climb that is not for the fainthearted. It is equipped with an old rusty bathtub which he uses as a toilet, some benches and a stack of hay that serves as a bed

The gang includes several goats, a flock of chickens, some thirty dogs and cats and his favourite - an adult wild boar named Mara

The 70-year-old gave up his career as a mechanical engineer fifteen years ago in a bid to distance himself from the grind of modern life and now lives in a self-made house in the southern city of Pirot

The 70-year-old gave up his career as a mechanical engineer fifteen years ago in a bid to distance himself from the grind of modern life, initially moving into a tree house he built himself. He now lives in a tiny mountain cave

Hermit Panta Petrovic, 70, demonstrates how he leaves his bedroom in his tiny mountain cave house on the forested Stara Planina mountain in Serbia

Serbian hermit 70-year-old Panta Petrovic rests in his bedroom in his cave on the forested Stara Planina mountain in southern Serbia

After wolves slaughtered some of the animals he kept near the cave, Petrovic decided to move them to a shack he assembled in the outskirts of the town where he thought they would be safe.

The gang includes several goats, a flock of chickens, some thirty dogs and cats and his favourite - an adult wild boar named Mara.

Petrovic found her eight years ago as a helpless piglet entangled in the bushes, and bottle-fed her until she recovered.

Now, the intimidating 400lbs (200kg) animal playfully rolls in the creek and eats apples from Petrovic's hand.

'She means everything to me, I love her and she listens to me. There is no money that can buy such a thing. A true pet', Petrovic said.

Among the animals, there are three kittens whose mother was killed by a wolf, which he now feeds through a syringe.

Petrovic receives welfare, but also relies on donations for food and supplies for the animals.

Before isolating, Petrovic donated all the money he had made abroad to the community by funding the construction of three small bridges in the town.

'Money is cursed, it spoils people. I think nothing can corrupt a human like money', Petrovic told AFP.

On top of one of the bridges, Petrovic built a pigeon loft which he, despite his advancing age, effortlessly climbs in order to stock them with pieces of bread he found while searching the bins.

Petrovic found her eight years ago as a helpless piglet entangled in the bushes, and bottle-fed her until she recovered. Now, the intimidating 400lbs (200kg) animal playfully rolls in the creek and eats apples from Petrovic's hand

Petrovic mostly feeds on mushrooms and fish from the local creek, but also hikes downtown in search of leftover food in the bins. And his visits to the town have become more regular recently

On top of one of the bridges, Petrovic built a pigeon loft which he, despite his advancing age, effortlessly climbs in order to stock them with pieces of bread he found while searching the bins
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'I sent Meghan roses for her 40th birthday… I didn't hear back': Thomas Markle tells Dan Wootton on GB News how he tried to rebuild bridges with estranged daughter and wished her 'brighter days ahead' but was rebuffed

Thomas Markle says Meghan used to be more giving and loving before her wedding. He says she is not the daughter he used to know.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In what seemed like a bolt-from-the-blue, Huw Edwards over the weekend came close to revealing he will soon step down from presenting the News at Ten.

But for many months internal warfare has been raging at the increasingly woke BBC about the Welshman's stranglehold on the corporation's flagship bulletin, watched by millions of Brits every night.

The PC brigade – now dominant at the Beeb – have been vocally opposed to Huw, who turns 60 this week.

They say he is 'too old and too white' to carry on in the role he has held since 2003 in the long-term.

One household name BBC News presenter told me recently: 'It's outrageous that Huw is still in place at the News at Ten and there is a major push underway to get him to stand down and take a reduced role.

In what seemed like a bolt-from-the-blue, Huw Edwards over the weekend came close to revealing he will soon step down from presenting the News at Ten

'He's an old white guy and he's very arrogant. The feeling is that it's time for the BBC to practice what it preaches on such an important show. Huw hasn't helped himself and doesn't have a lot of allies.'

Such ferocity from the fellow famous presenter towards Huw surprised me.

But speaking to various sources within the BBC it's clear the identity politics their reporters regularly promote on screen has had a big influence behind-the-scenes.

Major on screen vacancies at BBC News in recent years have been used to address an apparent diversity issue.

Old white bloke Jeremy Paxman was replaced by female Emily Maitlis on Newsnight.

It's no surprise the favourites internally to replace Edwards include the aforementioned Bruce, Sophie Raworth, Mishal Husain (pictured) and Reeta Chakrabarti

Old white bloke David Dimbleby was replaced by female Fiona Bruce on Question Time.

Old white bloke Eddie Mair was replaced by gay Evan Davis on PM.

Old white bloke John Humphrys was replaced by black Clive Myrie on Mastermind.

You get the idea.

Often it seems like one's demographics are more important than their talent.

So it's no surprise the favourites internally to replace Edwards include the aforementioned Bruce, Sophie Raworth, Mishal Husain and Reeta Chakrabarti.

Old white bloke David Dimbleby was replaced by female Fiona Bruce (pictured) on Question Time

Some think a rotating cast of these women could fill the void when Edwards leaves.

Exactly when that will be is unclear, but his interview is being seen as an attempt to show his rivals within BBC News that he won't hang on for much longer.

Edwards made the revelation in what the BBC described as a 'special interview' for Radio Cymru ahead of his 60th birthday on Wednesday.

Speaking to the Welsh language broadcaster Dewi Llywd, he said: 'Now that a big milestone is here, which is 60-years-old, it's natural for a man to think, 'Am I going to continue in this job for another five years, or do I want to do something different?'

Dan Wootton (pictured): Often it seems like one's demographics are more important than their talent

'The nightly news business, after 20 years, that can be taxing, even though I still enjoy the job. But I don't think I'll be doing that for long. Because I believe that, in the first place, I think it's fair for the viewers to get a change.

'Secondly, I have co-workers who are very talented – it's time to give them a chance too.'

He added: 'I won't disappear tomorrow from the 10 o'clock news because I'm still enjoying myself. But of course, I'm thinking about the working patterns of the future. And the truth is that I don't want to sustain these working patterns for a long time to come, because I don't believe it's a very wise thing at all.'

Edwards is a BBC lifer, starting work at the corporation as a trainee in 1984. He rose through the ranks to host the BBC News at Six in 1999, moving to the flagship News at Ten in 2003. He has also replaced David Dimbleby as the host of election night broadcasts.

Last month he was revealed to be the fourth highest paid BBC star, with a salary of between £425,000 to £429,999, a drop of 8.6 per cent year on year.

But in the interview, he admitted the publication of his pay as part of new disclosures forced on the BBC in recent years had been a 'nightmare' and expressed annoyance at his BBC News colleagues receiving rises as he took cuts.

He said: 'It has angered me, to be honest. Not because I'm embarrassed about pay, especially because I took a huge cut years ago anyway. I don't expect anyone to feel sorry for me. But if you do get a huge pay cut, it's certainly going to affect you, your psychology, and your attitude towards the work. Especially if you see co-workers getting large pay rises and you don't quite understand why.'

His on-screen news rivals on the list included Fiona Bruce (£405,000), Emily Maitlis (£325,000), George Alagiah (£325,000), Sophie Raworth (£280,000), Mishal Husain (£275,000), Clive Myrie (£205,000) and Reeta Chakrabarti (£175,000).

All could be in line to benefit financially when Edwards reduces his role on the News at Ten.

So insiders suggest the battle of the Beeb over control of its most important news bulletin is going to get even nastier in the months to come.

Just don't expect any older white men to be seriously considered to replace Huw.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: PICTURED: Sorority student LA Dodgers ball girl, 24, who tackled field invader and knocked him over a barrier after SEVEN security guards failed

A Los Angeles Dodgers ball girl tackles a fan running across the field during a game opposing the Dodgers to their town rivals, The Angels. The streaker stormed onto the field, leading security on a wild chase...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cressida Dick’s hopes of securing a contract extension as Britain’s top police officer are fading, with key Government figures questioning her suitability to stay in post, the Mail can reveal.

Last month it emerged that the disaster-prone head of Scotland Yard wants to continue as Met Commissioner beyond her initial five-year contract, which expires in April.

The revelation prompted a backlash from a number of victims of Met incompetence who demanded she step down – not be given up to four more years in charge.

Dame Cressida Dick, pictured, is understood to be willing to continue as Metropolitan Police Commissioner if the government gives her a contract extension

Radio DJ Paul Gambaccini, who was arrested during the Operation Yewtree sex abuse inquiry in 2013 and spent a year on bail before the case was dropped, described Dame Cressida as an officer who ‘shames the Met’. He added: ‘She is unworthy of any position from commissioner down to dog catcher'

Dame Cressida faced criticism for trying to thwart an inquiry into the unsolved murder of private eye Daniel Morgan, pictured

Now informed sources have told this newspaper that there are mounting concerns in Government about Dame Cressida’s continued leadership of the force.

The Met chief has been caught up in a string of controversies including her handling of the Operation Midland scandal, her force’s woeful security operation at the Euro 2020 final and allegations of a ‘cover-up’ culture at Scotland Yard. In June, an official report branded the Met ‘institutionally corrupt’ and accused Dame Cressida of trying to thwart an inquiry into the unsolved murder of private eye Daniel Morgan. She has rejected the key findings.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson side-stepped questions on Dame Cressida’s job prospects during a recent radio interview.

But a distinguished former chief constable told the Mail: ‘She would be mad to seek an extension.

‘She has become the story and that is when it’s time to step down.’

Prime Minister Boris Johnson, left, side-stepped questions on Dame Cressida’s job prospects during a recent radio interview

Another former top chief constable – previously a vocal supporter of the embattled Yard boss – said: ‘Cress has been administrating the Met, not leading it. It’s time for fresh blood.’

The Mail has learned that a significant number of serving senior officers are deeply unhappy with Dame Cressida’s ‘hands off’ leadership style and her ‘head in the sand’ response to criticism of her and her inner circle.

Dame Cressida’s apparent determination to secure a contract extension poses a potentially tricky political problem for Mr Johnson, who may not want to be seen to be ousting Scotland Yard’s first female chief. He was criticised in October 2008 when, in one of his first acts as London mayor, he fired gaffe-prone Met commissioner Sir Ian Blair – one of Dame Cressida’s remaining cheerleaders.

Former Tory MP Harvey Proctor, who lost his home and job over the Met’s disastrous Operation Midland probe into spurious child sex abuse allegations, said last month: ‘She is a disgrace and should have resigned long ago. It is time for her to go because of Operation Midland, not to be seeking any extension to her employment at the Met.’

Former Tory MP Harvey Proctor, who lost his home and job over the Met’s disastrous Operation Midland probe into spurious child sex abuse allegations, said last month: ‘She is a disgrace and should have resigned long ago. It is time for her to go because of Operation Midland, not to be seeking any extension to her employment at the Met’

Mr Proctor, who received £900,000 from the Met in compensation and legal costs over the fiasco, added: ‘I hold her culpable for her role in a severe waste of public funds which severely impacted a number of lives, including mine.’

Radio DJ Paul Gambaccini, who was arrested during the Operation Yewtree sex abuse inquiry in 2013 and spent a year on bail before the case was dropped, described Dame Cressida as an officer who ‘shames the Met’. He added: ‘She is unworthy of any position from commissioner down to dog catcher.

‘The disastrous mistakes made during Operation Midland and beyond it would have been enough to have ended her predecessor Bernard Hogan-Howe’s career and should have been more than enough to end hers.’

The commissioner, 60, who was formally made a dame commander by Prince Charles last month, has indicated she was ‘happy’ to remain in the top job.

Speaking after the ceremony at St James’s Palace, she said: ‘I’m very focused on my job, I love my job, it’s a huge honour.’

Downing Street has refused to be drawn on whether the Prime Minister supported her being given another term but said she ‘retains his full confidence’.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some of Britain's leading universities have revealed they'll continue teaching classes on Zoom despite Education Secretary Gavin Williamson calling for online lessons to end.

Of the 24 institutions that make up the elite Russell Group, 20 confirmed that some undergraduate teaching will continue to be online.

Meanwhile, institutions including Russell Group members Birmingham and Leeds have confirmed that they had no places available through Clearing this year after grade inflation saw A Level results hit a record high yesterday.

Manchester University, which regularly has several places available through Clearing, also had no vacancies this year.

Almost half of all pupils were given A or A* results - up from 38.5 per cent in 2020 and 25.2 per cent in 2019.

Yet the results have triggered fears over grade inflation and of courses being over-subscribed - prompting some universities to offer pupils £10,000 to defer their entry for the year.

Another concern will be the return of Zoom teaching, after Mr Williamson demanded the Office for Students investigate any institution that still offers online lessons from next semester.

The regulator said it would not enforce the demand and also said universities could teach pupils however they wished as long as they were providing a 'good quality experience of higher education'.

Students wave their A-Level exam results after collecting them as Britain's top universities defy Gavin Williamson's call for no more Zoom classes

King's College London, Birmingham and Manchester universities were among the institutions without Clearing places this year

Yesterday's results came after teachers decided grades for a second year in a row after exams were cancelled due to the pandemic. They used coursework, classroom performance and mini-assessments to reach their decisions.

However, the huge success of pupils meant more met their university entry requirements than ever before, prompting some institutions to close their Clearing programmes before the results were even released.

The University of Birmingham said in a statement: 'We are able to confirm that we do not have any places available in Clearing & Adjustment this year. You can search our available courses for 2022 or if you are still interested in applying for study in 2021 check out the UCAS website. We wish you all the best.'

King's College London said: 'For 2021 entry, King's College London will not have places on any of our courses via Clearing or Adjustment on A level results day. If you currently have an offer to study at King's, you can find out more about confirmation on our website to get prepared for results day.'

While Leeds University simply wrote: 'Leeds is a popular university and our courses are in high demand. As a result, this year we do not have any vacancies in clearing.'

The row has further damaged the Education Secretary's position with rumours that Boris Johnson could sack him for his 'anti-woke' Equalities Minister after Mr Williamson was accused of ruining the credibility of A-levels by 'baking in' soaring grade inflation and allowing a growing results gap between private and state schools.

Mr Williamson, nicknamed Private Pike by critics who compare him to the hapless young soldier in Dad's Army, is said to be fighting plans for Kemi Badenoch to take over in the next reshuffle, reportedly telling allies he 'knows where the bodies are'.

It came as it was revealed that A-level grades could be scrapped in a massive overhaul of the education system.

Gavin Williamson, who famously keeps a whip on his office desk, is reported to have warned that he 'knows where the bodies are and [the] PM is too weak to sack him' over the A-Level results chaos

Boris is said to favour Kemi Badenoch, his equalities minister who has been vocal in her concerns about the the woke-ification of British education. Williamson's allies have previously claimed that Mr Johnson's wife, Carrie, is against him

The number of teenagers getting top grades in A-Levels has risen across the board but private schools are pulling further ahead of state schools, almost doubling the number of As and A*s in the past two years since exams were postponed

It is understood the government is looking at possibly replacing the A*-E letter grades with a numerical system similar to GCSEs.

At the same time, the proportion of students allowed to achieve the top grades will be reduced gradually over a period of years until it returns to pre-pandemic levels, meaning there could be years before proper exams return.

Meanwhile, it was also revealed that medical students are to be offered £10,000 to switch schools amid a scramble for top university places.

THE RESULTS BY NUMBERS 44.8% of subject entries were awarded either an A or A*, up from 38.5 per cent in 2020 and 25.2 per cent in 2019. 19.1% of entries received an A*, up from 14.3 per cent in 2020 and 7.8 per cent in 2019. 99.5% Overall pass rate – A* to E, slightly down from 99.7 per cent in 2020. 88.5% received a C or above, up from 88 per cent in 2020 and the highest rate since at least 2000. 70.1% of grades at private schools were A or A* – compared with 42 per cent at state-run academies. 28.1% The percentage point gap at A and A* between entries from private schools and academies, compared to 24.6 in 2020 and 20.3 in 2019. 46.9% The proportion of entries by girls which scored A or higher. It is 4.8 percentage points higher than boys (42.1 per cent). Last year, girls led boys by 3.2 percentage points (39.9 per cent girls, 36.7 per cent boys). 3.6% Rise in entrants for maths, which was taken by 97,690, from last year – making it the most popular subject this year. 35,268 Geography saw the biggest percentage jump in candidates of any subject with more than 1,000 entrants, rising by 16.8 per cent from 30,203 to 35,268. 435,430 people from the UK and overseas were accepted on to university courses, up 5 per cent on last year. 388,230 among UK applicants have been accepted, an 8 per cent rise compared with last year. 50% Drop in students from the European Union taking up courses – 9,820 compared with around 22,000 last year. 8% Increase in students accepted on to nursing courses from last year, up to 26,730. Advertisement

After a record proportion of top A-level grades yesterday, many more applicants than usual met the terms of an offer to study – leaving many medical schools oversubscribed.

Now, the Medical Schools Council (MSC) and the Department for Education (DfE) are setting up a radical programme to ease the places squeeze.

Under the scheme, students who move from an oversubscribed school to an undersubscribed one will receive £10,000 ‘for the inconvenience’.

The Government is expected to stump up most of the cash, rather than the institutions.

The move is expected to affect about a third of England’s 33 medical schools. It comes after a record number of students were accepted on to UK degree courses.

So-called ‘higher tariff’ institutions saw a 14 per cent increase in the number of places given – up from 142,720 in 2020 to 163,100.

But universities with less competition for places, which usually attract undergraduates through clearing, saw a fractional decrease in students accepting offers.

For medical courses, the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) figures show that 28,690 students applied this year – a rise of 21 per cent on last year.

Yesterday, it was announced that 8,560 students from England had been accepted – up 23 per cent on results day last year.

Unlike other degrees, the number of places on medicine and dentistry courses is capped to ensure standards are maintained.

Last week the DfE announced an extra 9,000 places would be made available but many schools are still oversubscribed.

In a statement yesterday, the MSC said: ‘Medical schools are committed to maintaining high standards of education and training.

‘Currently, the sites where high-quality clinical placements are available, together with the facilities required to support medical education, are not exactly aligned with oversubscribed schools.

‘For this reason medical schools have jointly agreed to support a brokerage programme so that applicants who have met the conditions of their offers at oversubscribed medical schools will be given the opportunity to move to different medical schools.’

Universities minister Michelle Donelan said: ‘In an unprecedented year, both for students and the NHS, it is important that we as a Government look for solutions, which is why we are supporting students who choose to take up the option to move to other providers.

'We want to make sure as many people as possible who have met their grades can take up a place this year if they want to.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@George and Amal Clooney could soon be facing privacy issues at their £12million Berkshire mansion as a neighbouring theatre has applied to convert the space into housing.

If successful, the The Mill at Sonning, which is situated next-door to the Clooneys Grade II-listed home, will be turned into semi-detached houses that would oversee the couple's sprawling property.

The news will no doubt come as a shock to the couple, who helped keep the theatre company stay afloat during the pandemic with a substantial donation last October.

Exclusive: George and Amal Clooney face privacy issues at £12m Berkshire home after theatre (that they helped save from closure) plans to convert into houses overlooking their garden

Generous: The news will no doubt come as a shock to George and Amal, who helped keep the theatre company stay afloat during the pandemic with a substantial donation last October

Despite the celeb couple's contribution, the playhouse is still struggling and recently applied for planning permission to convert its rehearsal and visiting actors' accommodation into two semi-detached residential dwellings, ’specifically to provide additional financial support to the theatre in order to ensure its future.’

According to the planning statement, ‘the pandemic caused the Theatre to close its doors in March 2020 - the business is in dire straits and has been on the verge of closing completely.'

However, the new planning app may not be quite as pleasing for George, 61, and Amal, 43, who've always given their full support to the theatre.

The proposed two-storey properties will each have three bedrooms, an open plan kitchen and lounge, and a balcony on the top floor. Yet the balconies will be overlooking the river and, more significantly, the Clooneys property.

Back on its feet: The Hollywood A-lister, 59, and the barrister, 42, donated towards The Mill at Sonning Theatre (pictured) last year to help keep the struggling business afloat

The theatre’s planning application acknowledged it was a potential trouble spot, stating in its Design & Access Statement:

'It is worth noting that although there will be views out over the river, there is already a relatively high and dense screen of trees on the opposite bank, edging Mill House, and as such we do not foresee that there will be any negative impact on either privacy or visual amenity experienced by the owners of Mill House as a result of these proposals.’

However, in colder months, that screening of bushy trees is usually more threadbare.

Proposals: Despite the celeb couple's contribution, the playhouse applied for planning permission to convert into two semi-detached residential dwellings

Plans: The proposed two-storey properties will each have three bedrooms, an open plan kitchen and lounge, and a balcony on the top floor

A notice letter was sent out to the couple’s residence by South Oxfordshire District Council, but they didn’t make a complaint.

The Theatres Trust aren’t happy with parts of the plans, concerned about noise levels coming from the theatre and future income dipping due to no rehearsal space.

It said: 'The applicant notes that acoustic measures will exceed "standard requirements" and we suggest this is conditioned to safeguard the theatre’s activities into the future and protect it from complaints and restrictions being imposed on it.

'Although sympathetic to the theatre’s need to review its options to ensure it will be sustained into the future, particularly given the extreme challenges arising from the pandemic, it must be careful not to undermine its future viability.

'The rehearsal space constitutes part of the theatre’s cultural and social offer and this will be lost; it is also potentially a source of income for the theatre if open to outside groups.'

History: The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982

The plans have also irked the Environment Agency, who objected on three counts that there was ’no assessment of the risks to nature conservation’, an ‘inadequate buffer zone’ to the river bank, and the ‘absence of an acceptable Flood Risk Assessment’.

Amal and George's property was hit with floods in February this year and January 2020, which left their grounds swamped with muddy water.

In response, the theatre changed their plans for the properties to be situated further from the river and produced an ecology report. There’s also been an application to Natural England for a bat licence and proposals now include bat roosting areas.

The council targeted June 2 for a decision date, which is now two months overdue.

Background: The Mill is now run by Tim and Eileen's daughter, artistic director Sally Hughes, who has received help from the Clooneys in the past

The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982.

It is now run by their daughter, artistic director Sally Hughes, who has received help from the Clooneys in the past.

In 2018, Sally won approval for a development of five properties after the celebrity couple lodged no objections.

She had the pair over to watch performances and allowed them to use her car park for the many contractors who were renovating their nine-bedroom, eight-bathroom mansion, which they bought in 2014 and moved into three years later.

The theatre owner built the flats to help pay a £1 million bill caused by woodworm at the theatre — a converted 18th-century flour mill on a small island in the Thames.

In October, the Mill announced on Facebook, special praise for the Clooneys and playwright Ray Cooney, whose comedies are often performed there.

It said: 'Since July, when the theatre celebrated its 38th birthday, The Mill has only been able to operate its adjoining restaurant with reduced seating, but this together with fundraising and donations from Mill Angel supporters and Hollywood star George Clooney and his wife Amal, who are near neighbours and regular attenders, have been a lifeline to ensure the venue's survival.’

'Artistic Director Sally Hughes singles out special praise for the playwright Ray Cooney, whose legendary farces are performed regularly at the venue.'

History: The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982

Last year, it was reported that George and Amal, who share twins Ella and Alexander, four, were building a shed for 'security purposes' in the grounds of their sprawling listed mansion home.

In a planning request to the local council, their new addition - complete with what appears to be a toilet - is described as a simple, single-storey timber construction with a pitched roof clad in cedar shingles.

The duo's abode, which stands on an idyllic stretch of the Thames, is secluded by trees on acres of land - but it appears they are keen to beef up security as the famous home attracts more tourists.

It will be built in the style of a garden shed near their gravel driveway at the Georgian property.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A reclusive father-of-four lay dead inside his barricaded and cluttered home for a year before his 'mummified' body was found, an inquest has heard.

John Arthur Noble, 75, was found dead at his run-down home in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, in April after neighbours told police they hadn't seen him for 12 to 18 months.

An attending paramedic estimated that Mr Noble may have been dead for more than 12 months when he was found due to the 'mummified' state of his body.

The inquest heard that the front door of his home in Golcar Brow Road, Meltham, was blocked by a large pole that formed a makeshift barricade.

A police officer found Mr Noble's body next to a settee, with the property full of containers of urine, discarded food, cigarettes, beer bottles and videotapes.

An attending paramedic estimated that recluse John Arthur Noble, 75, may have been dead for more than 12 months when he was found due to the 'mummified' state of his body

The officer said: 'John was in a state of what I can only describe as mummification.

'I conducted a search of the property to find many rooms full of items of food, beer and videotapes.

'I went through the house where there were several containers with urine in them. These were all downstairs around the house.

'At the front door, he had placed a long wooden pole inside the property to block the door shut.

'There were piles of mail dated 2020. The food in the property was dated 2019 and 2020 which said to me it had been there for some time.'

Detectives were called in and later ruled out any suspicious circumstances.

Neighbours told police they only saw Mr Noble when he collected shopping deliveries at his front door.

One neighbour stated that she had raised concerns about Mr Noble several years ago but nothing was done as he was deemed to have capacity, the inquest was told.

Mr Noble's brother, Roy, who attended the house after the body was found, told police he had seen his brother a year ago and he would not answer the door to anyone.

Roy said he had to talk to his brother through the letterbox. He said his brother had problems with local youths who had often damaged the windows which had then been boarded up.

Roy said his brother had split up with his partner 30 years ago and had then become a recluse and isolated himself more.

Mr Noble was found dead at his run-down home in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, in April after neighbours told police they hadn't seen him for 12 to 18 months

In a statement Mr Noble's son, Gary, said he was estranged from his father. He said his father, a former labourer, hadn't worked for many years.

Gary said: 'I had not seen him for 29 years. My father sadly pushed people away due to his drinking and also his mental health issues.

'I cannot offer much information about my father as we have had no contact for the last 29 years.

'My mother and father split up over 30 years ago and when they first split I did try to maintain a relationship with him but all he ever did was push me away and that meant having no relationships.

'From what I have learned since my father's death is that he was a recluse. He never really saw anyone and he had no friends.

'The neighbours did try to help him and he even pushed the neighbours away.'

Gary said his father had also previously told social services 'where to go'.

Gary said: 'My father didn't see anyone at all except the Sainsbury's delivery driver.

'My father was a heavy drinker and a heavy smoker and he had a very poor diet from what I could see when I went to clean his house.

'The walls were stained yellow and there were hundreds of empty cigarette packets.

'I would describe him as living in squalor and being a hoarder. My father had no contact with anyone I know of and I am unaware of anyone being able to offer any information about his life.'

A report by Mr Noble's GP said: 'Mr Noble has a long history of mental health difficulties dating back to the 1970s.

'However, he does not seem to have been on any medication pertinent to his mental health for about 20 years.'

The coroner, Martin Fleming, recorded a narrative conclusion. He said a post-mortem examination was unable to establish the cause of death because of the advanced state of decomposition.

Mr Fleming said: 'Very sadly in this case, after the split with his wife some 30 years ago John became something of a recluse, shunning family, friends and neighbours, along with any possible help from doctors and social services.

'I've heard it was extremely uncommon for his neighbours to see him as he very rarely, if ever, left his home address.'

Mr Fleming added: 'There is clear evidence that John was not looking after himself and self-neglecting.

'This is such a sad case. It's clear that John needed help. It's clear he was self-neglecting but it remains unknown if this caused or contributed to his death.'

Mr Noble's other son, Gavin, who attended the inquest, told the

hearing: 'The ending to this tale was one, as a family we always knew would turn out this way because of how he was, and his behaviour.

'We didn't have a great childhood with him so I don't feel any grief at his loss, to be honest.

'Today was just about getting a little bit of closure and being able to register the death and get on with processing the estate.'

Mr Fleming told Gavin: 'The great sadness and tragedy here is that John felt the need to live his life in such a very sad way, to the exclusion of others. That is very sad indeed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 'mass casualty plan' is in place amid fears NHS hospitals made out of a lightweight concrete could be on the brink of collapsing, leaked documents show.

The emergency scheme – known as Operation Rapture – would come into effect in the event of 'significant hospital structural failure' in the East of England.

It would see ambulances diverted to other nearby sites and non-urgent beds freed-up to house patients transferred from crumbling hospitals.

Concerns have been raised about hospitals built with a lightweight form of concrete planks that have deteriorated over time and become unstable.

Reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete (RAAC) planks, widely used in construction in the 1960s and 1980s, are said to be much weaker than traditional concrete.

At least four hospitals in the region were built using the material — the West Suffolk, Hinchingbrooke Hospital, and the Queen Elizabeth and James Paget hospitals in Norfolk.

In 2020, the trusts participated in an exercise that simulated a scenario where part of a hospital collapsed due to RAAC plank failure, the BBC reports.

The risk has been deemed so likely the West Suffolk trust, based in Bury St Edmunds, commissioned a report into the odds of being charged with corporate manslaughter should there be a fatal roof collapse.

Documents revealing the report were leaked by a whistleblower who feared staff and patients were being kept in the dark about how serious the risk was.

A 'mass casualty plan' has been put in place in the East of England amid fears several NHS hospitals are on the brink of collapsing. In September 2020 four hospitals in the region participated in 'Exercise Hodges' that simulated a scenario where part of a hospital collapsed due to RAAC plank failure

At least four hospitals in the region were built using the material — including the West Suffolk Hospital in Bury St Edmunds

Hinchingbrooke hospital in Cambridgeshire has restricted patients weighing more than 19 stone from being treated on certain wards where the structure has weakened

A risk assessment of the West Suffolk Hospital earlier this year found a roof collapse was 'almost certain' and could be 'catastrophic' if mitigations weren't in place.

But this has since been downgraded to 'likely' after the hospital had metal reinforcements fitted to bolster the failing planks.

WHAT ARE RAAC PLANKS? Source: SCOSS Autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) is different from normal dense concrete. It was used in roofs, floors and walls of NHS buildings and schools in the 1960s to 1980s because it is lighter and cheaper than traditional concrete. It has no coarse aggregate, and is made in factories using fine aggregate, chemicals to create gas bubbles, and heat to cure the compound. It is relatively weak with a low capacity for developing bond with embedded reinforcement. It was used in two main forms of structural elements; lightweight masonry blocks and structural units (such as roof planks, wall and floor units). When reinforced (Reinforced AAC: RAAC) to form structural units, the protection of the reinforcement against corrosion is provided by a bituminous or a cement latex coating, which is applied to the reinforcement prior to casting the planks. The reinforcement mesh is then introduced into the formwork and the liquid AAC mix added. Advertisement

The West Suffolk currently has 27 metal beams under the planks for additional support, while the James Paget in Great Yarmouth has 18. The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, in King's Lynn, has more than 200 metal supports.

Hinchingbrooke Hospital has restricted patients weighing more than 19 stone from being treated on certain wards where the structure has weakened.

Concerns about RAAC planks were first raised in 2018 following the collapse of a school roof in Essex.

The government set aside £110m earlier this year to carry out 'urgent remediation' work at seven hospitals built using the same concrete.

They included the four in eastern England as well as Airedale in West Yorkshire, Leighton in Cheshire and Frimley Park in Surrey.

Documents also revealed that bosses at the West Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust hired a law firm to assess its risk of being charged with corporate manslaughter should the hospital collapse and kill patients or staff.

Interim chief executive Craig Black said the report was commissioned to get the fullest picture possible about the situation, rather than for sinister reasons.

He said that as well as legal experts, the trust had reached out to financial, technical and medical professionals.

Mr Black claimed the trust had considered closing the hospital but concluded the impact of reduced treatment outweighed the risk of a sudden collapse.

He added that it was 'really sad' the documents had been leaked by staff who did not believe the hospital was being transparent.

He told the BBC: 'We have weekly briefings on the situation around RAAC; we have posters up around the hospital; we talk to staff continuously.

NHS England said the affected hospitals were safe for patients, visitors and staff.

'Trusts in the East of England work in line with specialist industry advice and have been given more than £67m to help them manage their estates programme,' a spokesman said.

'Trusts have maintained safe services for patients, who should access hospital care as they normally would, and also introduced a number of measures including improved surveillance and use of specialist equipment to help identify and fix any issues immediately.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been enjoying a sun-soaked break in Ibiza together.

And Dua Lipa and her beau Anwar Hadid headed to a private jet to fly out of the party destination on Monday as their trip came to an end.

It came as the singer, 25, marked the end of the holiday with a photo dump on Instagram where she planted a kiss on her 22-year-old model boyfriend.

Home time: Dua Lipa and her beau Anwar Hadid headed to a private jet to fly out of the party destination of Ibiza on Monday as their trip came to an end

Heading to the private jet Dua flashed her abs in a green crop top and high-waisted black jeans while accessorising with a black bucket hat.

Meanwhile Anwar dresses casually in white jogging bottoms and a long-sleeved T-shirt as he carried the couple's luggage.

In her photo dump Dua had her toned abs on display yet again as she donned a sheer green crop top which she teamed with shiny trousers of the same hue.

Cute: It came as the singer, 25, marked the end of the holiday with a photo dump on Instagram where she planted a kiss on her 22-year-old model beau

Style: In her photo dump Dua had her toned abs on display yet again as she donned a sheer green crop top which she teamed with shiny trousers of the same hue

The beauty completed her look with a green cap, bright pink handbag and neon green high heels.

In other pictures from the fun-filled trip she twerked with friends as they stood outside their villa before posing with two more brunette beauties.

She playfully captioned the snaps: 'like a little slice of keylime pie'

Travel: Heading to the private jet Dua flashed her abs in a green crop top and high-waisted black jeans while accessorising with a black bucket hat

Larking about: In other pictures from the fun-filled trip she twerked with friends as they stood outside their villa

The Levitating singer and model began dating in June 2019.

Dua and the younger brother of Bella and Gigi Hadid have given fans a glimpse of their romance on social media ever since.

Talking about her romance with Anwar to Rolling Stone magazine, the star recently said: 'I'm very comfortable in the relationship, more so than any others.'

Stunning: She was also pictured posing with two more brunette beauties during the sun-soaked trip away

Dua also discussed how the couple spent part of 2020 isolating on Anwar's family farm in Pennsylvania, admitting that she loved the quiet pace of life and also used the opportunity to improve her horse riding skills.

She said: 'Wake up around 9:00, 9:30, shower, get dressed, have a bit of breakfast, take the dog out on a really nice long walk, maybe do some yoga, make some lunch, hang out, watch a movie, play with the animals.'

The hitmaker also spoke about boyfriend Anwar in a recent issues of British Vogue, saying that she tries to balance 'being so excited and in love', while keeping their romance private.

Dua told the magazine of posting their relationship on Instagram: 'We have all these incredible memories and experiences, and if there's something that we want to share together, then OK that's fun.'

She added: 'But at the same time, we're quite private - we'll only show you as much as we want you to see.

'It's a little bit of give and take, trying to find the right balance of being so excited and being in love, and wanting to share that with the people around me, but at the same time not wanting to put too much out there.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The ex-husband of reality TV star Kerry Katona died after a drugs binge at a budget hotel where he crushed a ball of cocaine inside a sock and 'ate' the contents, an inquest has heard.

Former rugby league player George Kay, 39, collapsed with a seizure was rushed to hospital on July 5, 2019, but died later due to the excess effects of the toxic Class A substance.

Just 12 hours before the tragedy police had been called to the Holiday Inn in Sutton Weaver, Cheshire after Mr Kay was seen wandering around the corridors 'asking for someone to be his friend.'

Mr Kay, who was married to Kerry between 2014 and 2017, was also found erratically shouting and knocking on other guests doors, with hotel staff attempting to return him to his room at one point after he claimed there were 'wasps' inside.

Officers said Mr Kay was hallucinating while under the effects of the drug but let him stay in his room despite noticing traces of cocaine by his bathroom sink.

A policewoman was later disciplined for not searching Mr Kay or arresting him for possessing cocaine. Staff called police and officers attended at 9.54pm but left when Mr Kay agreed to return to his room.

Coroner Peter Sigee today recorded a verdict of drug-related death at an inquest.

George Kay and Kerry Katona in 2015. Mr Kay, who was married to Kerry between 2014 and 2017, had been seen acting erratically and knocking on other doors at the hotel

The former rugby league player (pictured in 2018) collapsed with a seizure was rushed to hospital in July 2019

Craig Pondsford, the hotel's operations manager, described his behaviour as 'paranoid and irrational' and Mr Kay had urged him to share a line of cocaine.

Mr Pondsford described how he'd spoken to Mr Kay and tried to get him to return to his room.

He initially refused before going back inside and sitting on the end of bed and 'staring at the mirror', he said.

Mr Pondsford became so concerned he contacted police and two officers attended the hotel and spoke to Mr Kay, who'd become 'calm' by this point.

Just 12 hours before the tragedy, police had been called to the Holiday Inn in Sutton Weaver, Cheshire after Mr Kay was seen wandering around the corridors 'asking for someone to be his friend. [Stock image]

The former rugby player's drugs use also got 'significantly worse' after he was prevented from seeing the couple's seven-year-old daughter Dylan-Jorge, it's claimed.

The couple separated in 2015 and reportedly divorced two years later after a tumultuous period together in which Mr Kay was accused of being abusive and violent towards his ex-wife.

Speaking at the inquest, Caroline Garcia, a hotel worker, told the hearing that at around 7pm a colleague rang her to say there was a guest in the corridor making noise.

She went to see what was going on and found a 'strong, tall man speaking with another lady outside one of the rooms'.

Mr Garcia said: 'I thought he was drunk or high and I dealt with the situation. He was not making any sense and said he was looking for someone to be his friend.

'I asked him for ID in order to find his room but he kept constantly saying he was looking for a friend. He was not rude but was not following instructions.

'I got him into a lift and we were there for around an hour. Another colleague of mine got him some water but he was having difficulty drinking the water.

'He asked if I would prepare cocaine for him, but I said I wouldn't do that... He said there was a man in his room but we went to his room and we confirmed there was no one else there. He was refusing to go into the room and was saying it was not his.'

Mr Kay's drugs use also got 'significantly worse' after he was prevented from seeing the couple's daughter Dylan-Jorge, who is now seven, it's claimed. George is pictured with 'DJ' in a Facebook picture he described as one of his favourite photographs

The inquest heard Mr Kay had been behaving in a 'paranoid and erratic manner'

Barman Michael Hulme said: 'Mr Kay was behaving in an erratic manner and the manager was present encouraging him to go back to his room. He was not a threat but he was unpredictable. He asked for cocaine and was told he couldn't have it.

'We got him to his room and he appeared to be making no sense. He said he had family at the hotel, which we knew wasn't the case and I saw some type of white powder in the bathroom which I thought might be cocaine.'

Luke Smith, a food and beverage supervisor at the hotel, said Mr Kay had been 'agitated and annoyed with himself', wanting to enter the room but 'it was as if something was stopping him'.

'I was concerned about how he might have mental health issues,' Mr Smith said.

'Whilst I was standing in the door, I saw white powder in the bathroom. The following morning he needed house keeping to let him back into his room.

'He pulled out a sock with a large ball and was sat in a chair. He caused the ball to crumble by crushing it and I believed it was drugs.

'He became very unwell, so we put him in the recovery position and called an ambulance.'

Kerry Katona and George Kay at The National Reality TV Awards 2015

Manager Craig Ponsford said Mr Kay had been knocking on another guest's door, behaving in a 'paranoid and erratic way'.

Mr Ponsford added: 'He said he was at the hotel for a family function, but we knew was wasn't true. He kept saying he wanted someone to be his friend.

'We got him to his room and there was around 1/2 teaspoon of white powder in the bathroom. He had calmed down by now and seemed okay and asked for a pizza.

'I was asking police about on what grounds we could get him removed as I was concerned about his mental health. They said there was no grounds to get him removed.'

Cheshire Police said cocaine worth £100 with a high purity was found in the room.

PC Declan Corcoran said: 'The hotel staff were concerned about a male wandering around and banging on doors refusing to go back to his room.

'When we got there, he was quite calm. He understood that he had been taking drugs. He said he had taken the substance in the bathroom about one hour ago. He said he had been seeing shadows and that he saw wasps in his room.

'He realised he had been hallucinating. He said he was struggling with his mental health because of issues in his personal life. He admitted to taking cocaine that evening.'

The policewoman, who cannot be named, said: 'It looked like he had sniffed a line of cocaine off the side of the sink. If there was half a teaspoon of cocaine, I would have taken it as analysis but there wasn't much there at all.

'I did not believe it was enough to arrest him for possession of drugs. The remnants of cocaine were left in the bathroom. I was mainly concerned about his welfare.'

The hearing was told Mr Kay played rugby for Warrington U21's and went on to play for Sale, Lancashire and Widnes.

Family member said Mr Kay had taken 'recreational drugs' since a young age and were aware of his drug use. Above: Mr Kay, pictured in 2018

His mother Hilary said: 'He had taken recreational drugs from a young age and I was aware of his drug taking in May 2019.

'He had a social life which involves various celebrity friends and they would provide money and there was talk about helping him set up a business abroad. He took a trip to Australia to watch a Rugby tournament.

'He had a lovely time and was not taking any drugs or alcohol at that time. There has been occasions in the past where he had become agitated from his drug usage.

'He knew he had problems but he was a lovely lad who made friends easily. He was kind and would do anything to help anyone. He had personal difficulties which may have increased his drug taking.'

Recording a verdict of drug related death, coroner Peter Sigee said: 'Police officers were called to attend because Mr Kay was behaving in an effective manner.

'He admitted to taking drugs, he was calm and police did not consider it lawful to arrest or search him. They did not think he required an urgent medical assessment and they left.

'On the morning of 6 July, he was seen to eat a quantity of cocaine and then collapse. It is not possible to say now he came into possession of the cocaine he took on that morning but I am satisfied the death was drug related.'

Mr Kay met Kerry when they were at school together but started dating in 2012 after bumping into each other in Warrington.

They married in September 2014, five months after she had their daughter Dylan-Jorge, now aged seven but split in 2015 and divorced two years later.

Earlier this year Kerry, 40, told of her 'anger' over George's 'selfish' addiction that has left Dylan-Jorge without a father.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An Alicante resort has been hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after severe changes in atmospheric pressure.

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish.

These are large, tsunami-like waves are triggered by severe changes in atmospheric pressure caused by fast-moving weather events, such as a heatwave.

It comes as a blast of hot weather pushing north from the Sahara is expected to push temperatures to 47C in Spain, Portugal, and Italy, in the coming days.

The freak weather incident saw the sea level drop and then rise, washing over the beach and promenade around 2:30am on Wednesday.

Alicante resort Santa Pola has been hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after severe changes in atmospheric pressure

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish

Pictures showed the beach covered with white wash and water lapping over the promenade and around cars on nearby streets

It comes as a blast of hot weather pushing north from the Sahara is expected to push temperatures to 47C in Spain , Portugal, and Italy , in the coming days - known as Lucifer

Pictures showed the beach covered with white wash and water lapping over the promenade and around cars on nearby streets.

Santa Pola police said the rare weather damaged the town's fishing fleet and left several boats adrift on Wednesday morning.

The Department of Climatology of the University of Alicante said the rare phenomenon was more common around the Balearic Islands, but had happened in Alicante before - though this was much stronger than usual.

Guardamar del Segura, south of Santa Pola, was also hit by the meteotsunami and saw water levels rise at least 80cm by Wednesday morning.

Bins were left strewn across the beach in Santa Pola after a meteotsunami pushed them over early on Wednesday

Water and white wash was seen lapping at the tyres of cars parked streets close to Santa Pola beach on Wednesday

Santa Pola, a resort town close to Alicante in Spain, was hit with the rare weather phenomenon around 2:30am on Wednesday

WHAT IS A METEOTSUNAMI? Meteotsunamis are similar to tsunamis but are not triggered by seismic activity on the ocean floor. Instead, meteotsunamis are driven by air-pressure disturbances linked with fast-moving weather events, like severe thunderstorms. The storm front generates the wave, which moves towards the coast, where it is amplified by a shallow continental shelf, inlet or bay. Scientists are only just starting to understand meteotsunamis but waves of 6ft (1.8m) or more have already been observed. Meteotsunamis occur in a number of places around the world, including the Great Lakes, Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Coast, Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas. Identifying a meteotsunami presents a unique set of challenges to scientists, since the characteristics of these waves are so similar to other meteorological phenomenon, including tsunamis. It can also easily be confused with wind-driven storm surges or a seiche, which is a standing wave in an enclosed or partially enclosed body of water. These uncertainties make it difficult to predict a meteotsunami and warn the public of a potential event. Scientists are working to pinpoint the exact conditions which are most likely to generate a meteotsunami in an effort to improve advance warnings. Advertisement

The meteotsunami comes ahead of a heatwave from the Sahara, expected to make landfall in southern Europe in the coming days.

Temperatures are forecast to soar over 45C in southern Europe, with the heat expected to last until at least Monday.

Issuing a heat warning, a spokesperson for Spain's weather service AEMET said: 'Mainland Spain and the Balearic Islands are facing a probable heatwave.

'This could lead to adverse effects on people's health and to a significant risk of forest fires.'

Sweltering heat is also expected across Italy and Portugal this week.

The mercury reached 47C in Sicily on Tuesday, close to Italy's highest ever recorded temperature of 48.5C.

The weather is expected to fuel wildfires in southern Italy, mirroring blazes in Greece, Cyprus, Turkey, Lebanon, and Algeria, in recent weeks.

It comes after the UN on Monday published a damning report warning the world is already experiencing the effects of climate changes - and that they are set to get rapidly worse.

It highlighted how scientists are quantifying the extent to which human-induced warming increases the intensity and/or likelihood of a specific extreme weather event, such as a heatwave, drought, or a wildfire.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040 - the bombshell report dubbed a 'code red for humanity' warned.

The world's largest ever report into climate change also said it was 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Janos Sztojka (pictured), from Braunstone in Leicestershire, 'lived like a king'

A human trafficking boss has been jailed for six years after using a man as a slave, disciplining him with a stun gun and making him sleep next to his dogs.

Janos Sztojka, 33, from Braunstone in Leicestershire, 'lived like a king' while keeping a 31-year-old man with learning difficulties as a virtual prisoner over the course of two years, a judge heard.

Video footage captured the moment Sztojka was arrested and his home was raided by police before a stun gun and wads of cash were found.

Sztojka forced his victim to carry out household chores and spent the majority of the money the man earned at a Derby food production factory - including buying a lavish £180 birthday cake for his wife and flights for four other men he trafficked into the UK from Hungary.

Leicester Crown Court heard Sztojka, who used a number of aliases including Johnny Boss, controlled the finances of all five men and made sure they were escorted to and from the factory where he arranged for them to work.

He also forged utility bills to open bank accounts in each of their names - which he then sold via the black market to other crooks who used the accounts to launder around £150,000.

Sztojka also admitted possessing a prohibited item, a Taser-like stun gun, that was seized from his home, which his slavery victim claimed was used to discipline him.

The defendant, who has previous convictions for burglary and money laundering, was deported from the UK in May 2017 but returned soon afterwards.

He then arranged for the Hungarian males, who were between 19 and 56 years old and spoke little English, to come to Leicestershire under the guise of providing them with well-paid jobs.

But the victims' salaries were paid into Onepay card accounts, which were controlled by Sztojka, and they were given only 'a fraction of what they earned'.

The domestic slave victim later told the police Szoska 'took me for an idiot.'

Rufus D'Cruz, prosecuting, said: 'He had no access to cash and was paid in food and cigarettes and sometimes not even that.

Sztojka forced his victim to carry out household chores and spent the majority of the money the man earned at a Derby food production factory. Pictured, a police raid on the house

The defendant, who has previous convictions for burglary and money laundering, was deported from the UK in May 2017. Pictured, during Szojka's arrest

'He wasn't allowed to leave the house, the defendant would lock the door and not let him out and he felt like he was in prison, being monitored by CCTV cameras.

'If he refused to do something he would be shouted at and slapped on the face, leaving him scared, stressed and nervous.

'His sleeping accommodation was shared with three dogs and he described himself as "the fourth dog in the household". He wasn't allowed to eat what, or when, he wanted.'

Footage taken by police of the operation shows dozens of police officers raiding Szojka's home.

One clip shows Sztojka being led away by officers as he was arrested alongside several others.

Another shows a stun gun and police handling wads of cash that was earned by the victims.

Sztojka used a stun gun on his victim on three occasions, pressing the weapon onto his leg over his trousers and once causing him to fall on the floor, leaving him feeling 'hurt and humiliated', the court heard.

The 30,500-volt weapon was recovered by the police and the defendant claimed it was left at his home by 'someone else.'

Between October 2018 and December 2020 neighbours noticed the victim regularly cleaning up outside the house while Sztojka did nothing other than 'strutting around like he was a king.'

They said the victim was often seen 'rushing out to unload the shopping' from the car.

Another witness said the victim was treated 'like a b***h boy', was constantly being shouted at and appeared 'visibly scared'.

His salary payment card was used by the defendant or his partner for purchases in shops such as Boots and at petrol stations in Leicester, often while the victim was busy working.

The offences were discovered when the victims' employment agency and the factory's management reported their concerns about the five Hungarian workers to the government's Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority, resulting in an investigation.

Four of the victims, who were living at the home of the defendant's relative in Wigston, were only in the UK for about four months before their 'dark situation' was discovered.

Sztojka was said to come from a 'Romany gypsy background' with no relatives remaining in Hungary. Pictured, money found during a raid on the house

Sztojka also admitted possessing a prohibited item, a Taser-like stun gun (pictured), that was seized from his home, which his slavery victim claimed was used to discipline him

What are the signs of modern slavery? Someone in slavery might: Appear to be under the control of someone else and reluctant to interact with others;

Not have personal identification on them have few personal belongings;

Wear the same clothes every day or wear unsuitable clothes for work;

Not be able to move around freely;

Be reluctant to talk to strangers or the authorities;

Appear frightened, withdrawn, or show signs of physical or psychological abuse;

Dropped off and collected for work always in the same way, especially at unusual times, i.e. very early or late at night Source: Antislavery.org Advertisement

More than £17,000, including £8,000 from the man who was kept as a slave, was stolen from all five men.

Judge Robert Brown told Sztojka: 'The treatment of your victims, in particular one of them, was deplorable.

'He was particularly vulnerable, with learning difficulties, and you had him captive in your household for two years. When he wasn't working in a factory he was performing chores in your home at your behest.

'There was a high degree of deceitfulness towards all five victims as you controlled their pay cards and they were economically trapped.'

He said Sztojka, who has a partner and a small child from a different relationship, would be deported to Hungary at the end of his sentence - for a second time.

Henry James, mitigating, said four of the victims were given a portion of their wages and had not complained about the food or accommodation they were given - and one left the situation of his own free will. He added they were not kept in squalor.

He claimed the defendant fraudulently opened bank accounts in the victims' names to sell on under the instructions of someone else, which he said was the main reason for bringing the men into the country on a short-term basis.

Sztojka was said to come from a 'Romany gypsy background' with no relatives remaining in Hungary.

He was jailed for six years after admitting five counts of facilitating travel of a person with a view to exploitation, one count of requiring someone to perform forced or compulsory labour, one count of making or supplying articles [bogus utility bills] for use in fraud and one count of being concerned in money laundering.

He was also made the subject of a 10-year Slavery and Trafficking Prevention Order.

The defendant will face a proceeds of crime confiscation hearing later in the year, with a view to seizing any assets and compensating the victims.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Health authorities in Guinea are monitoring 155 people they fear may have caught a deadly Ebola-like disease.

One man has already died from Marburg virus, prompting a desperate scramble to find everyone he came into contact with.

All of the people he met have now been traced and told to self-isolate. They are also being kept under observation for three weeks.

The case, detected last week in Gueckedou, marked the first time the virus has been spotted in West Africa.

No other cases have been detected yet — but the World Health Organization warned the affected village is near the country's border with Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Marburg is one of the deadliest pathogens known to exist, killing between half and 90 per cent of everyone who gets infected.

The virus is carried by fruit bats but can be spread between humans through blood and bodily fluids, as well as touching contaminated surfaces.

Infected patients can resemble ghosts, with deep-set eyes and expressionless faces, according to the WHO. Other symptoms include headache, diarrhoea, stomach pain and vomiting.

After five days, many patients start to bleed under the skin, in internal organs or from openings such as the mouth, eyes and ears. Patients often die from nervous system failure, not blood loss.

The map shows the location of previous Marburg virus outbreaks (marked with stars) and countries that have experienced Marburg haemorrhagic fever outbreaks. It also displays countries with imported cases of the virus in humans (in light orange), including North America and South Africa, and countries that have experienced outbreaks after infected monkeys have been imported (orange), such as in Germany. The purple dotted line shows where the bats that can transmit the virus are found, including parts of Africa, Australia and China

What is Marburg virus? Marburg virus causes a severe and highly fatal haemorrhagic fever that often kills whoever catches it. Initial symptoms include a severe headache, a high fever, diarrhoea, stomach pain and vomiting and become increasingly severe. In the early stages of the disease, it is very difficult to distinguish from other tropical illnesses that cause fevers, such as Ebola and malaria. After five days, many patients start to bleed under the skin, in internal organs or from body opening such as the mouth, eyes and ears. There is currently no cure for the disease, so patients are monitored and treated with fluids. Studies are currently trialling antibody treatments and antivirals, but these can only be given as part of the trials, according to WHO. Patients then die from nervous system failure and the fatality rate is 50 per cent, according to World Health Organization estimates. Marburg fatality rates in past outbreaks have varied from 24 per cent to 88 per cent of those infected. It is initially transmitted to humans through exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus bats and it is then spread through direct contact with infected people's bodily fluids or surfaces and materials contaminated with these fluids. Source: World Health Organization Advertisement

The WHO announced yesterday that Guinea's Ministry of Health informed it of a suspected case on August 6.

The man started experiencing symptoms on July 25 and went to a local health facility near his village on August 1 with a headache, tiredness, stomach pain and bleeding gums.

He was treated with rehydration and antibiotics but died on August 2.

A team of WHO and local experts were deployed on August 3 and confirmed through a test that the man had Marburg virus disease.

Two labs subsequently confirmed the positive test result.

Experts are now working to identify the source of the outbreak and searching for more possible contacts.

Dr Georges Ki-Zerbo, the WHO's country head in Guinea, said Marburg had been circulating in animals, particularly bats, in southern Guinea and neighbouring Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Pathogens have tended to cross from animals to humans in the region because of their close interaction, notably in the hunting and eating of 'bushmeat' from the wild.

Dr Ki-Zerbo said: 'There is no known secondary case. The contacts have been traced, and 155 people are under observation for three weeks.

'It is active surveillance. The contacts are kept at home, isolated from other members of the family. They are visited every day to check on potential symptoms.'

Marburg and Ebola are closely related.

Guinea was declared free of Ebola two months ago, following an outbreak that killed 12 people.

Gueckedou was the origin of the 2014-2016 West Africa Ebola outbreak, the deadliest in history, and saw a brief resurgence of Ebola this year.

Dr Ki-Zerbo said Guinea was better prepared to handle an outbreak than it had been when Ebola struck in 2014. The discovery of the Marburg case also indicated improved ability to detect such infections.

He said Guinea has built a 'robust health security system' since the last Ebola outbreak, including the use of rapid response teams, disease detectives, epidemiologists and social anthropologists, and better coordination with neighbouring countries.

He added: 'Globally, the approach to combating Marburg would not be different from Ebola.

'The only difference is that there is no vaccine or drug specifically directed to the virus. Only supportive care is available.'

The WHO warned the country has a 'fragile healthcare system', which is exacerbated by disease outbreaks and the Covid pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The best of the Great British Summer could be over already as the Met Office warns that the searing 86F heatwaves we experienced last month are unlikely to take place for the rest of August.

Just yesterday, scores of sunseekers flocked to parks and beaches as the UK enjoyed highs of 77F amid the promise of a good spell of summery weather after parts of the country were battered by heavy rain.

Now forecasters at the Met Office are dampening spirits as they predict that conditions will settle down in the coming days, with no sign of scorching temperatures ahead in a blow to holidaymakers.

Met Office spokesman Graham Madge said: 'Do not expect to see heatwave conditions, but dry, sunny spells for many. August has essentially been a case of mixed fortune with some areas seeing drier weather than usual, while others have virtually had a whole month of rainfall in just 10 days.

'We're not expecting to see record-breaking weather, as there have certainly been wetter Augusts in the past but many areas have faced a very wet and intense period of rain.'

During the first 10 days of August, Britons endured heavy rainfall and lightning storms - with extreme weather patterns including flooding and wildfires fast becoming the norm both in the UK and Continental Europe.

Today, rain is expected to fall over the North of England and Scotland, with lighter rain further south. Weather conditions for the weekend are 'unusually uncertain', the Met Office said - with a low pressure front coming in from the Atlantic possibly bringing even worse conditions.

Yesterday spectators sat along the River Thames watching the Henley Royal Regatta, while others headed to Bournemouth beach and parks in London to play in the water fountains.

But other parts of Britain continued to suffer from rain, including South West England, where windswept revellers arrived in damp conditions for Boardmasters Festival in Newquay, Cornwall, which runs until Sunday.

Meanwhile, holidaymakers were left shocked after seeing sand dunes on fire in the Welsh seaside resort of Borth in Ceredigion, with firefighters racing to the blaze at a local golf course.

And in Europe, an Alicante resort has been hit by a freak 'mini-tsunami' caused by a blowtorch Saharan heat surge that is expected to send temperatures in Spain soaring to a blistering 117F.

Ominous rain clouds roll in over Derwent Water near Keswick in the Lake District this morning

An aerial view showing the damage at Hurst Castle on August 10, 2021 in Hampshire near Lymington, England

People enjoy the hot weather on beach at Bournemouth in Dorset with more summery conditions on the way

Sand dunes ablaze in the middle of Borth and Ynyslas Golf Course in Ceredigion, West Wales

During the first 10 days of August, Britons endured heavy rainfall and lightning storms, with extreme weather patterns including flooding and wildfires fast becoming the norm both in the UK and the Mediterranean - including the Greek islands, Alicante, Sicily, Turkey and Algerica in Northern Africa

SICILY RECORDS EUROPE'S HIGHEST EVER TEMPERATURE

Sicily recorded Europe's highest ever temperature yesterday as it sweltered in a 119F 'heat dome' as hot air from the Sahara continued to engulf large parts of the Mediterranean region.

The region's agriculture-meteorological information service (SIAS) said a record-breaking 119.8F was recorded in the city of Syracuse, which lies on the southeast coast of the island, after an anticyclone, dubbed 'Lucifer', swept across the country.

The previous highest temperature ever recorded on the European continent was 118F in Athens in 1977. The temperature in Sicily is yet to be independently confirmed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

As Lucifer continued to sweep across the nation, Syracuse's mayor, Francesco Italia, told the Italian newspaper La Repubblica that Sicily's heatwave 'worries us'. He said: 'We are devastated by the fires and our ecosystem - one of the richest and most precious in Europe - is at risk. We are in full emergency.'

Meanwhile Italy's health ministry issued 'red' alerts for extreme heat for several regions as large parts of the Mediterranean region continue to battle the extreme weather.

Firefighters in Italy said they had been involved in more than 3,000 fire-fighting operations in Sicily and Calabria in the last 12 hours as mercury levels continued to rise and bring severe changes in atmospheric pressure.

Last week Italy's fire service was also battling blazes in the southern town of Gravina in Puglia and San Giacomo degli Schiavoni, further to the north, after infernos in Sicily and Pescara at the weekend.

Europe is set to swelter in a 114F 'heat dome' as the scorching weather, which has contributed to huge wildfires in Italy, Turkey, Algeria and Greece in recent days, continues to sweep across the region. Pictured: Sun-seekers on a beach in Palermo, Sicily

Italian firefighters race to a wildfire near Petralia Soprana, near Palermo, Sicily, as mercury levels rise

WILDFIRES IN GREECE

The Greek woman who was pictured fleeing her burning home in anguish has revealed she lost sight of her husband moments before the iconic image, which has become the new face of global warming, was taken.

Panayiota Noumidi, 81, explained she could not find her husband as flames engulfed their home on the island of Evia because he was helping battle the wildfires, causing her to cry out for help.

She was later reunited with her husband and taken to a hospital for treatment but said she wants to return to Gouves, her home for 34 years, and continue life as normal.

Noumidi said she was not bothered by the image, which has been likened to Edvard Munch's The Scream, but said she hoped to one day wake up and 'see everything as I knew it'.

Greece has for over a week been ravaged by wildfires which, fanned by strong winds, have torn through forest dried out in a blistering heatwave.

Hardest-hit has been the island of Evia, where flames have now raged for nine days - racing from one side of the island to the other, reducing everything in their path to ash, and forcing thousands of residents to evacuate.

Noumidi said she was not bothered by the images, which were likened to Edvard Munch's The Scream, but said she hoped to one day wake up and 'see everything as I knew it'

Greek villagers have refused to evacuate and are working around the clock to save their homes as wildfires continued to ravage the island of Evia

WHAT IS A METEOTSUNAMI? Meteotsunamis are similar to tsunamis but are not triggered by seismic activity on the ocean floor. Instead, meteotsunamis are driven by air-pressure disturbances linked with fast-moving weather events, like severe thunderstorms. The storm front generates the wave, which moves towards the coast, where it is amplified by a shallow continental shelf, inlet or bay. Meteotsunamis occur in a number of places around the world, including the Great Lakes, Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic Coast, Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas. Advertisement

ALICANTE FLOODED BY 'METEO-TSUNAMI'

An Alicante resort has been hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after severe changes in atmospheric pressure.

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish.

These are large, tsunami-like waves are triggered by severe changes in atmospheric pressure caused by fast-moving weather events, such as a heatwave.

It comes as a blast of hot weather pushing north from the Sahara is expected to push temperatures to 47C in Spain , Portugal, and Italy , in the coming days.

The freak weather incident saw the sea level drop and then rise, washing over the beach and promenade around 2:30am on Wednesday.

Pictures showed the beach covered with white wash and water lapping over the promenade and around cars on nearby streets. Santa Pola police said the rare weather damaged the town's fishing fleet and left several boats adrift on Wednesday morning.

The Department of Climatology of the University of Alicante said the rare phenomenon was more common around the Balearic Islands, but had happened in Alicante before - though this was much stronger than usual.

Alicante resort Santa Pola was hit by a meteotsunami which flooded streets and beaches and damaged cars after severe changes in atmospheric pressure

Santa Pola was hit overnight on Wednesday by the freak weather incident, called a rissaga in Catalan Spanish

TURKEY GRIPPED BY MUDSLIDES AND FIRES

Severe floods and mudslides triggered by torrential rain in northern Turkey have left at least five people dead and another person missing, the country's Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency said Thursday.

The floods battered the Black Sea coastal provinces of Bartin, Kastamonu, Sinop and Samsun on Wednesday, demolishing homes and bridges and sweeping away cars. Helicopters scrambled to rescue people stranded on rooftops.

The disaster struck as firefighters in southwest Turkey worked to extinguish a wildfire in Mugla province, an area popular with tourists that runs along the Aegean Sea. The blaze was one of more than 200 wildfires in Turkey since July 28. At least eight people and countless animals died and thousands of residents have had to flee fierce blazes.

As floodwaters began to recede across the affected regions in Turkey's north, a statement from the Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency, or AFAD, said rescuers had recovered five bodies and were still searching for one missing person. It was not immediately clear if they expected to find more bodies in swamped homes or vehicles.

The worst-hit area appeared to be in Kastamonu, where flooding inundated much of the town of Bozkurt. At least 13 people were injured when a section of a bridge collapsed in Bartin province. In Sinop, helicopters lifted 19 people to safety.

Many of the affected areas were left without power and village roads were blocked. Turkey's Black Sea region is frequently struck by severe rains and flash flooding.

A view of damaged sites after floods and landslide caused by heavy rains as search and rescue works continue for 85-year-old Arife Unal

Flames rise after a forest fire broke out in Bucak district of Burdur, Turkey

ALGERIAN FORESTS DECIMATED BY MEDITERRANEAN FIRES

The death toll climbed to at least 69 as firefighters, soldiers and civilian volunteers battled blazes in forests across northern Algeria on Wednesday, in the latest wildfires to sweep the Mediterranean.

President Abdelmadjid Tebboune declared three days of national mourning starting from Thursday, and authorities say they suspect widespread arson after so many fires erupted in such a short space of time.

In an update, state-run news agency APS said the rash of more than 50 fires that broke out Tuesday had claimed four more lives, in addition to state television's toll of 65 dead, including 28 soldiers deployed to help overstretched emergency services.

Several arrests have been announced, but the identities or suspected motives of those detained have not been disclosed.

Images of trapped villagers, terrified livestock and forested hillsides reduced to blackened stumps were shared on social media, many of them accompanied by pleas for help.

AFP journalists saw villagers desperately trying to put out the spreading fires with makeshift brooms in an effort to save their homes.

Villagers attempt to put out a wildfire, in Achallam village, in the mountainous Kabylie region of Tizi Ouzou, east of Algiers

Smokes rise from the wildfire at Beni Douala town in Tizi Ouzou Province in northern Algeria

Extinguishing works continue for the wildfire at Beni Douala town in Tizi Ouzou Province in northern Algeria

HEAT WARNINGS FOR SPAIN AND PORTUGAL

Spain's weather service recorded a temperature of 116F in the Costa Del Sol and said mercury levels could also surpass 111F in other areas.

As the temperatures across Europe continue to rise, lead forecaster at Severe Weather EU, Marko Korosec, said a 'more intense heatwave is expected to develop for Spain and Portugal' later this week.

He said: 'Towards the weekend, the heat dome and the upper ridge is expected to expand also across the Iberian peninsula. Coming into Friday, the heatwave significantly ramps up as much warmer air mass advects farther north and west across the Iberian peninsula.'

Portugal's prime minister Antonio Costa warned that the hot weather would increase the threat of wildfires, which in 2017 killed more than 100 people in the country.

Mr Costa urged people to take special care amid the scorching weather and wildfire danger, adding that many wildfires start with 'careless behaviour'. He also said said 'the terrible images' from Greece and Turkey in recent days had brought back memories of the disaster in 2017.

'We don't want to see that scenario here again,' Mr Costa said in a videotaped message at his official residence.

Issuing a heat warning, a spokesperson for Spain's weather service AEMET said: 'Mainland Spain and the Balearic Islands are facing a probable heatwave. This could lead to adverse effects on people's health and to a significant risk of forest fires.'

While peaks in temperature are not unheard of in Spain and Portugal during the summer months, climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms.

A woman fans herself in Madrid, Spain, Tuesday, as temperatures begin to rise at the start of an oncoming heatwave

UN REPORT: MAN-MADE GLOBAL WARMING MUST BE REVERSED



The UN report, which as been dubbed a 'code red for humanity', said the Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years - a decade earlier than previously expected - and heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040.

Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'

However, some experts say there is still hope that cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases could stabilise rising temperatures.

Scientists involved in the report said the 1.5C or 2C thresholds are not cliff edges the world will fall off, but that every bit of warming makes a difference, so it is important to curb temperature rises as much as possible.

If temperatures continue to rise, there could be devastating effects here on Earth, including a dramatic loss of sea-life, an ice-free Arctic and more regular 'extreme' weather

These graphs show how human influence has warmed the climate at a rate unprecedented in at least the last 2,000 years

The UN scientists modelled the changes in annual mean temperatures worldwide based on 2.7F (1.5C), 3.6F (2C) and 7.2F (4C) global warming

The projected changes in extremes are larger in frequency and intensity with every additional increment of global warming

'We can't wait. The signs are unmistakable': Biden urges US action after doomsday UN report says global warming is ALREADY causing extreme weather and the world will heat up by 2.7F by 2040 - a decade earlier than forecast US President Joe Biden has sounded the alarm on climate change following the release of a bombshell United Nations report dubbed a 'a code red for humanity.' 'We can't wait to tackle the climate crisis. The signs are unmistakable. The science is undeniable. And the cost of inaction keeps mounting,' Biden said in a statement Monday, as he urged the US and world nations to swiftly limit greenhouses gasses. The Earth is likely to warm by 2.7F within the next 20 years - a decade earlier than previously expected - and heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense, according to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment. On Monday, 234 experts warned in the report that the US is headed for disaster. Flooding, deadly fires and heat waves will not only become the norm but will intensify in a warming world, warns the 3,949-page assessment. Humans have already heated the planet by roughly 2 degrees Fahrenheit (1.1C), since the 19th century, largely by burning coal, oil and gas for energy – with the US being one of the world's top producers. Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 2.7F (1.5C) above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040. Advertisement

Professor Richard Betts, from the Met Office Hadley Centre and a contributing author to the report, said: 'Like the speed limit on a motorway, staying below it is not perfectly safe and exceeding it does not immediately lead to calamity, but the risks do increase if the limit is passed.

'Limiting warming to 1.5C clearly needs much more urgent emissions cuts than is currently happening, but if the target is still breached we should not assume all is lost and give up - it will still be worth continuing action on emissions reductions to avoid even more warming.'

The report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was produced by 200 scientists from 60 countries.

Drawing on more than 14,000 scientific papers, the review included the latest knowledge on past and potential future warming, how humans are changing the climate and how that is increasing extreme weather events and driving sea-level rises.

The authors said it was 'virtually certain' that heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions'.

They also said a rise in sea levels approaching two metres by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out', while the Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050.

Following the report, Prime Minister Boris Johnson called it 'sobering reading' and said it was clear the next decade was going to be pivotal to securing the future of the planet.

'We know what must be done to limit global warming - consign coal to history and shift to clean energy sources, protect nature and provide climate finance for countries on the frontline,' he added.

And US President Joe Biden urged the country and world nations to swiftly limit greenhouses gasses.

He said in a statement: 'We can't wait to tackle the climate crisis. The signs are unmistakable. The science is undeniable. And the cost of inaction keeps mounting.'

Meanwhile UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres called the new report a 'code red for humanity'.

He warned: 'The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.'

And Anthony Blinken, US Secretary of State, said in a statement: 'Today, the United States joined nearly 200 IPCC member governments in approving the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report.

'The report finds we are already edging closer to a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] warmer world, and every day emissions rise the prospects for averting the worst impacts of climate change become dimmer.

'This is why it is essential that all countries - in particular the major economies - do their part during this critical decade of the 2020s to put the world on a trajectory to keep a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] limit on warming within reach.

'This is why the United States has committed to a 50-52 percent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels in 2030 and is marshaling the entire federal government to tackle the climate crisis. We cannot delay ambitious climate action any longer.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 35-year-old woman has today been charged with two counts of death by dangerous driving after a boy was killed on his 10th birthday alongside his four-year-old sister in a horror crash on the M1.

Relatives posted on social media in memory of Smaller and Lilly McCann who died near Milton Keynes after their car crashed with a lorry on Monday night.

Their mother's Facebook page showed a photograph of Smaller next to a birthday cake and 10th birthday balloon from earlier in the day.

Today, Thames Valley Police charged Mary McCann, of Bamford Avenue, Derby, with two counts of causing death by dangerous driving.

She has been remanded in custody to appear at Crown Court on September 6.

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children (left, Smaller, right, Lilly) on social media

Their mother's Facebook page showed an image of smaller next to a birthday cake and 10th birthday balloon from earlier on Monday

There was also a post of a birthday cake showing it was Smaller's 10th birthday on the day he died

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes

Smaller and Lilly were passengers in a white Vauxhall Astra which collided with a Scania lorry between junctions 14 and 15 of the motorway, near Milton Keynes.

Another child passenger and the driver of the Astra were injured and taken to hospital but have since been discharged.

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday.

Investigating officer Sergeant Dominic Mahon, of the serious collision investigation unit at Bicester, Oxfordshire, said: 'My thoughts remain with the family of the two children who sadly died at this extremely difficult time.

'We are appealing for anyone who may have witnessed this collision or anyone who may have dashcam footage that may have captured what happened, or either of the vehicles prior to the collision, to please get in touch.'

Devastated family members paid heartbreaking tributes to the children on social media.

One wrote: 'Life is cruel to take them away from my lovely brother. Best old father in the world, he put them first no matter how hard he hit they were his life please god give him the strength.'

The HGV driver was not injured in the incident, which happened at about 11.10pm on Monday (file photo)

The children's aunt said: 'RIP my perfect little niece and nephew. Aunt Elizabeth's old pet Smaller and me little frilly Lilly.

'Love you always and forever and never in this lifetime will you ever be forgotten, always loved.'

A family friend put: 'Mortal divine RIP beautiful angels. So sorry for your loss, their poor mommy and daddy.'

A cousin wrote: 'Can't believe I'm even writing this but rest in peace to my two beautiful little cousins Smaller and Lilly.

'I love you with all my heart. I love you so much this don't even feel real. What has this world come to, hearts in bits. RIP my babies.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot is branded 'disgusting' by city's top police union chief who blames her for cop's murder by 'encouraging' criminals after she was confronted and told she has 'blood on her hands'

Chicago alleged cop killers' mother says 'don't believe everything that you see or hear' before getting arrested by police.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Tom Daley puts on a stylish display in ANOTHER of his hand-knitted sweaters - after gaining an army of new fans with his craftwork at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics

Tom Daley was out celebrating on Friday after returning from the Olympic Games as he joined a host of GB Olympic athletes for a raucous night out. The star headed to Soho and London Bridge for what The Sun reports...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The HS2 rail link is a 'huge white elephant' that should be 'put out of its misery', senior Tories will urge ministers.

The line's future is due to be discussed in the Commons on September 13 after more than 155,000 people signed a petition calling for it to be axed.

Ex-Cabinet ministers will warn it could cost up to £150billion. Esther McVey said: 'HS2 is a huge white elephant. The Government should put it out of its misery.'

The HS2 rail link is a 'huge white elephant' that should be 'put out of its misery', senior Tories will urge ministers. Pictured: Construction work on the HS2 station at Old Oak Common in London

But a Department for Transport spokesman said: 'It is a key part of our promise to build back better from Covid.'

It comes after the Mail revealed that the Eastern leg of the rail line, to Nottingham, Sheffield and Leeds, is likely to be shelved.

Former business secretary Andrea Leadsom is among those due to speak in the debate, triggered because more than 100,000 people signed a petition on the Government website.

Former business secretary Andrea Leadsom is among those due to speak in the debate, triggered because more than 100,000 people signed a petition on the Government website

She told the Sunday Telegraph: 'Its budget has overrun time and time again and it is inconceivable that it offers value for the taxpayer in any form.

'The entire project is bad for our economy and our environment and I will be sharing my concerns in September's debate.'

Prominent backbencher Andrew Bridgen wrote in the Sunday Express that residents of the North and Midlands want better local east-west transport to towns and cities, not faster routes to London.

'With HS2 having little support out in the country, ballooning costs and looking out of date, with a questionable business case, it's time to shoot this white elephant and concentrate resources on local connections which are deliverable and benefit the majority, not just the few,' he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 21-year-old British student with a 4chan account claims that he is trapped in Afghanistan and has accepted he may die there amid the Taliban takeover of the state after going to the warzone on holiday.

He has posted a series of photos of his apparent trip around Afghanistan including his air ticket to Kabul and posing with body armour and a gun that he says belong to UK security personnel.

Miles Routledge, 21, claims he has been abandoned by the British Embassy in Kabul, which he alleges have not responded to any of his phone calls or emails as the Islamist terror group streamed into the capital.

The Loughborough physics student says he is hiding in a United Nations safehouse in Kabul, where about 50 others including Britons, Americans and Turks are also staying, after arriving in the country this week.

In posts to message board site 4chan and livestreaming platform Twitch, Mr Routledge, from Birmingham, claims he was quizzed by armed Taliban militants while on his way to Kabul International Airport.

They apparently asked him where he was from - to which he said Wales. He claims the fighters did not know where Wales was, and let him go. Mr Routledge says he later came across another armed convoy during the Taliban insurgency and took a selfie on one of their gun emplacements.

Miles Routledge, 21, claims he has been abandoned by the British Embassy in Kabul, who he alleges have not responded to any of his phone calls or emails as the Islamist terror group streamed into the capital

Pictured: an image posted to Mr Routledge's 4chan shows a flight ticket to Kabul

Mr Routledge says he came across two armed convoys during the Taliban insurgency, and took a selfie on one of their gun emplacements

In posts to message board site 4chan and livestreaming platform Twitch, Mr Routledge, from Birmingham, claims he was quizzed by armed Taliban militants while on his way to Kabul International Airport

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Boris Johnson blames US withdrawal for 'accelerating' Afghan collapse and vows to get Brits out in address made just hours after clowning around with Olympic athletes - and Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was on HOLIDAY Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current situation and said the Government is getting Britons out of the country 'as fast as we can', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. Advertisement

Speaking to the Times, he claims he made the decision to visit Afghanistan after watching tourism videos on YouTube. He says that when the takeover began, he could not refund his flights so chose to travel instead.

Mr Routledge also said he had accepted the possibility that he might die in Afghanistan. In a message addressed to friends on social media, he apparently wrote: 'I've bitten off more than I can chew and something has not gone to plan resulting in this situation.

'There was no convincing me otherwise and I knew the risks, it was a gamble I took that went wrong despite my confidence and jokes.'

He yesterday told his viewers: 'I was fully prepared for death, I accepted it. This trip has been a test of God. I'm very religious so I believe I'll be looked after.

'Before I left I wrote a letter to my friends saying that if I died, not to feel guilty, that I would die happy and religious and proud.'

He says that he may be safe because of a £15 joke purchase he made which gives him the right to use the title 'Lord', seen on his American Express card.

The student told his followers: 'The Taliban may see that as reason enough to keep me alive, thinking it may hold some negotiating power as they'll think I'm important. Let's hope it won't get to that stage though.'

MailOnline has contacted the British Foreign Office and the UN for comment.

US-backed Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country for Tajikistan, effectively ceding power to the Taliban and bringing the 20-year Western occupation of Afghanistan to an end, while thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the Pakistan border in a bid to escape Islamist rule.

Mr Ghani said in a Facebook post that he escaped Afghanistan to 'prevent a flood of bloodshed', claiming 'countless patriots would be martyred and the city of Kabul would be destroyed' if he had remained.

He did not disclose details on his current location.

The Loughborough physics student says he is hiding in a United Nations safehouse in Kabul, where about 50 others including Britons, Americans and Turks are also staying, after arriving in the country this week

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

China and Russia prepare to accept Taliban rule of Afghanistan: Beijing officials pose with leaders of militants and Kremlin has 'no plans' to evacuate its embassy due to 'good relations' China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise Taliban rule in neighbouring Afghanistan after the Islamist terror group seized the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday and the country's embattled president fled for Tajikistan. Most global powers are reluctant to recognise the rule of the militant group overthrown by US-led coalition forces in 2001, with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warning that Afghanistan cannot be allowed to become a 'breeding ground for terror' again. But Beijing and Islamabad could break rank in order to form closer ties with the likely new government, with Chinese state media preparing its people to accept the likely scenario that the ruling Communist Party might have to recognise the Islamist group. In China, a series of photos were published last month by state media showing Foreign Minister Wang Yi standing shoulder to shoulder with visiting Taliban officials decked out in traditional tunic and turban in Tianjin. Meanwhile, the Kremlin said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, with Russian state media reporting that the Sunni Islamist group formed after the Soviet withdrawal of Afghanistan has promised to guarantee the safety of its diplomatic staff. And Iran, which has long been wary of the Sunni Muslim Taliban, has moved to ensure the safety of its diplomats and staff after previously offering to help end the crisis during talks in July. Advertisement

Foreigners in Kabul were told to either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 British diplomats, citizens and Afghan translators, and the British Ambassador was moved to a safe place.

The US and French Ambassadors have already been evacuated as the US rushes to rescue more than 10,000 of its citizens.

Italy's defence ministry said a first military plane would arrive on Sunday to begin 'emergency evacuation' operations, while Denmark, Norway and Finland are temporarily shutting their Kabul embassies, with Finland to offer asylum to 170 local staff and their families.

However, the Kremlin's envoy said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, as China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise the rule of the Sunni extremist group which was created after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

Bagram airbase was also surrendered to the Taliban by Afghan troops, despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO to build up Afghan security forces. Upon its takeover, hundreds of Taliban and Islamic State terrorists being held prisoner there were freed.

Commercial flights were later suspended after sporadic gunfire erupted at the airport, according to two senior US military officials who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss ongoing operations.

Evacuations continued on military flights, but the halt to commercial traffic closed off one of the last routes available for Afghans fleeing the country.

As night fell, Taliban fighters deployed across Kabul, taking over abandoned police posts and pledging to maintain law and order during the transition.

Residents reported looting in parts of the city, including in the upscale diplomatic district, and messages circulating on social media advised people to stay inside and lock their gates.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current crisis and announced his government's priority is to get UK nationals out 'as fast as we can' after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in Downing Street.

He also vowed that the Middle Eastern state must not become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

But he was slammed by Tory MPs - including ex-soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - for presiding over Britain's 'biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez and called for UK troops to be redeployed.

They also called the crisis a humiliation for the West.

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was accused of 'going AWOL' after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the Afghanistan crisis unfolded.

The British Foreign Office said he was returning to the UK on Sunday and was 'personally overseeing' the department's response to the situation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Prince Andrew's legal team could try to get sex abuse allegations against him by a victim of Jeffrey Epstein thrown out of court by saying he had diplomatic immunity because he was a trade envoy at the time, it has been claimed.

Top US lawyer Spencer Kuvin suggested that Andrew's legal team may claim the Duke of York - who was a trade envoy in 2001, when Virginia Giuffre alleges that he raped and sexually abused her - had immunity in America.

Mr Kuvin, who represents several of convicted paedophile financier Epstein's victims, made the claim as friends of Andrew said the royal was 'cheerful and relaxed' over the bombshell case in the US and would remain silent.

The Duke held the role of 'special representative for international trade and investment' for the UK for a decade from 2001 until 2011, after taking it up when he left active military service in the Royal Navy.

This means Andrew could be protected under the 1978 Diplomatic Relations Act in the US because he was working for the UK Government in America at the time – and not because he is a member of the Royal Family.

The case alleges that he sexually abused Ms Giuffre - then known as Virginia Roberts - at Epstein's properties in New York and the US Virgin Islands, and at the home of Epstein's girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell in London.

Meanwhile Andrew is said to have 'no intention' of changing course and is not panicking about Ms Giuffre's lawsuit launched in New York last week, according to a friend in London. The Duke is currently at Balmoral visiting his mother the Queen with his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson,

Mr Kuvin told the Mirror: 'Ms Giuffre's lawyers have huge barriers to overcome to get her lawsuit anywhere near a jury. If the Duke engages in the case at all, his legal team will undoubtedly file a motion to dismiss the complaint on numerous different grounds. For sure, they would argue diplomatic immunity. They would have a strong case.'

A friend told the Sun: 'His legal team always expected this and have prepared. They advised the Duke to keep calm and carry on and he is taking their advice. The legal process could go on for years but that's not his fault. He will respond if required to by law, as he has always said.'

Prince Andrew's lawyers may try to get his rape accuser's claim thrown out of court by claiming he had diplomatic immunity as friends say the royal is 'cheerful and relaxed' over the sexual abuse allegations and will remain silent

Prince Andrew with Virginia Roberts taken in 2001. Virginia claims that the Prince had sex with her, knowing she had been 'trafficked'. Prince Andrew denies any wrongdoing and claims not to remember even meeting her

Ms Giuffre claims she was trafficked by Jeffrey Epstein and forced to have sex with The Duke of York when she was a teenager, which the duke categorically denies

Andrew's lawyers are reportedly frantically trying to avoid the case going to trial in the US over fears that jurors may side with an alleged victim of sexual abuse over him in the MeToo era.

While the 61-year-old has firmly denied the claims, those inside the palace believe there could be 'credibility' problems with his version of events, according to the Times.

What is diplomatic immunity and why could it be argued that Prince Andrew has it in the US? Prince Andrew's lawyers could claim that he was a trade envoy in 2001 when Virginia Giuffre alleges that he raped and sexually abused her in New York - and therefore had diplomatic immunity. The Duke of York held the role of 'special representative for international trade and investment' for the UK from 2001 until 2011, after taking it up when he left active military service. The position involved promoting Britain as a destination for investment from overseas, and creating positive conditions for UK businesses exporting and investing overseas. Diplomatic immunity basically means that some foreign government officials do not face the jurisdiction of local courts and other authorities for their official or personal activities. While the principle can be traced back to Ancient Greek and Roman governments, US law on the diplomatic immunity is linked to 1708 when the UK Parliament formally recognised it. Similar legislation was then passed in the US itself in 1790 which gave absolute immunity for diplomats and their families and servants. This law remained in force until 1978, when the present Diplomatic Relations Act (22 U.S.C. 254) was enacted to replace it and give a more precise regime to reduce how much immunity was given to many people at diplomatic missions. Guidance published by the US State Department states: 'While police officers are obliged, under international customary and treaty law, to recognise the immunity of the envoy, they must not ignore or condone the commission of crimes'. The Queen has 'sovereign immunity' which grants her protection from prosecution when travelling outside Britain, but this does not apply to other members of the Royal Family. Instead, when a royal is working abroad – which would be with the British Government - they act as diplomats during their time abroad and therefore receive diplomatic immunity. Therefore, Andrew could potentially receive diplomatic immunity because he was working for the UK Government in America at the time – and not because he is a member of the Royal Family. Advertisement

In the legal claim, lawyers said Epstein, Ghislaine Maxwell and the prince had all forced Miss Roberts to have sex with Andrew against her will after she was trafficked to London in 2001.

They alleged two other such incidents also took place at Epstein's mansion in New York and at his private island in the US Virgin Islands, Little Saint James.

The legal document, filed to a court in New York, said Miss Roberts, now 38 and a married mother-of-three known by her married name Virginia Giuffre, had suffered 'severe and lasting' damage.

In a car-crash Newsnight interview in 2019, the prince denied any untoward activity and claimed he was in a Pizza Express in Woking - not in the capital - at the time.

He claims to have no recollection of ever meeting Ms Giuffre, despite a widely-shared photo of them posing together that same year.

Friends have questioned the picture's authenticity, but no evidence has emerged proving that it is a fake.

It follows claims from American that Ms Giuffre's legal team had been astonished by the naivety of Andrew's tactics and warned his evasive approach was certain to backfire.

There is mounting concern at the Palace too, where the Queen's courtiers are piling pressure on the Prince to change tack and speak out publicly. The Queen has met with Andrew in the past few days at Balmoral and aides close to the Monarch now fear the silence will damage the Royal Family itself.

Last week, the Mail on Sunday revealed that Andrew was facing renewed sex claims in a New York court.

The civil lawsuit alleges that Andrew had sex with Ms Giuffre at the Manhattan home of the late financier Jeffrey Epstein and at other locations in 2001, knowing that she had been trafficked by Epstein when she was a 17-year-old minor.

Ms Giuffre, whose maiden name was Roberts, also claims that Andrew 'stonewalled' communications from her lawyer and rejected a request to explore alternative dispute resolution.

If Andrew was hoping the allegations would fade - and that he could resume a place in public life - the fresh legal case has placed him back at the centre of controversy.

Now the Palace fears it will be dragged in too, unless the Queen's second son makes some attempt to diffuse the mounting tension.

The Prince has not spoken publicly in the past week, but in an interview with BBC Two's Newsnight in 2019, he said he could not remember meeting Ms Giuffre and categorically denied that they had sex.

One well-placed palace insider said: 'There's a growing sense that his legal team need to say something, even if it is just to acknowledge that they are working on it. The Duke's legal team is not doing him or the rest of the family any favours by being so taciturn.'

US lawyers tried to hold up Prince Andrew on his horse in order to personally serve him court papers for the Virginia Giuffre sexual assault case, it is claimed

One source said: 'The Queen met with Andrew and no doubt asked him, 'What are your lawyers saying? What's the advice?''

Steve Scully (pictured) claims to have witnessed the Duke of York kissing and grinding against a blonde woman wearing a bikini - whom he insists was Andrew's sex accuser - by a swimming pool between 2001 and 2004

The source said there was 'bafflement' about the strategy of Andrew's legal team, which includes Gary Bloxsome of the firm Blackfords and advice from Blair Berk, a female lawyer who previously represented Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein.

So far they have refused even to reiterate Andrew's previous claim that he has no recollection of meeting Ms Giuffre.

One insider said the paranoia within Andrew's team was such that the lawyers had 'hunkered down' and were even 'blanking' requests for information from other aides.

The source close to Ms Giuffre's advisers - headed by heavyweight US litigator David Boies - said of Andrew's legal team: 'If I was to give you one word which sums up the attitude from Prince Andrew and his side, it is 'arrogance'. No one out-bluffs David Boies.

'We gave them multiple times to respond, to come to the table to discuss this, and they ignored our letters, ignored our calls. They were given multiple opportunities to get together, to start a discussion and avoid any of this becoming public. There was nothing but a wall of silence.'

A preliminary hearing has been set for September 13 in Manhattan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Visitors to Buckingham Palace Gardens took to TripAdvisor with bad reviews about their experience, calling the Queen's official residence a 'money-making machine'.

Ticket sales for the chance to enjoy a picnic at the palace has to be suspended when they were first released due to 'overwhelming' demand.

However, tourists have warned other guests away from the attraction after discovering large parts of the gardens were out of bounds.

Tourists have flocked to TripAdvisor to warn other guests away from the attraction after discovering large parts of the gardens were out of bounds

The palace website promised visitors the chance to soak up the 'beauty and calm of this walled oasis' on a self-guided tour.

Visitors would then be able to enjoy a 'once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to picnic on the lawn', according to The Sunday Times.

This summer the 39-acre gardens were opened for self-guided tours and picnics for the first time, after entry into the palace exhibitions was stopped last year.

The gardens include a 511-foot herbaceous border and plane trees planted by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.

Tickets went on sale in April at £16.50 for an adult or £42 for a family with up to three children.

Guests bemoaned overbearing security guards, a ban on prosecco, overpriced coffee and cakes and 'rip-off' gift shop tat at the Queen's official London residence

But guests were left unhappy with their experience, citing overbearing security guards, a ban on prosecco, overpriced food and 'rip-off' gift shop tat as reasons not to go.

One guest described it as a 'money-making machine' while another added they felt 'robbed by the royals'.

Many also criticised the size of the area in the gardens, which opened in July, that was available for the public to access.

Many were surprised that areas, including the rose garden and wildflower meadow, were off limits without paying an extra £6.50 per person for a guided tour, which needed to be booked in advance.

This summer the 39-acre gardens were opened for self-guided tours and picnics for the first time, after entry into the palace exhibitions was stopped last year

One guest described it as a 'money-making machine' while another added they felt 'robbed by the royals' as visitors flooded review sites to tell of their negative experience

Review sites have been flooded with comments criticising them as 'bitterly disappointing' and 'poor value for money'.

One disappointed guest wrote on TripAdvisor: 'Beware of this complete rip-off! I paid £16.50 for access to the gardens only hoping to laze around, see beautiful flowers and trees.

'What I experienced was first a long queue to security check and then seeing a piece of a lawn surrounded by standing stewards watching your every step and ropes segregating rest of the garden.

'This small fragment of the park that you have access to is easily walkable around in 10 min and nothing is interesting to see there.

Visitors were promised they would be able to enjoy a 'once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to picnic on the lawn' at Buckingham Palace

Review sites have been flooded with comments criticising them as 'bitterly disappointing' and 'poor value for money'

'You can't even sit on the lake's bank to watch wildlife because of these ropes everywhere. I am very disappointed and feel robbed by royals.'

Another wrote that it was a 'waste of time and money' while another added there was 'nothing special' about their visit.

However, many were thrilled at getting the chance to enjoy the gardens, and visiting the palace has a 4.5 star rating — out of 5 — on TripAdvisor with almost 30,000 reviews.

One review raved about 'getting to see her majesty's private garden' describing it as an 'incredible experience', before giving it five stars.

A Royal Collection Trust spokesperson has stated: 'A ticket to visit the Garden at Buckingham Palace this summer costs £16.50 for adults and allows visitors to take in approximately two-thirds of the Garden, including the 156-metre Herbaceous Border, the Horse Chestnut Avenue, the plane trees planted by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, and the lawns with views of the island and its beehives across the lake.

The opportunity to enjoy a picnic on the lawns is also part of the visit for the first time, and short talks and QR codes offer visitors more information about the Garden and its history. Features in the south-west of the Garden, including the Rose Garden and wildflower meadow, can be viewed through add-on guided tours, which must be booked in advance and are priced at £6.50 for adults.

This information is detailed on the Royal Collection Trust website at the time of booking. A range of concession prices is also available.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Binky Felstead has sparked a debate over whether you should sterilise a baby's bottle before using it or just put it through the dishwasher.

The mother-of-two welcomed her son Wolfie in June and on Monday prepared for her first foreign holiday with her new arrival, daughter India, four, and husband Max Darnton.

Taking to Instagram she shared sweet snaps of the family boarding the plane as she explained how they had surprised India with the trip - prompting several in the comments to ask for her advice on travelling with children.

Discussion: Binky Felstead has sparked a debate over whether you should sterilise a baby's bottle before using it (pictured with husband Max and children India, four and Wolfie, six weeks)

One wrote in the comments: 'I'd love to know how you packed for a baby? We want to go away with our baby but have no idea what to do about packing for him...Things like sterilisers, bottles, pram set etc?'

Binky then replied directly to the woman, saying: 'I personally don't sterilise anymore as feel the dishwasher does the trick! But ovs lots of bottles, muslins, sun hat, cream, nappies & I packed a few little summer rompers but to be honest it's so hot he's just in nappies most of the time!! So really simple!!'

NHS guidance on sterilisation states dishwashers will clean feeding equipment but not sterilise it.

The comment over sterilising then sparked a debate under the post with one writing: 'Milton tablets are excellent for sterilising and super small to pack. All you need is a large bowl or bucket where you are staying (should sterilise bottles until you stop using formula).'

Another wrote in response to the suggestion of using Milton tablets: 'Really great advice esp about continuing to sterilise bottles.'

A third penned: 'The dishwasher will clean but doesn't sterilise. Little ones tummy's are so sensitive to bacteria and upset you should sterilise until 12 months. The dishwasher doesn't reach high enough temperatures to sterilise.'

Debate: Under her holiday post Binky was asked for advice on travelling with children to which she responded that she uses a dishwasher instead of sterilising Wolfie's bottles

Opinions: The comment over sterilising then sparked a debate under the post with one writing: 'The dishwasher will clean but doesn't sterilise. Little ones tummy's are so sensitive to bacteria and upset you should sterilise until 12 months'

NHS guidance on sterilising baby bottles It's important to sterilise all your baby's feeding equipment, including bottles and teats, until they are at least 12 months old. This will protect your baby against infections, in particular diarrhoea and vomiting. Before sterilising, you need to: Clean bottles, teats and other feeding equipment in hot, soapy water as soon as possible after feeds. Use a clean bottle brush to clean bottles (only use this brush for cleaning bottles), and a small teat brush to clean the inside of teats. You can also turn teats inside out then wash them in hot soapy water. Do not use salt to clean teats, as this can be dangerous for your baby. You can put your baby's feeding equipment in the dishwasher to clean it if you prefer. Putting feeding equipment through the dishwasher will clean it but it does not sterilise it. Make sure bottles, lids and teats are facing downwards. You may prefer to wash teats separately by hand to make sure they are completely clean. Rinse all your equipment in clean, cold running water before sterilising. The advice above applies to all your baby's feeding equipment, and whether you are using expressed breast milk or formula milk. Source: NHS Advertisement

NHS guidance on sterilisation states: 'It's important to sterilise all your baby's feeding equipment, including bottles and teats, until they are at least 12 months old.

'You can put your baby's feeding equipment in the dishwasher to clean it if you prefer. Putting feeding equipment through the dishwasher will clean it but it does not sterilise it.

'This will protect your baby against infections, in particular diarrhoea and vomiting. There are several ways you can sterilise your baby's feeding equipment. These include: cold water, sterilising solution, steam sterilising, boiling.'

Off we go! Binky shared a sweet picture in the post holding her baby as India beamed up at the camera

Binky explained in the caption about preparing for her trip, penning: 'FAMILY VAY- KAY • ☀️

'When I was about India's age my parents packed my bags in the car whilst I was asleep & when they woke me up in the morning they told me we were going to drop daddy off at the airport for one of his usual business trips!

'It wasn't until I was actually on the plane that they had to tell me it was actually a holiday we were going on.. and I still remember how excited I was!!

'So … Max & I told India the day before we left that we were going to pack her bag & pretend we were going to go on a holiday. We packed the car when she was sleeping. In the morning we woke up the kids, put them in the car & told India we were going to take her to the park.

Surprise! Binky explained in the caption that they hadn't told India that they were going on a family holiday

'We got to the airport, put her on the luggage trolley & she had the biggest smile on her face ( clearly brighter than I was) … we told her it wasn't actually a pretend holiday and that we were going on a airplane & she let out the biggest squeal and skipped through the airport saying ' hi! ' to everyone.

'Needless to say travelling with two compared to one is slightly different … at least Wolfie can't walk yet- much easier! He did sleep most of the way and I made sure he sucked on his dummy (or my finger) to help pop his ears! We had India in the middle between Max & I & Wolfie was on my lap!

'I actually traveled from London to Bali with India the day after her 2nd Birthday on my own & it was actually okay, just made sure I was super prepared! Advice travelling with kids hasn't changed from my post I did back then. Make sure there are plenty of snacks, stickers, colouring books & toys! Spread the toys out throughout the flight… and promise ice cream when you land!! ☀️ … oh and think of that G&T!

… also, this little bag India is on in the last pic is brilliant for plonking them on whilst waiting around for check in & running through airports when late for your flight!'

Advice: Binky explained in the caption about preparing for her trip as she told how it was different having to travel with two children

Binky and Max tied the knot during an intimate civil ceremony at Chelsea Old Town Hall on Friday 23 July.

Their surprise ceremony took place seven weeks after Binky and Max welcomed their son Wolfie.

Binky also shares daughter India with ex-boyfriend Josh 'JP' Patterson, who Max is doting stepfather to.

Announcing the news in HELLO! magazine, Binky called it 'the most perfect day', with Max adding: 'It's amazing. To be honest, it felt official when Wolfie was born because of him and India being siblings, but getting married has cemented it.'

Love: Binky and Max tied the knot during an intimate civil ceremony at Chelsea Old Town Hall on Friday 23 July

He went on: 'Binks looked incredible. India swung the door open just before she walked down the aisle so I got a sneak peek, but I pretended I didn't.'

After the ceremony, Binky called on the likes of her former Made In Chelsea star Ollie Locke to get the party started as they headed back to their home for drinks and dancing.

Binky and Max will also host a bigger ceremony in Corfu next summer, with Max telling the outlet that they plan to have a BBQ on the beach and go snorkelling.

They have already hired a 'big boat to sail around the coves' and have also secured a cliffside venue for their wedding.

Max added that they've rented a private beach where they can enjoy a meal after the ceremony with their loved ones.

Images shared with the magazine reveal that Binky opted for a beautiful silk dress that featured lace detailing across her shoulders.

Businessman Max also opted for white, with his suit being a slightly darker shade to Binky's stunning dress.

Writing about the big day in an Instagram post, Binky penned: 'BLIMEY- WE ARE MARRIED!!!! @max_fd

Doting parents: Their surprise ceremony took place seven weeks after Binky and Max welcomed their son Wolfie into the world

'Had one of the most special days of my life marrying my best friend. My gorgeous, beautiful daughter being my flower girl, passing/dropping us the rings …my big brother giving me away… and Wolfie sleeping the whole way through!

'This was an intimate family day given all of the ever changing rules… Bring on next year when we do it all again to celebrate & party with all our loved ones and friends!!☀️ We’ve found a perfect sunny location!!'

The pair revealed they were engaged to be married after 19 months of dating in a sweet Instagram post shared in September 2020 after meeting at Soho Farmhouse.

She revealed the good news via Instagram as she shared a picture of her kissing the businessman while holding up her hand to show off the sparkling diamond ring.

Gushing about the proposal, which took place after he asked her daughter, for permission to pop the question, she wrote: 'The easiest "Yes" EVER!'

In the sweet snap, Binky passionately kissed her beau after she had accepted his proposal, which took place in a picturesque field at the Long Man of Wilmington.

In November, Binky admitted she wouldn't be with Max if 'marriage wasn't in the plan', but insisted she didn't 'mind' when the couple decide to tie the knot.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rylan Clark-Neal, 32, has sparked hopes that he could reconcile with husband Dan Neal, 41, following their split.

According to The Sun, former policeman Dan has been spotted back at the property they share in Essex, with his Range Rover parked on the drive.

An insider said: 'It was a very sad period but after it all came out into the open they seem to be in a better place and Dan has been back at the home at times.

Reuniting? Rylan Clark-Neal's 'husband Dan was seen back at their home sparking hopes they could reconcile after split'

'Everyone who knows them likes them very much, so hopefully things are working out.'

MailOnline has contacted a representative for Rylan for comment.

The star, who rose to fame on X Factor nine years ago, revealed in June that he and Dan had split after six years of marriage.

Marriage breakdown: The star, who rose to fame on X Factor nine years ago, revealed in June that he Dan, had split after six years of marriage (pictured above in 2016)

Rylan thanked fans for their support and revealed he is working towards returning to his jobs.

He made the decision to step down from presenting stints such as Eurovision and his BBC Radio 2 show after his marriage broke down.

Taking to Instagram in July, he penned: 'I just wanted to write a message to thank you all for the love and kindness you have shown us.

'We are currently prioritising our mental health and looking after the ones around us we love the most. I am working towards getting back to the jobs I love in due course. Thank you for being patient with me X'.

Grateful: The star took to Instagram at the beginning of July to write a message to his 1.4million followers following his marriage breakdown

With the return to work on the star's radar, Rylan is reportedly set to make his television comeback on Strictly Come Dancing's spin-off It Takes Two.

According to reports in The Sun, Rylan will return to the BBC2 show after co-presenting it alongside Zoe Ball for the past two years.

With 50-year-old Zoe quitting It Takes Two back in May, Rylan will allegedly sit alongside Strictly professional Janette Manrara, 37, for the extra ballroom dancing instalment which is starting next month.

Television return? With the return to work on the star's radar, Rylan is reportedly set to make his television comeback on Strictly Come Dancing 's spin-off It Takes Two

A source revealed to the publication that Rylan has missed working and is 'hopeful' be back on fans' screens soon.

They said: 'Rylan’s spent time away from the spotlight focusing on his wellbeing surrounded by friends and family.

'It’s all looking positive and the team at It Takes Two always have a lot of fun filming. It’s a joyful show to work on.

'Of course, everyone backstage wants what’s best for Rylan and aren’t putting pressure on him.'

MailOnline contacted representatives for Rylan and Strictly Come Dancing for comment at the tine.

Taking a break: Rylan made the decision to step down from presenting stints such as Eurovision and his BBC Radio 2 show after his marriage broke down (him and Dan pictured above in 2016)

Comeback: According to reports in The Sun, Rylan will return to the BBC2 show after co-presenting it with Zoe Ball for the past two years - but Zoe quit back in May (pictured in 2019)

Last month it was revealed that former Pussycat Doll Nicole and Simon Cowell are 'amongst the stars rallying around the presenter' who is in a 'very dark place' amid the breakdown of his marriage.

It was reported that Katie Price, 43, has 'been his rock' as he comes to term with what has happened, while Ruth Langsford has also been offering her support.

A source told Closer: 'Katie Price in particular has been his rock over the last few weeks, and given she's been through three marriage splits herself, she understands the torment he's going through.

'Nicole has also been messaging him and has given him a list of books that have helped her through painful break-ups.'

The source further revealed to the publication that Rylan was in a 'very dark place' but found it 'hugely comforting' to have his friends supporting him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the shocking moment a driver, with three children inside his car, ploughed into a set of parked vehicles and overturned in a quiet residential street.

Video footage shows the black BMW clipping the front of a parked silver BMW, rolling onto its roof and eventually slamming into metal fencing in Bradford, west Yorkshire.

The minute-long CCTV clip, which shows multiple angles of the crash impact and the devastating aftermath, has been shared online.

The devastating aftermath in Lister Avenue, Bradford, west Yorkshire after a 31-year-old driver slammed into two parked cars (right) and was left hospitalised

A 31-year-old man suffered life-changing injuries and is fighting for his life in hospital where he remains in a serious condition.

Three children were also in the car with him, with all of them being subsequently taken to hospital. The trio were hurt but are not thought to have suffered life-changing injuries.

The crash happened in the quiet residential street of Lister Avenue, Bradford at around 5.30pm on Monday, August 9.

Video footage shows the black BMW clipping the front of a parked silver BMW, rolling onto its roof and eventually slamming into metal fencing

The crash happened in the quiet residential street of Lister Avenue, Bradford at around 5.30pm on Monday, August 9

CCTV footage shows the moment the black BMW smashes into two parked cars, a silver BMW and a red Mercedes.

Debris is seen strewn across the road as the black BMW barrels through the air before rolling onto its roof and into the middle of a busy junction.

At the end of the clip, three police officers are pictured examining the scene and the battered remains of the black car.

The driver, a 31-year-old man, was immediately rushed to hospital and has suffered life-changing injuries.

The three children in the car were also taken to hospital, but their condition is said to be stable.

One resident who lives on the street told YorkshireLive the sound of the crash was 'like a bomb had gone off.'

The owner of one of the two parked cars, which were wrecked in the accident, said the collision 'sounded like a bomb had gone off'.

Another local said: 'I heard them drive past my house on Lister Avenue so fast and then I heard the crash at the bottom of the road.'

West Yorkshire Police are appealing for any witnesses who were present at the time of the crash or anyone with CCTV or dash cam footage that could assist their enquiries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Erica Whittingham, 33, helped her inmate lover Michael Seddon escape from HMP Sudbury and met him at least eight times over the next six months

A female prison officer helped a dangerous robber escape from jail in Derbyshire after falling in love and forming a relationship with him behind bars.

Derby Crown Court heard how Erica Whittingham was waiting in her car outside HMP Sudbury and then drove Michael Seddon away after he left a decoy in his cell to trick guards.

For the next six months she remained in contact with her lover, meeting him in hotels around England and buying him gifts such as clothes while he was on the run.

Whittingham said that she had fallen in love with the violent robber who had been part of a gang that tied up and battered an elderly farmer. He was caught after he formed a relationship with another woman.

Now the 33-year-old will return to prison as an inmate rather than an officer, having been jailed for three years.

Recorder Balraj Bhattia QC said: 'You knew what you were doing was wrong and I am satisfied you were complicit in his escape.

'You were responsible for driving him away knowing he was an escaped prisoner.

'You were complicit in him being unlawfully at large for a long period.'

Daren Samat, prosecuting, said Whittingham and Seddon began a relationship when she was working at HMP Dovegate in Staffordshire where he was then serving.

He said after Seddon was moved to HMP Sudbury they remained in contact with him using a contraband mobile phone and her using a 'burner' phone.

Mr Samat said: 'On October 1, 2019, Mr Seddon escaped form HMP Sudbury.

Derby Crown Court heard the pair had maintained contact using an illegal mobile phone in Seddon's cell and a burner phone owned by Whittingham

'He had left a decoy on the bed, left the prison and into a car where the defendant drove him to Stoke railway station from where he caught a train to Liverpool.

'Intelligence showed there were suspicions she had started a relationship with him while working at Dovegate and the following day as she was at work she was held.'

Mr Samat said mobile phone analysis showed the pair had been in contact with each other after Seddon Dovegate left to go to Sudbury.

He said over the next six months he was unlawfully at large they met on at least eight occasions including a hotel in Birmingham and in Manchester, Tamworth, Lincolnshire, Crewe, Merseyside and Bicester.

Mr Samat said Seddon was arrested in Bournemouth in March 2020 having formed a new relationship with a different woman.

Whittingham, from Bramshall, Uttoxeter, previously pleaded guilty to harbouring an escaped prisoner and misconduct in public office.

Mark Sharman, her barrister, said that since being dismissed by the Prison Service his client had found work at a residential care home.

He said she has represented her country internationally at Badminton and at the time of the offence had split up from her husband who she had been with for 11 years.

Mr Sharman said: 'She is brutally honest in her pre-sentence report when she relates she had found someone (Seddon) that she loved.

'Whether that was reciprocated or not that is what she believed.

'She was smitten with this man.'

Seddon, from Bootle, was 22 when he was jailed in 2011 for his part in a terrifying robbery.

He was one of a gang of four men found guilty of tying a 78-year-old farmer to a chair in his own home and beating him in a shocking two-hour ordeal.

This week's hearing was told he was previously handed an extra six months to the one he is serving for escaping lawful custody.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woman who refused to split the bill at her friend's birthday dinner because she wasn't drinking alcohol, has sparked a heated debate about group dining etiquette.

Writing on UK-based forum Mumsnet, the woman explained that the cost of her food and drink totaled just £19 while celebrating her friend's birthday alongside five others.

She said her friend texted a day later complaining that her refusal to split the bill equally, and pay £40, had left the other members of the group upset.

Many comments on the post reassured the woman that she hasn't done anything wrong and her friend is being unreasonable, but others argued she shouldn't have gone if she wasn't willing to split the bill to at least contribute towards the cost of the birthday girl's meal.

An anonymous woman, who lives in the UK, has sparked a heated debate about splitting the bill when dining with friends (file image)

The woman took to Mumsnet, explaining that her friend had texted her complaining about her decision not to split the bill - despite it being double the price of her food and drink

The woman admitted the situation had left her speechless, saying that six people had gone out for her friend's birthday.

'I was the only one who didn't drink alcohol. Just a few lemonades,' she explained. 'At the end one person said: "Should we just split the bill then?". But she didn't say it as a question, more of a leading statement. She then got her phone out and split it six ways. Came to just over £40 each!

'I said, "Sorry, no. You've all drunk quite a bit and I've had no alcohol at all. Would you mind if I pay separately?".

'They said "yeah fine"... and the atmosphere was a little odd after that. We all went our separate ways after that. It wasn't a particularly expensive place, but not cheap. Food very reasonably priced but of course the alcohol stacked up the bill significantly

'I've been messaged my birthday girl this morning to say I was really out of order and should've just split. Everyone was a bit upset.

'Am I being unreasonable to not have split?! I felt like I was being fair there. She also said she was opening her gifts from me in the evening but I've had no words in a way of thank you.'

One response to the post admitted they've been in a similar situation, but would've split the bill.

'This has happened to me too. Very often, my meal is much cheaper than everyone else's because I don't have alcohol and usually don't have dessert. I always just cough up when the bill is split equally and accept that I have partly paid for other people's food and drinks.'

Another said: 'I would never not just split the bill. Can't be a**** with all that, but I can afford to pay it and if I couldn't I wouldn't go to that particular restaurant/ night out etc. I would also expect to pay towards the birthday person's meal.'

A flood of responses argued the woman should have split the bill to ensure that the birthday girl doesn't have to pay for her own meal

A third added: 'I see where you are coming from but it was 40 quid, I would just have split it to avoid tension and because I rarely eat out with friends. Having said that your friend is a b**** for texting you like that and the others need to grow up if that upset them.'

However, a stream of commenters defended the woman and reassured her that they also wouldn't have wanted to pay double the cost of their food and drink to split the bill equally.

One person wrote: 'As someone who doesn't drink alcohol, I would have said exactly the same. Cocktails and doubles with mixers can be £6-£10 each and my sparkling water is £2.

'The only thing I would have done is chip in for the birthday girl so she didn't pay for her share? So say my cut was £20 and hers was £40, I'd maybe have thrown in a tenner or something towards hers.'

'It should never be compulsory to split the bill. I might raise an eyebrow if everyone had similar meals and drink and one person wanted to pay for their meal to the penny but I wouldn't say anything.

'It is actually very rude to expect a non drinker to split the bill when everyone else has had lots of alcohol. I would always speak up in this situation,' another added, saying that they would always suggest that the person who hasn't drank alcohol shouldn't have to pay as much as everyone else.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Obamas didn't invite Prince Harry and Meghan Markle to Barack's 60th birthday party because 'they will go towards William' amid the family's rift, Prince Harry's biographer has claimed.

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex did not attend the lavish do thrown by the former US president at his seven-bedroom £8million holiday home in Martha's Vineyard on Saturday. It included John Legend and Chrissy Teigen, Meghan's friend CBS This Morning host Gayle King, George Clooney and Jay-Z and Beyoncé.

And according to royal expert and author Angela Levin, who wrote Harry: Biography of a Prince, it is thought that Barack and Michelle, 57, wanted to take a 'step back' from the couple out of respect for the Queen.

'I'm sure that if they say we can only deal with one brother and his wife — you cannot have both because they are so far apart now — they will go towards William,' said Angela, speaking to The Sun. 'The Obamas clearly always regarded Harry highly, but I am sure they can see through Meghan.

They may stay around, but they won't be as pally as they once were.'

The Obamas didn't invite Prince Harry and Meghan Markle to Barack's 60th birthday party because 'they will go towards William' amid the family's rift, Prince Harry's biographer has claimed. Pictured, Prince Harry, US President Barack Obama, First Lady Michelle Obama, Prince William, Kate Middleton pose as they attend a dinner at Kensington Palace on April 22, 2016 in London

Prince Harry and US First Lady Michelle Obama laugh as they listen to a music presentation by wounded warriors at the USO Warrior and Family Center at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, October 28, 2015

Oprah Winfrey interviewing Prince Harry and Meghan Markle on A CBS Primetime Special premiering on CBS on March 7, 2021

The royal expert went on to say that the Duchess of Sussex 'desperately wanted' to be among those in attendance.

'I am told that despite claiming she was unable to attend, Meghan desperately wanted to be the special guest at the Obama's amazing party,' she said. 'But the fact is, Harry and Meghan were never even on the original list.'

The Obamas first met Her Majesty back in 2009 at the G20 summit, and in 2011 the monarch hosted them on a three-day State visit.

When the Duke of Edinburgh passed away in April, aged 99, Obama posted a glowing tribute on Twitter, writing: 'Through his extraordinary example, His Royal Highness Prince Philip proved that true partnership has room for both ambition and selflessness – all in service of something greater.'

His wife also tweeted: 'Our thoughts are with Her Majesty the Queen, the Royal family, and the British people.'

Speaking about the Queen during her 2019 book tour, Michelle described her as 'wonderfully warm, funny, elegant and kind and considerate in really interesting ways'.

Despite both Meghan and Harry currently being on parental leave after welcoming their daughter Lilibet in June, the Duchess used her 40th birthday as an opportunity to launch her new 40x40 initiative, designed to encourage women back into work post-pandemic

In 2016, they attended a dinner with Prince William and Kate Middleton at their home, where they were photographed meeting Prince George, then three, who was in his dressing gown ready for bed, before having dinner with the Cambridges and Harry.

Obama publicly threw his support behind Prince William's Earthshot Prize in October, writing on Twitter: 'It's going to take a lot of big-thinking and innovation to save the one planet we've got – and that's why @KensingtonRoyal's leadership on climate change can make a real difference.'

The Obamas also have a long-standing relationship with Harry, having bonded with him over his Invictus Games - for which they starred in a video with the prince and the Queen to help promote it in 2016.

The following year Harry interviewed Barack in Toronto for his guest edit of BBC Radio 4's Today programme, during which they discussed the risks of social media and the corrosion of civil discourse.

Meghan also made a point of attending Michelle's talk at the London Southbank Centre in December 2018, with the two women reportedly getting together backstage afterwards for a 'power meeting' to discuss their shared passion for girls' education.

When the Obamas returned to the UK in 2016, they made a point of visiting Kensington Palace where they met Prince George, then three, who was in his dressing gown ready for bed, before having dinner with the Cambridges and Harry

Despite both Meghan and Harry currently being on parental leave after welcoming their daughter Lilibet in June, the Duchess last week used her 40th birthday as an opportunity to launch her new 40x40 initiative, designed to encourage women back into work post-pandemic.

But while a host of celebrities - including Hillary Clinton - were asked to support the project, which asks people to donate 40 minutes of their time to mentoring, the Obamas were seemingly not invited to participate.

And Angela notes that 'it must be irritating for the Obamas' that the concept is similar to Barack's 60x60 birthday appeal, where people were asked to donate 60 dollars, or even six dollars, to a charitable cause.

The comments come after royal expert Camilla Tominey claimed Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's 'conspicuous' absence from Barack Obama's 60th birthday party could be a sign their 'special relationship' is over.

Despite Obama insisting the event had been scaled back from a guestlist of 500 because of the spread of the Indian Delta variant of Covid, a staff member told DailyMail.com that 300 to 400 people were in attendance.

Page Six, which broke the news of Harry's multi-million pound book deal, reported Harry and Meghan were 'not planning to attend' and suggested the Duke might whisk his wife away for her own birthday celebrations, as she turned 40 on August 4.

Camilla Tominey suggested that ordinarily, you would have expected Harry and Meghan to be 'front and centre' of the Obamas' guest list, however some people within Democrat circles have suggested the Sussexes' attempts to 'ape everything the Obamas have done' since they quit the Royal Family may have 'jeopardised their once special relationship'.

Writing in the Daily Telegraph, she said: 'Despite the Obamas not attending the Sussexes' wedding that year, it was thought that the newly California-based couple would be shoo-ins at Obama's 60th, as prominent 'progressives' and new-found members of the US metropolitan liberal elite.'

She claimed a source revealed the Obamas 'didn't like Harry attacking his family' during his and Meghan's explosive interview with Oprah Winfrey in March.

'They value family and certainly aren't the type of people who would want their children talking to the press,' the insider added.

Meghan made a point of attending Michelle's talk at the London Southbank Centre in December 2018, with the two women reportedly getting together backstage afterwards for a 'power meeting' to discuss their shared passion for girls' education

Former First Lady Michelle Obama also shed light on her and her husband's feelings on the public outpouring - during which they accused the monarchy of not supporting them and suggested Prince Charles and Prince William are 'trapped' in the system - in an interview with Access Hollywood.

'My hope is that, when I think about what they're going through, I think about the importance of family and I just pray that there is forgiveness and there is clarity and love and resolve at some point in time. Because there's nothing more important than family,' she said.

The Sussexes have followed a similar trajectory to the Obamas since quitting royal life, having signed a multi-million dollar deal with Netflix to produce their own documentary series.

Harry has also signed a lucrative four-book deal with Penguin Random House - the same publishers used by Obama for his memoir A Promised Land in November last year. In 2018 Michelle published her life story, Becoming.

Tominey suggested the Obamas may be fearful that an association with the Sussexes risks attracting negative publicity.

She added that Harry and Meghan bad-mouthing the royals during their Oprah interview 'arguably will not have gone down particularly well with a couple that have always put 'family first.''

Following the Oprah interview and Harry's book news, some royal commentators have criticised the Sussexes for dishing yet more royal dirt.

There is concern within the Firm that the release of one of the books is reportedly due to come after the death of the Queen - though Harry's lawyers have said the claim that he is waiting for his grandmother to pass away before releasing one of them is 'false and defamatory'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chester FC manager Anthony Johnson has said he thought he was going to die after being hospitalised with Covid, and is now warning vaccine sceptics: 'The most ridiculous thing I could do was not take time to get the jab.'

The father-of-three, 38, spent a week in Fairfield General Hospital in Bury, Greater Manchester in July after testing positive for the virus and suffering kidney failure, blood clots on his lungs and a 42C fever.

Now recovering at home, Mr Johnson - who insisted he is not an anti-vaxxer but refrained from getting vaccinated after previously suffering a mild illness from Covid - is urging sceptics to get inoculated against the virus.

The former Salford City boss, said: 'I am not an anti-vaxxer or a conspiracy theorist or anything like that. I just thought, I've had it once, I have probably got antibodies now, so when I get time, I will get it done. It is the most ridiculous decision I have ever made in my life.

'I would pay every single penny I have got to never feel the way I did two weeks ago. My wife has been double jabbed and the most ridiculous thing I could do was not take time to get the jab. How can you not have time for your own health? I could have died two weeks ago.

'To get it the way I have just shows not only can you get it again, but you can get it to the point where it could kill you. I am not trying to exaggerate the point, but I know where I was with this.

'Any advice I would give to people is go and get the jab.'

Chester football manager Anthony Johnson said he thought he was going to die after being hospitalised with Covid as he warned vaccine sceptics: 'The most ridiculous thing I could do was not take time to get the jab'

Mr Johnson (left), pictured in February 2018 during his time as Salford City co-manager with co-manager Bernard Morley (right)

Ministers already ordered an extra 60million doses of Pfizer's Covid vaccine for this year's campaign to give out third doses, which would be enough to give top-ups to all 54million British adults and fully vaccinate the 1.4million 16- and 17-year-olds who are now eligible

Mr Johnson, who rose to fame in the BBC documentary Class of 92: Out of Their League, tested positive for Covid last month after his daughter Bella, nine, caught it at school.

He isolated and experienced flu-like symptoms before he was taken to hospital with serious breathing problems. Paramedics arriving at his home were even forced to use a defibrillator after they struggled to find a pulse, Mr Johnson claimed.

Mr Johnson waited five hours before he was taken in because the Bury hospital was overwhelmed. Eventually he was moved to the Covid ward, where he was put in a bed next to elderly patients.

There, he was diagnosed with pneumonia, was forced to wear an oxygen mask and was temporarily wheelchair-bound. To make matters worse, he could not see wife Kayla and kids Lewis, 16, Bella and Zac, seven.

Mr Johnson said: 'I was saying to the nurses and doctors, 'I know I'm not as poorly as everyone else is in here.

Mr Johnson (far right), pictured in August 2015 during his time as Salford City co-manager with (l-r) players Jason Jarrett, Gareth Seddon, and co-manager Bernard Morley

Daily Covid infections recorded in the UK yesterday rose by 8.4 per cent compared to the same day last week, with 23.510 people testing positive. But deaths and hospitalisations are still a fraction of the numbers seen in previous waves, suggesting curbs to control the spread will not be imposed in the near future

'And the doctor said, 'You are, your kidneys are failing, your blood oxygen level is lower than anybody else's in here, you're as poorly - if not worse - than everybody else'. When he said that it struck a chord with me at how close I was to probably dying.'

After seven nights in hospital, Mr Johnson is now feeling 'a million times better' - and was overwhelmed by the support of Chester.

He added: 'It has just been absolutely unbelievable. You realise how important you are to some people. I'm a nobody, I'm not a celebrity, I'm not a famous football manager. But I've had thousands and thousands and thousands of messages from people.

'The players sent me a montage video with them and Bernard Morley, our co-manager.

'I cried. Before that, I'd never cried in my whole life.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A TV nature presenter has lashed out after his 90-year-old mother had to wait on the floor more than six hours for an ambulance - after falling out of bed.

BBC's Countryfile and Springwatch expert Iolo Williams was furious that over-stretched ambulance crews in the Labour-run Welsh NHS left his mother Megan on the floor.

His mother fell from her bed at 7am and was too frail to move - and was still there at 1pm when the ambulance crew took her just four miles to hospital.

Iolo said: 'It is disgraceful that my 90-year-old mother has fallen and been forced to lie on the floor for so long.

BBC's Countryfile and Springwatch expert Iolo Williams was furious that over-stretched ambulance crews in the Labour-run Welsh NHS left his mother Megan on the floor

'I don't blame the paramedics themselves, they just do their job. But there's no love at all for the NHS, that's obvious - things have been getting worse for years.

'There is a clear lack of investment. We see the rich people running the country, and they know if you need to go private, people can.'

Megan was in agony after falling out of bed at her home in Felinheli, North Wales, only four miles from Ysbyty Gwynedd in Bangor.

Iolo's sister Ffion was staying with her mother at the time, and heard her mother shouting after the fall. She then had to call the emergency services three times.

Iolo was so shocked that her posted a picture of his mother's plight on social media saying: 'This is my mum. She is 90 and very frail. In the night, she fell out of bed.

'My sister called the ambulance before 7am. Nearly six hours later and the ambulance still hasn't arrived! This is what happens when successive governments cut funding to essential services.'

It is the latest in a series of glitches by the Labour-run Welsh NHS and the Welsh Ambulance Service.

Countryfile presenter Iolo was so shocked that her posted a picture of his mother's plight on social media

Welsh Ambulance Service chief executive Jason Killens apologised to patients who had endured long waits - saying the service was in 'uncharted territory'.

He insisted the service was working hard to deal with the situation and had recruited 'over a couple of hundred' new staff in the past 18 months.

'We're recruiting and training more through the rest of this year, which will be paramedics on the streets as we approach winter,' he said.

The Welsh Government said getting patients from ambulances and into A&E remained a 'significant challenge' and recently announced £25m to improve the outcome of emergency calls.

A spokesman said: 'A range of local and system-wide factors contribute to these delays, including reduced physical capacity within emergency departments, increased levels of demand, and pressures elsewhere in the system.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Britain's Schools Minister today finally admitted Covid-19 has led to a growing fissure between rich and poor pupils as 1million students prepare to receive their GCSE results with record numbers getting top marks just days after rampant grade inflation in A-levels.

Nick Gibb also insisted exams will be back next year with 'adjustments' but dismissed fears over grade inflation, saying it has been a 'different, difficult year', adding: 'It's like comparing apples and oranges'.

Mr Gibb said the growing attainment gap between privileged and poorer children is 'not acceptable' and admitted the pandemic had 'amplified those inequalities' as experts predicted that private school pupils are expected to pull further ahead of their 'have-not' counterparts in the state system when the GCSE results are released this morning.

Teenagers trying to get places at sixth-forms and colleges face an unprecedented battle with each other for A-level places as state schools become increasingly selective over who they admit for the next two years.

Almost one in three GCSE entries will get top results today as ministers consider an overhaul to stop grades becoming meaningless and degraded because exams were cancelled and teachers had the final say. Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems, with Gavin Williamson being tipped to be sacked by Boris Johnson.

Mr Gibb said: 'This is an exceptional year, designed to make sure that despite the pandemic, despite the fact we had to cancel exams, because it wouldn't have been fair for children, young people, to sit exams when they've had such different experiences of Covid - the different levels of self-isolation and so on - so a teacher-assessed system was the best alternative to make sure they can go on to the next phase of their education or careers.'

He said the Government wanted examinations to return next year, adding: 'We've already announced the adjustments to the exams - we expect all young people to be taking exams in 2022 but we will be making adjustments to those exams to reflect the fact that this cohort will have had disruption to their education as well.

'And the regulator Ofqual will be saying more about the grading standard that will be used for those exams in the autumn term.'

At the heart of the row will be whether children were properly served by their schools during the pandemic after it emerged 700,000 comprehensive pupils got no home lessons at all.

In contrast private school students received around six hours per day while at home, with Britain's 'heavily unionised' state schools accused of failing students, especially from the poorest backgrounds.

A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine (stock image)

Grading explained: The grading for GCSEs moved to numbers rather than letters in 2017 - and could soon change again

A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine. A record 29 per cent of entries are expected to get at least a 7 – equivalent to the old A – and around 10 per cent will get a 9, which is a high A*.

Experts have predicted today's results will be like the 'wild west' for those applying to sixth forms because grades are so high with the gap between private and comprehensive schools expected to dominate debate again.

Gavin Williamson shouldn't be sacked... says his junior minister Gavin Williamson was defended by one of his departmental ministers following calls for the Education Secretary to be sacked. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said Boris Johnson should fire Mr Williamson amid reports the Prime Minister is considering replacing him with equalities minister Kemi Badenoch at the next reshuffle. Schools minister Nick Gibb, asked on Sky News why Mr Williamson should keep his job, said: 'Because he is a very effective Education Secretary. 'I've worked with Gavin Williamson for the last two years and he is driven to make sure that no student will suffer long-term damage to their prospects as a consequence of the pandemic. 'He is driven to continue the reform programme in our education system where we saw, up until Covid, that attainment gap close in primary school and in secondary school. 'And he is driven to do more to make sure we continue to drive up standards in our education system so that background does not matter in terms of the opportunities available for young people.' Advertisement

Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at Exeter University, has said some popular state sixth forms have set such high entry requirements some students will now be excluded from staying on.

He said: 'My worry is for pupils who may have just missed out on grades, which can determine whether you get a sixth-form place and what A-level subjects you can study. Sixth-form admissions are the Wild West of the education system, with every sixth-form determining its own selection criteria. A particular concern for me are the prospects of poorer pupils who will not necessarily be backed up by sharp-elbowed parents.

At one point the National Education Union issued guidance to state schools warning online lessons should be kept 'to a minimum'. Dr Mary Bousted, the union's joint general secretary, said: 'Teachers cannot be working as though they are sat in front of a class, and children cannot be expected to be able to study full time with online resources.'

Tory MP Andrew Bridgen, who has campaigned for a level playing field between comprehensives and private schools, told MailOnline yesterday that state education was let down by unions and teachers during the pandemic.

He said: 'The state system is heavily unionised and this is holding back schools and the children they are meant to serve. People have to realise that the public sector is not being run for the benefit of the public - it is run for the benefit of the people working in it'.

Asked about the disparity in lockdown lessons between state and private counterparts he said: 'It was all entirely predictable. You could see it coming a mile off. In the private sector there were Zoom lessons throughout the day. There is no reason why this couldn't have been the same in state schools but it didn't happen and once again children, often in the poorest areas of the country, have lost out'.

Amid claims the grading for GCSEs could be changed again, a government source said a new grade 10 was 'possible' and had not been 'ruled out'.

They added: 'It's a discussion that's yet to be formally framed, but there will be conversations about changing the grading this autumn.'

It comes as half a million pupils collect their GCSE results this morning after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to the pandemic.

Teachers have decided the marks, meaning grading will be the most generous in recent history – leading to accusations of the qualifications being devalued.

Education expert Alan Smithers, of the University of Buckingham said: 'We have a scale that has lost its meaning as we have people continually being given 9. Adding a 10 isn't a bad idea as it would be a good new label for outstanding performance.'

However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had 'value' despite the grade inflation.

He said: 'Students and their teachers should feel immensely proud of what they have achieved. I want to be clear – this is a moment to celebrate our young people and their futures.'

However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had 'value' despite the grade inflatio

Labour is calling on the Government to do more to address lost learning during the pandemic, with the party estimating that more than half a million Year 11 students receiving their GCSE results on Thursday will leave secondary school without receiving catch-up support.

On a visit to a school in Swindon to meet students receiving their GCSE results, Sir Keir Starmer is expected to say the current plans to catch up on lost learning 'risk holding back a generation of kids'.

Sir Kevan Collins, the former education catch-up commissioner, quit his role in June over the Government's proposal of a £1.4 billion fund to help children recover missed lessons, describing it as 'a bit feeble' - he had proposed a £15 billion recovery package.

The Labour Party says that face-to-face teaching lost this year amounts to more than eight weeks per pupil, in addition to an average of 14 weeks last year, with some groups such as pupils on free school meals and those in the north of England being disproportionately affected.

Labour estimates 560,000 year 11 students are leaving secondary school this summer without catch-up support, and says that is set to rise to 1.9 million children by 2024.

The party is calling on the Government to match Labour's children's recovery plan, which it says would provide a £15 billion package, including small group tutoring, breakfast clubs, mental heath support, more professional development for teachers, and extra investment to support the pupils who struggled the most with lockdown learning.

On his visit to a school in Swindon, the Labour leader, Sir Keir, is expected to say: 'These young people are excited for their futures and every one of them must be allowed to reach their potential.

'Yet the Conservatives are failing to give children the support they need to catch up on lost learning. They risk holding back a generation of kids.

'Labour's Children's Recovery Plan would give every child the support to learn, play and develop after this pandemic, delivering them a brighter future.

'It's time for the Conservatives to get behind Labour's plan and match our ambition for children's futures.'

Labour's shadow education secretary, Kate Green, said the Government's recovery plan for students is 'inadequate' and 'will leave millions of children without any additional support, showing a shocking lack of ambition their future ambitions and life chances'.

A Government spokesperson said: 'We have committed to an ambitious and long-term education recovery plan, including an investment to date of over £3 billion and a significant expansion of our tutoring programme, to support children and young people to make up for learning lost during the pandemic.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Ben Affleck visits Jennifer Lopez on set of her latest film project in LA... with the actor mingling with crew and rocking an earpiece

Ben Affleck spends a couple of hours on a set that Jennifer Lopez is currently working on. Ben takes a smoke break, caught enjoying an animated conversation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Shocking moment Indian man, 24, is killed by flying rotor blade after test flight of homemade helicopter goes horrifically wrong

Eerie footage shows a man building his own helicopter in a garage before he was tragically killed by the faulty blades on an attempted trial run.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Booster jabs are set to be compulsory for travel abroad and care home staff in plans under discussion by Ministers.

A source close to the talks about Covid certification told The Mail on Sunday: ‘The assumption is that you will be required to have the most up-to-date health passport.

'So if the advice is to have a booster six months after your second jab, then that is what you’ll need.’

At the moment, double-jabbed Brits can go to amber list countries without having to quarantine upon their return.

Booster vaccines will be compulsory for care home workers once they are rolled out, a senior Government source said.

Booster jabs are set to be compulsory for travel abroad and care home staff in plans under discussion by Ministers. [File image]

This will add to the legal requirements for care home staff, who from October will have to be double-jabbed to work in the sector, subject to parliamentary approval.

Millions are set to be offered a third jab from September after Health Secretary Sajid Javid announced the roll-out to priority groups.

A Minister told the Mail on Sunday the ‘logical’ move will be to make the booster shots a requirement for travel, adding that the most up-to-date Covid certification for travel will become as normal as the need to have a yellow fever jab to enter certain countries.

Last night Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Conservative leader, said: ‘If I were the Government I would tread carefully on this.

Booster jabs will take a while to get to the majority of the travelling public.

‘And there are issues around whether they are necessary – some scientists say that they may not be necessary.’

Booster vaccines will be compulsory for care home workers once they are rolled out, a senior Government source said. [File picture]

Meanwhile talks about what booster jabs will mean for domestic certification are still at an early stage within Government.

One insider said that, as domestic passports have only been announced for nightclubs, discussions over whether boosters will one day be required for entry are still in ‘very early days’.

The Government will make its decision on boosters following final advice from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), which is reviewing the scientific evidence on the third jabs.

The JCVI previously issued interim advice in June that Brits ‘should be prepared’ for another round of inoculations.

The roll-out would work in two stages, beginning with the over-70s, care home residents, extremely vulnerable people and health and care workers.

Then all over-50s and under-50s with long-term health problems would be offered the booster vaccine.

Mr Javid said last week: ‘When it comes to booster jabs we are waiting for the final advice from JCVI... and when we get that advice we will be able to start the booster programme, but I anticipate it will begin in early September, so I’m already making plans for that.

‘It’s really important that when we start that programme, the sort of first cohorts, the ones that got the jabs early on when we started our programme – the first in the world back in December last year – that those cohorts come first and so we will be prioritising it.’

Millions are set to be offered a third jab from September after Health Secretary Sajid Javid (above) announced the roll-out to priority group

A Government spokesman said: ‘We are preparing for a booster programme to ensure those most vulnerable to Covid-19 have protection extended ahead of winter and against new variants.

‘Any booster programme will be based on the final advice of the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation.

‘Until we receive the independent JCVI advice no decisions can be made on wider requirements for those who receive booster jabs.

‘The phenomenal vaccine rollout is building a wall of defence across the country, with over 66,900 hospitalisations prevented and more than 84,000 lives saved.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The former Prime Minister's wife was refused entry in 1976 while husband Tony was allowed inside with her law course supervisor

Over 300 lawyers have petitioned for women to be admitted as members

Cherie Blair has backed a campaign to end the ban on women joining a historic London gentleman's club - almost 50 years after staff barred her during a visit with her future husband.

The former Prime Minister's wife, who is a trained barrister, signed the petition calling for the Garrick Club to revoke its no-female members rule ahead of the club's 190th anniversary today.

Giving her support to the campaign, she recalled who she had tried to get into the club in 1976 with Tony Blair when they were law pupils at the chambers of Derry Irvine, but was left out in the cold.

'Forty five years ago, I was left standing outside the Garrick while my supervisor took my fellow pupil Tony Blair inside. It's outrageous that so little progress has been made since then,' she said.

Cherie Blair has backed a campaign to end the ban on women joining a historic London gentleman's club - almost 50 years after staff barred her during a visit with her future husband

The Garrick Club, which opened 190 years, is regarded as one of the last men-only bastions in the UK although women guests are welcome as visitors in most parts of the Club

The 66-year old added that the rule was not 'consistent with a commitment to equality and diversity'.

Cherie married Tony in 1980, and while Prime Minister, Mr Irvine served Lord Chancellor a member of the House of Lords.

She founded Omnia Strategy chambers in Marylebone, and joins more than 300 top lawyers backing the petition by Women At The Garrick Club.

Actor Nigel Havers, 69, himself a Garrick member, also supports the move to allow women members and said in a statement: 'Surely it is time for the Garrick to haul itself into the 21st century.'

The 1,400-member club in central London which was founded in 1831, and whose past members have included Charles Dickens, H. G. Wells, J. M. Barrie, A. A. Milne, Kingsley Amis, Sir Laurence Olivier and Sir John Gielgud, still stipulates in its rules that no women are allowed to join the club.

It is regarded as one of the last men-only bastions in the UK although women guests are welcome as visitors in most parts of the Club. It is thought 25 per cent of the senior judiciary holds membership at the Garrick, plus dozens of QCs.

Giving her support to the campaign, she recalled who she had tried to get into the club in 1976 with Tony Blair when they were law pupils at the chambers of Derry Irvine, but was left out in the cold. Pictured: Tony and Cherie in 1983

The online petition was created by lingerie tycoon Emily Bendell, 40, from East London, who sent a legal letter to the club in September 2020 stating that it's ban of female members amounted to sex discrimination under section 29 of the Equality Act of 2010.

The petition states: 'The undersigned believe that membership of the Garrick cannot be consistent with a commitment to equality and diversity.

'We urge the Garrick's members to consider whether they would remain members of a club that excluded based on race, religion, or sexuality. We invite the members of the Garrick to behave ethically, to call a vote and to vote in favour of admitting women.'

Several QCs to have signed the petition have been strident in their condemnation of the gender ban.

Leading equality law silk Rachel Crasnow QC at Cloisters Chambers said: 'Membership of a discriminatory club is at odds with one's professional commitment to equality. How can barristers or judges justify continuing as members of the Garrick, would they belong to a club that barred gay people or Jews?'

She added: 'The Bar has an ongoing problem with inclusion, diversity and equal pay to say nothing of retention. I'm concerned about what message young women entering the profession are given if the judge before whom they appear or even their pupil supervisor, has chosen to join a club which has no regard for gender equality.'

Top human rights barrister Michael Mansfield QC said: 'The Garrick has a place in history but that is where it should remain. It is plainly untouched by any meaningful values and is sustained by privilege and prejudice.'

Cherie added that the Garrick's rule was not 'consistent with a commitment to equality and diversity'

Prominent clinical negligence Joel Donovan QC said: 'I do not consider Garrick membership to be compatible with the judicial oath. I know that some judges, wisely, have given up their membership. Regrettably others, less wise, have yet to do so.'

Fellow personal injury law specialist Patricia Hitchcock QC said: 'Having been in the first year of girls at Westminster and the second year of women at Brasenose, weathered the storms of applying for pupillage when pregnant and combining early practice with parenting a small child, and dealt daily with some pretty unreconstructed reactions to my presence at the Bar, I thought that the bastion had been stormed.

'As I approach retirement it is deeply saddening to see that women are still being disadvantaged at the Bar and in the judiciary by 'behind closed doors' male-only networking. It is past time for this to end.'

In 2015, current Garrick club members including actors Damian Lewis, Hugh Bonneville and Stephen Fry were among 50.5 per cent who voted in favour of allowing female members at its AGM - but it as still far short of the two-thirds majority needed for a rule change.

Politicians Michael Gove, Ken Clarke and broadcasters Sir Trevor McDonald, Melvyn Bragg and Jeremy Paxman were also in favour of women joining but three former Conservative MPs and 11 QCs were among those who said they would vote to continue to exclude women members.

The online petition was created by lingerie tycoon Emily Bendell, 39, from East London, who has instructed lawyers to use UK Equality law to seek an injunction preventing the Garrick from 'continuing to operate its discriminatory policy' which she claims is 'unlawful'

At the time Supreme Court Judge Baroness Hale protested about the club's continued exclusion of women saying: 'I regard it as quite shocking that so many of my colleagues belong to the Garrick, but they don't see what all the fuss is about,' arguing that judges 'should be committed to the principle of equality for all.'

Ms Bendell who is the chief executive of lingerie brand Bluebella.com said: 'The Garrick's policy is outdated. The highest-ranking members of the legal profession participate in and preside over court cases that have far-reaching effects.

'It should not be the case that women are under-represented in places of such influence and members of the judiciary should not be building personal and professional relationships in an arena in which women are barred.'

'Irrespective of any tangible benefit that membership of the Garrick Club offers, association with a club that exercises such an exclusionary rule cannot be consistent with the commitment to equality and diversity that we would expect from leaders of the legal profession.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the favourites to succeed Len McCluskey as boss of the giant union Unite was last night caught up in a row over ‘bully-boy’ tactics to target the family of one of Britain’s richest men.

Sharon Graham was challenged to disown a plan to win a bitter battle with Ineos chemicals tycoon Sir Jim Ratcliffe. The controversial tactic was drawn up in 2013 during a bitter industrial dispute between Unite and Ineos at its Grangemouth oil refinery.

The ‘private and confidential’ plan, devised by Ms Graham’s own national organising and leverage department at Unite, talked of opening ‘dialogue’ with Sir Jim’s former wife as well as checking where one of his sons, who worked for Ineos, played rugby.

Unite union hopeful Sharon Graham, pictured, has refused to disavow a plot to target the family of Sir Jim Ratcliffe during a bitter dispute with one of Britain's richest men concerning his company Ineos

Ms Graham hopes to replace Unite general Secretary Len McCluskey who is standing down

The powerful union even proposed enlisting the support of former Manchester United manager and Labour backer Sir Alex Ferguson, as Ineos boss Sir Jim is a fan of the team.

Last night, Left-winger Ms Graham, one of three candidates bidding to succeed ‘Red Len’ as general secretary, insisted she did not write the plan and was not in charge of the union’s action. But she made no apology for targeting the families of entrepreneurs in some cases.

Her spokesman said: ‘Employers never think of families when they fire and rehire workers at will.

‘Company owners’ families are included in a campaign only if they have major business links to the company concerned. If employers object to that, it is hypocrisy.’

Gerard Coyne – the favoured candidate of Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer’s – condemned the draft plans. He told The Mail on Sunday: ‘The targeting and harassment of people’s families is totally unacceptable.’

The current ballot to succeed Mr McCluskey, a staunch ally of ex-Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, is seen as vital to Sir Keir’s future as Unite is one of the party biggest financial backers. Last week, Mr McCluskey claimed the party could ‘go under’ with Sir Keir at the helm.

Mr McCluskey was challenged yesterday to reveal how much union money was spent concealing that he was in a relationship with Mr Corbyn’s ex-chief of staff Karie Murphy.

In a new book, Mr McCluskey, who previously denied the relationship, boasts of his game of ‘cat and mouse’ with the press to suppress the story. Mr Coyne called on him to reveal how much Unite members’ money had been spent on the denials.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Robbie Williams has reflected on the mental health battles he faced at the height of his fame.

The singer, 47, discussed the struggles he faced with depression and anxiety after landing a spot in Take That at the age of 16.

Speaking to Chris Difford, 66, on his I Never Thought It Would Happen podcast, the 18-time Brit Award winner divulged into his own experiences with depression and anxiety with the Squeeze bandmember.

'I hated myself': Robbie Williams admitted he felt guilty for suffering with depression and anxiety after being given a 'golden ticket' into Take That

Robbie said he couldn't enjoy his career despite being given a 'golden ticket' at the age of 16 when he was chosen to be in the superstar band Take That.

He admitted: 'I couldn't jot down one nice thing about myself.

'I hated myself... the high bits [of my career] were married with a really, really dark depression and deep anxiety. And none of it was enjoyable.

'The fact that none of it was enjoyable made me deeply unhappy because I'd been given the golden ticket. This isn't an uncommon story.'

Troubled: Robbie said he couldn't enjoy his success in Take That due to his mental health struggles (pictured with Howard Donald, Gary Barlow, Mark Owen and Jason Orange in 1991)

Opening up: Speaking to Chris Difford, 66, (right) the popstar (left) divulged into his own experiences with depression and anxiety with the Squeeze bandmember

After notoriously exiting the five-piece in 1995, he thought he would be playing at Knebworth, where rival band Oasis had performed to a 250,000-strong crowd.

The issue was that the Staffordshire-born singer hadn't even written a song by that point.

Becoming visibly emotional, Robbie spoke of his overconfidence as he decided to embark on a solo career.

Despite wanting to be like Radiohead, Oasis and Blur, he described himself as more of a 'cabaret act' and couldn't help but be 'musical theatre'.

Overconfident: After exiting the five-piece in 1995, Robbie thought he would be playing at Knebworth, where rival band Oasis had performed to a 250,000-strong crowd (pictured in 1996)

Robbie praised his wife for creating stability in his life and claimed family life is a 'different level'.

The Rock DJ hitmaker began dating actress Ayda Field, 42, in 2006 and they welcomed their first child, Theodora, eight, in 2012.

They are also proud parents to Beau, one, Colette (Coco), two, whom they welcomed via surrogate and son Charlton Valentine Williams, six.

The I Never Thought It Would Happen podcast series, from the charity Help Musicians, features the likes of Sting, Billy Bragg, Yungblud and Tom Odell shining a light on the highs and lows musicians face.

The full episode is available from all the major podcast providers now.

Help Musicians offers mental health support for anyone working in music. Visit musicmindsmatter.org.uk or call 08080 802 8008.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her first child, Consy, tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019.

And pregnant Malin Andersson has revealed she is expecting another girl with boyfriend Jared, and has told that the baby is due on same date as her late daughter Consy.

The former Love Island star, 28, hosted a gender reveal party over the weekend for 80 friends at her Cambridgeshire home, with a plane flying overhead releasing pink smoke to reveal that she is carrying a girl.

It's a girl! Malin Andersson, 28, has revealed she is expecting another girl with boyfriend Jared, and has told that the baby is due on same date as her late daughter Consy

Malin told OK! 'From the get-go I knew it was a girl, I had this gut feeling. So I was super happy. It just made sense to me.'

'Even though I knew what the gender was, because I went to the scan myself, when I saw the smoke it brought up loads of emotions.

'It made me feel really emotional. It confirmed it was real, in a weird way. It was like a little miracle and a blessing.

'To make it even more special, my new baby shares the same due date as my daughter Consy.'

Exciting: The former Love Island star, 28, is expecting a baby girl with boyfriend Jared

Last week, Malin shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse.

Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse at the hands of her ex Tom Kemp when she was pregnant with her first child, who sadly passed away.

She wrote: 'It isn't until you are amongst peace that you realise what your life used to be like.

'Sometimes my life right now feels too good to be true. I don't like delving into my past unless it's to make a point & help you all to understand transition and strength - and this time I would like to compare how different my pregnancies are.

'Firstly, I have never been with anyone so loving and attentive.. that makes my soul shine and brings out only the best in me.

'I know this sounds so cringe as I write it - but when something so pure lands into your life, it almost feels alien if you've never experienced it before.

Radiant: Last week, Malin shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse

'My pregnancy so far has been stress free, calm and peaceful.. and a lot of that is down to me having a loving and stable relationship. One that has great communication and understanding - and most of all patience.

'I look back 3 years ago to when I was pregnant with Consy, and how volatile my relationship was then; and how I would wake up each day with severe anxiety, panic attacks and stress.

'With every argument and attack would come the tensing of my stomach and the knowing that my little girl could feel all the pain I felt too.

'It saddens me to think that I thought that was 'love' - and it breaks my heart knowing I let myself endure the emotional and physical pain whilst carrying something so precious - but this is what you call domestic abuse.'

Malin encouraged any of her followers who may be experiencing domestic abuse to go and seek help.

Candid: Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse when she was pregnant with her first child Consy who tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019

She wrote: 'Domestic abuse does not discriminate. If you are pregnant it can actually get worse.

'Domestic abuse during pregnancy puts a pregnant woman and her unborn child in danger. It increases the risk of miscarriage, infection, premature birth, low birth weight, foetal injury and foetal death.

'If you are pregnant and being abused, there is help. Your abusive partner is not only potentially endangering your life, but also the life of your unborn baby.

'With this, I am sending you all so much love. The transition my life has endured has been surreal - I never thought I would make it through the heartache and agony.

'But I'm here. I'm thriving. I'm smiling. And I've survived it.'

Speaking out: It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy

It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy.

Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing.

She wrote: 'Hey. It feels like I've been here with you before. I have. I'll be honest, 3 years ago feels like a blur to me.. but feeling a new human growing inside me again feels so familiar. It scares me.

'So I'm here to welcome you on my journey with my rainbow baby. I know that sharing how I feel resonates.. and I want those that are struggling to conceive, or have lost a baby and are trying, pregnant with their rainbow baby or feel like their happy ending hasn't come yet - to see a clearer view through my life.

'And that actually we must trust the timing in everything. I haven't spoken to you much yet on how I've felt.. to be honest it's been a very weird journey so far. I was hesitant to even reveal my pregnancy.

'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen. I've been very quiet.

Pregnancy: The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

'Malin quiet? That's strange - the queen of positive thinking.. waking up each day with not much to say. Just hope in her heart that baby will make it another day..'

Malin added that she appreciates every minute of life and is hoping for the best, adding that Consy is 'integrated' in her.

She said: 'See the reality is, we never really know what life can throw at us - we must remain present & mindful.. appreciate every minute. For sure I hope for the best, but I can't help past trauma creep up on me. She's integrated in me.

'Consy lives through me each day. I see her brown eyes open one last time.. and it gives me fear.. fear of the unknown. So what do I do? I've been going to therapy; remaining consistent.

'This has brought up a whole lot of unresolved feelings & pain that I seemed to have blocked out.. don't get me wrong I have the most amount of love and joy in my heart - but as I said.. I'm only human.'

The reality star added that she gets 'goosebumps' when she thinks about welcoming her child.

Relationship: Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing (pictured with her boyfriend Jared)

She wrote: 'We tend to always think the worst. When I realise what's growing inside me, I get goosebumps, I have to have a double take. Isn't it sad that sometimes things seem too good to be true? Well maybe, just maybe they aren't.

'I keep telling myself that this is my time.. And for f****n' sure - it is. Believe in your time. I'm here to tell you that your ending is only your beginning. Ma.'

The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

Malin revealed she was expecting a baby earlier this month when she a snap of her baby bump, with her hands and her boyfriend Jared's hands resting on it.

Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was being treated at Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away aged four weeks on 22 January 2019.

Malin wrote: 'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen'

Since then Malin has struggled with further strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison.

Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January.

The Sun recently reported that Tom - who was serving the remaining term on Home Detention Curfew - recently visited the area that the Love Island star lives.

He was then reportedly sent back to prison after failing to comply with the rules he was set as he continued to serve part of his sentence in the community.

A source told the publication: 'Malin was really shocked when she heard he had been in her area.

Tragic: Her daughter Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was treated at London's Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away on 22 January 2019

'She had really hoped his prison sentence would mark the end of having to think about him ever again.

'The whole thing has been incredibly stressful, but Malin is very strong and just hopes he's learnt his lesson now.'

A source also told MailOnline: 'Malin was glad to hear that Tom had been sent back to prison for breaching his license conditions, but to learn that he only returned for a week due to his sentence coming to an end concerns her.

'She feels that far too often the justice system fails survivors of domestic violence and ultimately believes that this contributes to the reason why perpetrators continue to abuse.'

Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand.

Scary: Malin has struggled with strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex Tom Kemp recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison (pictured together in 2019)

TV star Malin previously accused the 'narcissist' of being abusive in Instagram posts in 2019 and shared pictures of herself with a cut cheek and bloodied nose.

But Tom, from Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, denied the claims at the time, branding her a 'liar with mental health issues'.

The former couple had an on-off romance, splitting briefly during her pregnancy, amid claims Tom had been unfaithful to her, but reconciling shortly before the birth.

In March they split again, with Malin admitting it was better to end things between them as she and her partner struggled with their grief.

In October, Malin told how she believes the physical abuse Tom subjected her to while she was pregnant was a factor behind her daughter's death at just one month old.

Awful: Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January (Malin pictured with her injuries - taken at the time)

She revealed Kemp 'slapped and punched' her while she was six months pregnant, causing her to fall on her back and her stomach to hit the side of a bed.

Speaking to The Sun, Malin said she is convinced the incident contributed to Consy's death as after a few days, she noticed she wasn't moving around as much.

A month later, the movements reduced again and Malin insisted Kemp drive her to the hospital where doctors discovered Consy's irregular heartbeat, leading her to have an emergency cesarean that day at Great Ormond Street Hospital.

She said: 'When Tom threw me about, I'd tense my stomach so much, I could feel her pausing inside me. The doctors didn't understand what happened to her, but I know in my heart.'

Injuries: Tom left Malin with broken bones and bruises in a violent tirade

In June last year, Malin posted a lengthy Instagram post, captioned: 'The third and final lot, I am NOT a victim anymore.'

Calling their romance 'toxic and unhealthy', she said 'it has been an ongoing battle to emotionally let go as dealing with the grief from both my mum and daughter I've had him as my comforter.'

Accusing Kemp of emotional and physical abuse she said: 'Including being spat at, hit, pushed, kicked, scratched, spoken down to, controlled, manipulated, cheated and so much more I experienced the worst pain yet to come last night.'

Malin claimed she had received a phone call from a woman asking why the star had been texting her 'boyfriend.'

She wrote: 'After a calm and collected call with her we had finally came to the confirmation they have been speaking since January (when our daughter was in intensive care).'

Shocking: Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand (pictured are the injuries to her face)

'While I've been focusing on my mental health I've been receiving multiple emails, calls, texts from one extreme to the other (I'm a bad mum, my mum hates me I'm going to hell to the extreme of I love you I can't be without you etc.

'This ladies is a fine example of a narcissistic man.

'I will NOT be another victim to domestic violence, I will not be beaten mentally or physically when I've fought through so much worse than this.

Adding that she was 'exhausted, heartbroken and confused' she urged her followers to 'listen to your gut and learn to love yourself.'

If you are a victim of domestic abuse, call Refuge's freephone, 24-hour National Domestic Abuse Helpline on 0808 2000 247

If you have been affected by the death of a baby please call Sands on 0808 164 3332 or email helpline@sands.org.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ulrika Jonsson has marked her 54th birthday with a playful series of selfies that appear to have been taken from the comfort of her bed.

Ringing in her special day on Instagram on Monday, the TV star looked radiant while pulling faces for her social media followers and declaring: 'This is 54.'

Posting a lengthy caption alongside the intimate snaps, Ulrika branded herself 'a complicated soul' and 'a lioness of boundless proportions'.

Birthday: Ulrika Jonsson has marked her 54th birthday with a playful series of selfies that appear to be taken from the comfort of her bed

Special day: Ringing in her special day on Instagram on Monday, the TV star looked fresh-faced while pulling faces for her social media followers and declaring: 'This is 54'

Ulrika wrote in full: 'This is 54. Happy Birthday, to me. What I know so far: I'm a lioness of boundless proportions. I am fierce; I am loyal. Passion courses through my veins; fire scorches my heart and imagination canters like a wild horse through my buoyant, tangled mind.

'I love with reckless abandon and ardour at times when caution and circumspection might be the order of the day. Lying down with lions has never perturbed me. But the futility of attempting to change the shape of my heart has never been lost on me. I am who I am.'

She added: 'I may be too much. But I am never not enough. I'm instinctive and intuitive. An empath; a lover, a carer and nurturer. I am learning to put myself first but it turns out to be a vigorous lesson to learn. I am a woman of substance. I am a complicated soul.'

Ulrika concluded: 'I can be apprehensive and impatient. And I don't like goat's cheese.'

'Complicated soul': Posting a lengthy caption alongside the intimate snaps, Ulrika branded herself 'a complicated soul' and 'a lioness of boundless proportions'

Ulrika's birthday post comes four days after she returned from Corfu, where she had been visiting her eldest daughter, Bo.

While there, the doting mother shared plenty of sunny snaps with her followers, including a sizzling series of bathroom selfies in which she donned a bright yellow bikini.

Ulrika added: 'I love with reckless abandon and ardour at times when caution and circumspection might be the order of the day'

Ulrika set off for her mother-daughter holiday shortly after revealing her youngest son Malcolm, 13, finally had settled status in the UK and can remain for an 'indefinite period'.

Malcolm recently returned from America where his advertising executive father Brian Monet is from.

Ulrika said the thought of him being 'adopted abroad' would have been 'messy' so she is grateful to have him back home.

The media personality took to Instagram earlier in August to share a snap of Malcolm posing with a lightsaber.

Alongside the post, she wrote: 'Tonight I had a 27min instruction on lightsabers from the youngest Ungrateful.

Ulrika concluded: 'I can be apprehensive and impatient. And I don't like goat's cheese'

'He has just returned from the States where he custom made one. Himself.

'This is important because today I was told by the @ukhomeoffice that this half-yank, half-Viking boy has been given leave to stay in this country for an indefinite period. He finally has Settled Status.

'Which is a huge relief because the thought of having him adopted abroad was gonna be messy.

Age-defying: Ulrika's birthday post comes four days after she returned from Corfu, where she had been visiting her eldest daughter, Bo, and the star shared snaps of her holiday

Relieved: Ulrika revealed her youngest son Malcolm (pictured), 13, has finally settled status in the UK and can remain for an 'indefinite period'

'So thank you, UK for letting me keep him by my side. And if anyone is interested in lightsabers, you know where to find the bugger.'

Ulrika was married to ex-husband Brian for eleven years before the couple parted ways in 2019.

She is also mother to son Cameron, 26, with John Turnbull, daughter Bo with ex Markus Kempen and daughter Martha, 17, with Lance Gerrard-Wright.

Ex: Malcolm recently returned from America where his advertising executive father Brian Monet is from. Ulrika pictured with Brian in 2013
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sheridan Smith and David Walliams look unrecoginsable in the first look images from Hansel & Gretel: After Ever After.

Taking to Instagram to show off their new looks, Sheridan quipped this is how they look 'without a filter' in the images - which saw the pair transformed into a wicked witch and troll.

It's the second time the pair have teamed up for Sky One, after both taking part in last year's Jack & The Beanstalk: After Ever After.

'Me with no filter!' Sheridan Smith transformed into a wicked witch while David Walliams morphed into a troll in first look at Hansel & Gretel: After Ever After

The After Ever After takes a look at what would happen after the 'happily ever after' in classic fairytales, with this new project focusing on the villains in Hansel and Gretel.

In the snaps, Sheridan, 40, sports a prosthetic nose and crooked yellow teeth while clad in a black smock and witches hat.

David, 49, dons a brown troll mask with seaweed attached to his head and giant fangs.

Sheridan captioned the snaps: 'Me and the tv husband @dwalliams with no filter! god he gives me such glamorous roles!'

While David quipped the pair were 'looking lovelier than ever'.

While an exact release date has yet to be announced, Hansel & Gretel: After Ever After is expected to air around Christmas time.

New look: Taking to Instagram to show off their new looks, Sheridan quipped this is how they look 'without a filter' in the images - which saw the pair transformed into fairy tale creatures

Sheridan's new project comes after she confirmed her split from ex-fiancé Jamie Horn last month - a year after they welcomed their son Billy together.

The couple shared a statement addressing their break up to The Sun, earlier this month, which read: 'It is with great sadness that we have decided to have some time apart.'

'We both remain completely committed to raising our beautiful boy Billy together. We ask that you respect our privacy during this difficult time. Thank you.'

A source told OK! magazine at the time: 'Sheridan is struggling to get through the split. She put him out there for everyone to see and she really thought he was The One.'

Back to their glamorous selves: David and Sheridan have worked together on past projects and are good friends (pictured together in 2013)

The insider also claimed that splitting from Jamie brought back pain Sheridan felt after losing her father Colin, who died from cancer, in 2016.

'She's devastated. This has brought back all the feelings of missing her dad because he was her tower of strength,' the source added.

'In her heart she's hoping they can make it right, but it doesn't look like there's any way back. They have a baby together and it's tough. She's heartbroken.'

Iconic duo: It's the second time the pair have teamed up for Sky One, after both taking part in last year's Jack & The Beanstalk: After Ever After

Sheridan and Jamie first began dating in 2018 after meeting on Tinder and reportedly got engaged after just three months together.

Jamie is said to have proposed to Sheridan in May 2018 and the couple were living together in a rented property in North London.

Sheridan's ex Jamie had appeared onscreen alongside her in a one-off documentary, titled Sheridan Smith: Becoming Mum, she filmed for ITV. It was released in 2020 and followed her pregnancy as a first time mum.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Wanted star Max George was left battered and bruised on Sunday after having an accident - which could have left him blind - while he was swimming in the Adriatic Sea.

The singer, 32, who recently jetted abroad on holiday, had posted pictures of himself on Instagram by the sea, enjoying a platter of fresh fruit as he bathed in the sunshine.

Then Max, who recently filmed action movie Kill/Stream, decided he would try to see some more of the aquatic life around him by going swimming.

'Always wear goggles in the sea': The Wanted's Max George was left battered and bruised on Sunday after having an accident - which could have left him blind - while swimming in the sea

Unfortunately things took a turn for the worse as Max dived into the water and painfully collided with a rock on the seabed.

Showing off scratches to his face and an injury just below his eye, the frowning star told fans: 'Always wear goggles in the sea…'

He then joked: 'You should see the other guy. A MASSIVE rock at the bottom of the Adriatic.'

After fellow Wanted singer Tom Parker remarked on his Instagram post: 'Getting beaten up by the rock,' Max laughed: 'I hit my face on a rock at the bottom of the sea.'

'Looking for sun rays': The singer, 32, who recently jetted abroad on holiday, had posted pictures of himself on Instagram enjoying a platter of fresh fruit as he bathed in the sunshine

Ouch! Unfortunately things took a turn for the worse as Max dived into the water and painfully collided with a rock on the seabed

Max’s girlfriend Stacey Giggs admitted that Max was a ‘muppet’ following the incident.

The pop sensation's injury around his right eye was particularly dangerous as Max already has sight loss in his right eye.

Max nearly lost his sight to an eye infection ten years ago, meaning part of his left eye had to be removed, but then he also had problems with his right.

He said at the time: 'I can’t see properly out of my right. My left eye does all the work.'

The upload comes after Max's former bandmate Tom, 33, revealed earlier in August that his cancer tumour has slightly reduced and his condition is stable after his latest scan which took place on his birthday.

The Wanted star admitted he was filled with worry ahead of his scan but got good news, despite it being later than usual.

'The tumour is slightly smaller': The upload comes after Max's former bandmate Tom Parker, 33, revealed that his cancer tumour has slightly reduced and his condition is stable

He told fans online: 'OK... here goes. The last couple of days have been filled with dread and worry but I’m pleased to announce that the results of yesterday’s scan (lovely birthday present), are stable with a slight reduction in the tumour if anything.

'I can’t tell you how grateful I am to receive this news. We left it a little longer between scans this time just to give time for the medication to work etc but overall a great day.

'Thanks to all our healthcare team. You are truly wonderful. And thank you all you lovely people out there sending love and support. It really is so appreciated. Time to celebrate.'

Tom previously revealed he's making a documentary about his terminal brain cancer, admitting that it has been an 'emotional process' so far.

The Wanted singer told his fans in October that he had been diagnosed with stage four Glioblastoma and he has been sharing his health battle on social media ever since.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

He's best known for his appearance in Netflix's Selling Sunset alongside his twin brother.

And Brett Oppenheim, 44, enjoyed a break from filming on Sunday when he worked up a sweat in the sunshine, getting stuck into a game of volleyball with his bikini-clad partner Tina Louise, 40.

The duo – who packed on the PDA - were joined at the beach by FBoy Island stars CJ Franco and Sarah Emig.

Beach day: Brett Oppenheim, 44, worked up a sweat in the sunshine on Sunday, getting stuck into a game of volleyball with his bikini-clad partner Tina Louise, 40

Australian model Tina showcased her enviable physique in a hot pink bikini top and striped bottoms, making sure all eyes were on her impressive collection of tattoos.

Tina wore her bright blonde hair pulled back into a short ponytail.

Property mogul Brett opted for a bright pair of multi-coloured swimming trunks and appeared in high spirits while lapping up the balmy California weather.

It comes after Tina hinted that her romance with Brett was over in a telling social media post shared in June.

Hot pink: Australian model Tina showcased her enviable physique in a hot pink bikini top and striped bottoms, making sure all eyes were on her impressive collection of tattoos

Trunks: Property mogul Brett opted for a bright pair of multi-coloured swimming trunks and appeared in high spirits while lapping up the balmy California weather

Hair up: Australian model Tina wore her bright blonde hair swept back into a ponytail

Chatting away: Enjoying each other's company, Brett and Tina were seen chatting away in the sunshine

Tina spoke about her dating life while using a quirky filter that made it look like a man was hugging her from behind.

'A lot of you guys have been asking if I have been seeing anyone,' she said.

'And, well, there's this one guy, Steven, who is super clingy, and yeah, Steven,' she added, referring to the filter.

Staying hydrated: Brett sipped on a drink and made sure to stay hydrated in the hot weather

Sunshine at bay: Tina kept the sunshine at bay behind a stylish pair of sunglasses and could barely stop smiling

All in the details: The blonde bombshell accessorised with a delicate necklace and wore bracelets on each wrist

However, weeks after she shared the post her and Brett were seen enjoying a double date with Brett's Selling Sunset co-stars Mary Fitzgerald and Romain Bonnet at Westlake Village Inn in Los Angeles.

Tina and Brett nestled into each other while sitting at a table with the reality TV crew.

The couples were later seen in a model car, which Romain joking that it was the crew's new 'whip'.

Phone in hand: While conversing with her partner Tina held her phone in her right hand

Ripped: Brett showed off his ripped physique while enjoying a game of volleyball

Friends: Brett was seen chatting away to TV star Sarah Emig

Wow: Sarah, 25, wowed in a skimpy, nude-hued string bikini

Hair down: Sarah wore her bright blonde hair loose and beamed while talking to friend Brett

'Last night was a blast! So much fun and different from our usual night in WEHO! Thanks again @brettoppenheim for ride in your new whip!!,' he wrote.

Tina confirmed her relationship with Brett in April when they went 'Instagram official' on holiday.

The swimsuit-clad duo looked playful as they strolled along the golden sand in photos shared on their respective accounts.

Rings: Tina also wore gorgeous rings when she enjoyed a beach day at the end of the week

Giggling: Tina and CJ Franco, 30, shared a joke while relaxing in the sand

Headphones: CJ wore headphones while strolling across the beach with Tina

It's unclear how long they have been a couple.

Over the last year, Tina has been linked to a number of high-profile men, including Brian Austin Green and P. Diddy.

Tina and Brian were first linked in May 2020 after the actor separated from his estranged wife Megan Fox.

In October, she was spotted making out with rap mogul Sean Combs on a Malibu beach, but it's unclear if they were ever an official item.

Taking a breather: Sarah enjoyed a short break from her game of volley ball by sitting on a blue towel

Back at it: It wasn't long before Sarah stood back up with the volleyball

Unreal: The blonde bombshell looked beautiful in the skimpy two-piece
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jason Momoa says he's kept his work on the TV series Baywatch under wrap from his kids.

The Aquaman leading man, 42, who shares daughter Lola Iolani, 14, and son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12, with wife Lisa Bonet, 53, was asked on the Australian program Fitzy & Wippa what they think of his early career work on Baywatch.

The 6ft4 screen star, who played the role of Jason Ioane on 44 episodes of the show from 1999 until 2001, replied, 'We don't say the B word here. We hide all of that mate! Never happened mate!'

The latest: Jason Momoa told the Australian program Fitzy & Wippa that he's kept his work on the TV series Baywatch under wrap from his kids, daughter Lola Iolani, 14, and son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12

'We don't talk about those words, the B word didn't happen,' he said.

The Honolulu, Hawaii native also said his kids haven't seen his work on the HBO show Game of Thrones, as he played the role of Khal Drogo from 2011-2012.

'They're not going to watch Game of Thrones either even though it's fantastic,' he said of the series, which contained graphic scenes depicting sex and violence.

He added: 'So right now superheroes and we're good.'

Hilarious: Momoa joked of the show, 'We don't talk about those words, the B word didn't happen'

Flashback: (L-R) Momoa, Jason Brooks and Michael Bergin were seen on the show Baywatch Hawaii in 2000

Things in the Zoom interview took an awkward turn when Wippa's wife Lisa gatecrashed the interview and revealed she had a little crush on the Hollywood hunk.

After the couple enjoyed a few cocktails before the chat, Lisa worked up the confidence to tell Momoa that he's welcome to stay at their $6.5million Rose Bay mansion the next time he's in Sydney.

'Hang on, my wife has just walked in, she was responsible for the eyebrow,' Wippa explained, after he shaved his eyebrow to match Jason's trademark eyebrow scar.

'Do you want to ask Jason a question honey?' Wippa asked.

Lisa excitedly chimed in, saying: 'Hi how are you Jason? Congratulations on the movie. This might sound really creepy, but when Covid-19 is over you're more than welcome to stay with us, we have a spare bedroom!'

Momoa hilariously quipped back: 'I'm there!'

Wippa then dryly remarked: 'You can hop out now honey. You were warned Jason, I apologize about that!'

Leading man: Jason spent time in Australia in 2017 as he filed Aquaman on the Gold Coast

Can't blame a girl for trying! Nova star Michael 'Wippa' Wipfli's wife Lisa left the radio host red-faced as she crashed his interview with Jason Momoa over the weekend

The American actor even hilariously tried out an Aussie accent every now and then throughout the chat, saying 'mate' with a twang upon occasion.

At one point, he spoke about his signature long hair with an Aussie accent and quipped: 'I've got the blonde ends mate!'

Momoa also sent a sweet message to his Australian fans, telling them to keep strong while in lockdown amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

'Tell everyone in Australia I love them,' Momoa said. 'I truly enjoy your country, sorry about the lockdown, I hope you all stay safe.'

The A-list action star appeared to promote his new project Sweet Girl, which is slated to be released August 20.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A scientist has won £23,000 in damages after she was demoted by a government-backed body after having a premature baby.

Dr Katie Lidster, 38, had worked for UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) for seven years when she went on maternity leave to have her second child Daisy.

The mother-of-two, who had been based in Devon but often attended overseas conferences and commuted into London once a week, had to undergo a caesarean section two months before the due date.

Daisy came out weighing just 2lb 11oz and had to be fed through a tube during a 53-day stay in neonatal care following her arrival.

Dr Lidster, who was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder but was having counselling and had been feeling positive again, got in touch with her employer seven months after the C-section to discuss her return, The Mirror reports.

But her line manager told her it would not be appropriate to return to her position and was offered a job with fewer responsibilities for four days a week.

Dr Katie Lidster, 38, had worked for UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) for seven years when she went on maternity leave to have her second child Daisy

Dr Lidster, who has a PhD in neuroimmunology from Queen Mary University of London, resigned in December, and UKRI (headquarters pictured) admitted culpability at a Bristol employment tribunal and was ordered to pay £23,000 plus interest in damages

She was also told that her former job did not exist anymore, but five weeks later she found a nearly identical role being advertised internally.

A colleague had sent her the advert, and the job was given to the person who had been doing Dr Lidster's maternity cover.

The mother-of-two, who had been based in Devon but often attended overseas conferences and commuted into London once a week, had to undergo a caesarean section two months before the due date

Dr Lidster said: 'They had added one word to the job description and one responsibility, which I had been doing anyway.'

Dr Lidster, who has a PhD in neuroimmunology from Queen Mary University of London, resigned in December, and UKRI admitted culpability at a Bristol employment tribunal and was ordered to pay £23,000 plus interest in damages.

She had been represented by her husband, Met Office meteorologist Aidan McGivern, as they could not afford to pay for a barrister.

Dr Lidster, who now works for university group GW4, said: 'I can now focus on spending quality time with my family, especially my girls and start to refocus my career.

'At the time I didn't realise how long the whole process would take. They had taken my career away from me so I had no option but to fight for justice.'

Following reports of her case, Dr Lidster tweeted: 'When people ask how I battled for 18 months… it was this. My inner voice telling me to keep going. And after the worse thing had happened to me, I let go of fear.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The body of Esther Dingley, the British hiker who went missing in the Pyrenees late last year, has been found by her boyfriend close to where her skull was discovered a fortnight ago.

French detectives were led to the spot by Dan Colegate, 38, who made the grim discovery after scouring walking routes the 37-year-old took, he said announcing the news today.

'Yesterday, on the afternoon of August 9, Esther Dingley's body and equipment were found together in the Pyrenees, close to where a bone was discovered two weeks ago', he said in a statement.

Esther went missing on November 22 while solo hiking in the Pyrenees. She was reported missing by Colegate on November 24, just a day before her trip was due to end, sparking a massive manhunt.

The search was suspended in December due to deteriorating weather but resumed in the Spring and human remains, later confirmed to be a piece of Esther's skull, were found a fortnight ago.

Yesterday's grim discovery comes hours after French investigators admitted for the first time that Esther's death may have been a murder and they 'are not closing the door to any hypothesis'.

The rest of the body of Esther Dingley, (pictured with boyfriend Dan Colegate) the British hiker who went missing in the Pyrenees late last year, has been found

Esther's remains and equipment were found by boyfriend Dan Colegate on Monday as he scoured the routes the 37-year-old took

A team of forensic specialists and mountain rescue personnel were sent to the site where her remains were found to 'catalogue the scene and recover Esther' said an investigating source.

‘They have set up a survey area in the spot where the missing person’s body was recovered, and are gathering as much new evidence as possible.

‘Some of her equipment was recovered, but the yellow tent is not among the articles found.’

Missing equipment including Esther’s Lanshun ½ Ultralight tent have always been considered crucial to solving the mystery, because of the forensic clues it is likely to yield.

The team are made of Criminal Investigation Technicians (ICTs in French) from Toulouse, supported by high mountain police from nearby Luchon, and military personnel.

Esther’s body was found by Mr Colegate on Monday afternoon, close to where a portion of her skull was discovered two weeks ago.

There was no immediate information as to how police managed to miss the human remains, but the source said it was in a ‘natural hideway’, such as a gully, cave, or hidden behind rocks.

'At this stage an accident is the most likely hypothesis, given the location and other early indications', today's statement added.

'A full investigation is underway to confirm the details surrounding this tragedy.

'The family remain incredibly grateful for the efforts of the police units involved and their commitment to understanding the exact circumstances of Esther's death.'

Police last night said publicly for the first time that police are not ruling out that her death may not have been accidental.

Christophe Amunzateguy, the French prosecutor leading the probe told The Sun: 'The aim is to put forward a scenario to explain the disappearance of Esther Dingley,

'To find out what may have happened — whether it was an accidental thesis, or a criminal thesis, because we are not closing the door to any hypothesis.'

Privately, French and Spanish police are known to have put murder low down on their list of theories and believe the Oxford graduate suffered a mountain accident.

Esther went missing on a mountain pass on France's border with Spain, just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish.

She had numerous pieces of kit with her at the time of her disappearance, including a bright red and grey rucksack and a distinctive yellow tent.

The gear was made of durable, brightly coloured materials and would be expected to have remained in good condition despite months-long exposure to the elements.

The discovery of a fragment of Esther's skull by Spanish hikers on a mountain pass on France's border with Spain last month sparked a renewed hunt for the rest of her remains and equipment.

Investigators suggested that Esther's remains may have been moved to the well-trodden trail where the intial bone fragment was discovered, after the hiker perhaps died in a fall.

French police chief Jean-Marc Bordinaro suggested animals could have dragged the remains to the spot where they were discovered.

'Everything suggests that these bones were recently moved by animals. They would not have been there a few days earlier', he said.

Brown bears and wolves are among the creatures roaming freely in the mountain range, where birds of prey such as vultures are also a common sight.

'When this clothing and kit does turn up, it is likely to answer a lot of questions — or pose some more', The Sun reported a spokesman for Esther's family as saying.

'Finding out what happened remains a priority'.

Last month, human remains later confirmed to be Esther's were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain , just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish

The 37-year-old Oxford graduate had numerous pieces of kit with her at the time of her disappearance, including a bright red and grey rucksack and a distinctive yellow tent which are yet to be found

Oxford graduate Esther Dingley disappeared while on a solo-hike in the Pyrenees in November

Dingley had planned a solo hike from the Spanish town of Benasque to Pic de Sauvegarde, a mountaintop in the Pyrenees - which she reached on November 22, sending Colegate a picture via WhatsApp, which was their last contact.

She was seen by several witnesses including an Olympic Spanish skier asking for some fruit hiking on the path leading up to the summit.

From there she planned to walk between Port de la Gléré and Port de Venasque - a route of some eight miles - before hiking back down from the mountains.

But after two days without contact, Colegate reported Esther missing on November 24, just a day before her trip was due to end, sparking a massive manhunt.

Dan Colegate and Esther's mother Ria Bryant, 74, are assisting with the investigation.

Colegate has expressed disbelief at the theory that Esther may have died after becoming injured during her solo hike as she was an experienced hiker who should have had no problem with the route she is believed to have taken.

In her last known message, sent to Colegate on November 22, Esther wrote: 'Might dip into France. Hoping Refuge Venasque has a winter room. Keep you posted when can. Love you xxx'

Colegate wrote a 23-page report about Esther's plans to do a circular hike between Spain and France which involved sleeping at a mountain refuge.

He said in his dossier: 'An individual that Esther met on November 19 came forward to say he had specifically suggested this route through France, between Port de Venasque and Port de la Glere, to Esther when he met her. There is no reason to think that Esther did not stick to this plan.'

Esther went missing on November 22 while out hiking in the Pyrenees, and last month, human remains were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain

The 37-year-old from Durham was on a month-long solo trip and was supposed to return on November 24

The pass where Esther Dingley went missing was part of an area described as an 'easy' walk for the British hiker by her boyfriend

In a section titled 'Esther's Planned Onward Route', he suggested she reached the mountain refuge in France and slept there overnight before continuing a hike to return to her initial starting point in Spain.

He said: 'Her onward route would have involved a descent northwards towards the Hospice de France, a flat traverse westwards around the Imperatrice Way, and a climb southwards to the border at Port de la Glere. From the border the route descends back towards Hospital de Benasque.

'This route would have been well within Esther's capabilities for a day hike, in addition to the fact she had a tent, camping equipment and significant experience using it.

'Distance was 16km with 1100 metres of ascent, five to seven hours of hiking time. The weather remained excellent that Monday. The route is very obvious on the ground and also from the terrain when starting from Refuge de Venasque.

'It's basically impossible to get lost in good visibility here. The entire route is a well-made and easy to follow path. Although Esther believed and had warned family that there was poor signal in the area, in fact the signal is very good on the French side.

'Within half an hour of leaving the refuge, Esther should have been able to use her phone for most of the rest of the day.'

The couple, both Oxford graduates, had been travelling around Europe in a camper van for years after quitting their careers and Durham home.

Dingley's boyfriend Dan Colegate (left) has expressed disbelief at the theory that Esther may have died after becoming injured during her solo hike as she was an experienced hiker who should have had no problem with the route she is believed to have taken

Esther's partner of 20 years Dan Colegate (pictured together) claimed in a recent BBC interview he 'could no longer agree' with the idea she had suffered an accident
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A forensic expert who advised on the BBC's Silent Witness and quit her job after her boss raised a question about her sexuality has won £91,540.

Joanne Millington, who has been called as an expert witness in many high-profile court cases and is a visiting lecturer in several universities, joined Manlove Forensics Limited in 2012 as a senior biologist.

Joe Arend, who became the owner as the company was renamed ArroGen Forensics Limited in 2015, had brought up Ms Millington's sexuality at a meeting when she said she wanted to spend more time with her wife.

An employment tribunal in Reading, Berkshire was told that Mr Arend asked whether she had a problem with him 'because of her sexuality', pointing out he was 'big' and 'used to play rugby'.

Ms Millington, who appeared in BBC's 2018 true crime documentary 'Conviction: Murder in Suburbia' examining the conviction of Glyn Razzell for the death of his wife Linda in 2002, was left 'upset and embarrassed' when Mr Arend confronted her.

She was left 'very distressed' by the meeting and resigned shortly afterwards, the tribunal heard, and the panel found the company liable for sexual orientation discrimination, constructive dismissal and breach of contract.

Ms Millington has now been awarded £91,540 in compensation, including £20,637 for injury to feelings.

The tribunal found the discrimination 'impacted on her health and her career... (and) also impacted on her private life.'

Jo Millington, once part of the Met Police's murder team and a star of a recent BBC documentary, was 'upset and embarrassed' when Joe Arend confronted her and brought up her sexuality

The tribunal heard that Ms Millington - a blood pattern specialist who has worked for police forces across Britain in the past 25 years - started working for Oxfordshire -based ArroGen Forensics in 2012 as Lead Forensic Scientist.

In 2017, at her and another's scientist's suggestion, the company launched a new venture in partnership with the University of Surrey specialising in veterinary forensics.

Ms Millington was named Scientific Director, but a few months after launch, CEO Mr Arend started to voice unhappiness at how the new firm was doing and began to question Ms Millington's performance.

In one conversation, the tribunal heard he described her salary and expenses as 'crazy' and 'crackers'.

Ms Millington appeared in BBC's 2018 true crime documentary 'Conviction: Murder in Suburbia' examining the conviction of Glyn Razzell (pictured) for the death of his wife Linda in 2002

Then, after she complained about his behaviour, at a meeting in December of that year the CEO - described by one witness as 'bad tempered' and 'out of control' - questioned her sexuality.

The panel's judgment states: 'At one point in the meeting (Ms Millington) was talking about her work/life balance. She said she did not have enough time to spend with her family and her wife.

'A little while later, Mr Arend brought up the subject of the claimant's sexual orientation. He asked her whether she thought he had a problem with her because of her sexuality.

'He referred to the fact that he is big and used to be a rugby player. (She) found the question about her sexual orientation upsetting and unprofessional.

'She commented that she did not see the relevance of his question, and moved the discussion on to something else.'

The tribunal noted that Mr Arend admitted he would not have asked about sexual orientation if a woman employee had commented about not having enough time to spend with 'my family and my husband'.

The panel concluded: 'Mr Arend's question to the claimant about whether she thought Mr Arend had a problem with her sexual orientation was followed by a comment referring to stereotypes, when Mr Arend referred to himself being a former rugby player.

'The question introduced (Ms Millington's) sexual orientation into the discussion without there being any basis to do so, and...it implied that the claimant's sexual orientation might be a factor in her decision to make a formal complaint about Mr Arend.

'Miss Millington regarded her sexual orientation as a private matter (as she was entitled to do), and the question to her about it was upsetting and embarrassing. She would have preferred it not to have been asked.

'Her reputation and credibility underpin her career.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A life-extending treatment for thousands of women with incurable breast cancer has been approved after a U-turn by health officials.

The treatment – a combination of cancer drugs – can give some patients an extra nine months to live.

It can also help delay them needing chemotherapy and improve their quality of life during the extra months the treatment can give them.

Earlier this year the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence decided not to recommend the combination of the drugs abemaciclib and fulvestrant for routine use in England – saying the treatment was not cost effective.

A life-extending treatment for thousands of women with incurable breast cancer has been approved after a U-turn by health officials (stock image)

But after a deal was struck with the manufacturer Eli Lilly to discount one of the drugs – Nice has now given it the go-ahead.

Draft guidance recommends the drugs for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer which has spread to other parts of the body following hormone therapy.

The drugs work by blocking proteins in cancer cells and preventing them from growing.

Abemaciclib – a twice-daily pill also known by the brand name Verzenios – is usually priced at £2,950 for a packet of 56 tablets. But Nice said it had agreed to a confidential NHS discount.

Meanwhile fulvestrant – a hormone therapy drug – costs around £1,000 for the first 28-day cycle and £522 for subsequent cycles.

The regulator heard from charities including Breast Cancer Now in a consultation about the treatment while more than 60 women shared their experience of the drugs.

Between April and December 2019, 876 patients received the treatment through the NHS’s interim drug approval process.

But now more patients will be able to receive the drugs before their cancer gets worse.

The treatment – a combination of cancer drugs – can give some patients an extra nine months to live. It can also help delay them needing chemotherapy and improve their quality of life during the extra months the treatment can give them (stock image)

Meindert Boysen, director of the centre for health and technology evaluation at Nice, said he was ‘very pleased’ the NHS could now offer the drug combination adding that such treatments are welcomed by patients with incurable advanced breast cancer ‘because they can delay the time before their cancer gets worse and so delay or avoid the need for chemotherapy’.

Baroness Delyth Morgan, head of charity Breast Cancer Now, described the approval as ‘fantastic news’.

She said: ‘This decision brings hope to women who could see this combination treatment offer them precious extra months before their disease progresses. It could even help extend their lives and can also delay the need to start chemotherapy.’

The decision applies to England and Wales and Nice said its final guidance on the drug will be given in September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Four gang members who stabbed an innocent NHS worker to death just for where he lived are facing life sentences after being convicted of murder.

David Gomoh, 24, was chased and knifed at least nine times as he chatted to his girlfriend on the phone near his home in Canning Town, east London, on April 26 last year.

He was chosen by members of the Northside Newham gang to send a message to their Custom House and Beckton rivals after they challenged him 'Where are you from?'

He was not a gang member and was a completely innocent victim, picked because they thought he was from a rival gang's 'patch'.

Terrifying footage showed them try to target another innocent man minutes earlier, but he managed to run away.

The killers drove to the scene in a stolen silver Dodge Caliber to ambush Mr Gomoh near the NHS Nightingale hospital at the ExCel centre.

Mr Gomoh, who worked at St Bart's Hospital distributing PPE, managed to get to his feet and stumble the short distance home where he bled to death in front of his horrified family.

He died days before he was due to attend the funeral for his father, Ken Gomoh, who died after contracting coronavirus.

Members of Mr Gomoh's family attended court in person on Wednesday and gasped as the verdicts were read out.

Speaking outside court afterwards, Mr Gomoh's sister Lizzie said: 'David's murder is without a doubt the hardest thing my family and I have been through. It is something that no family should ever go through.

'Nothing will bring back a life that was so full of promise and hope, a life that was brutally taken away from us, but we are grateful now that we can begin to mourn.'

Drawings from David Ture's bedroom showing a number of young men carrying out a stabbing

The cartoon storyboard was described as a 'frightening depiction of the violence' in court

David Gomoh, 24, was chased and knifed at least nine times as he phoned his girlfriend

Murderer Mohammad Jalloh, 19, had denied carrying out the killing but was convicted at court

David Ture and Vagnei Colubali were also convicted today of murdering innocent David

After the killing one of the killers made a 'storyboard' cartoon strip glorifying the murder, the court heard.

Mr Gomoh, a marketing graduate from South Bank University in London, lived with his mother and sister, who also worked for the NHS.

David Ture, 19, Mohammad Jalloh, 19, Vagnei Colubali, 23, and a 17-year-old, denied but were convicted of murder and conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm after a six and a half week trial.

The jury of seven women and five men deliberated for 14 hours and 51 minutes before reaching unanimous verdicts on all charges.

Dock officers had to stop the 17-year-old storming from the dock as the verdicts were announced.

He was pushed back into his chair and told to 'simmer down' by a burly security guard as relatives of Mr Gomoh sat quietly in the courtroom.

The Recorder of London, Judge Mark Lucraft will sentence the four killers on a date to be fixed but told them: 'The four of you have been convicted of really serious offences.

'The sentence will be one of life imprisonment.'

He reminded the defendants that the murder had been described as 'a brutal attack.'

David's killers stole a silver Dodge Caliber found abandoned minutes after the stabbing

The scene on Freemasons road in Newham, London, after murder investigation was launched

Murderers made cartoon storyboard on how they would carry out the killing Jurors heard a a detailed 'storyboard cartoon' depicting Mr Gomoh's brutal murder was later found at Ture's home. 'The evidence is a frightening depiction of the violence that took place in April last year,' said Mr Glasgow. 'It could only have been drawn by someone who was present at the attack. 'You'll see how four individuals have been identified. 'Script has been provided by some of the characters.' Each image illustrated a different stage of the attack beginning with four figures deciding to head to the 'opp block' - the south Newham gang's territory. Mr Glasgow read out a number of phrases written next to the 'childish' drawings. 'Let's go opp block. 'Let's jump in the ride, K is our driver. 'Let me razz dis spliff. 'Let's hop out on these pagans.' Clothing can be identified by make and style in the drawing and is similar to that worn by Jalloh, Ture, Colubali and the 17-year-old in CCTV footage from the night of the attack. In the penultimate image, a drawing of a figure can be seen lying on the ground in what is supposed to be a pool of blood. 'Where his eyes would be there are Xs,' Mr Glasgow said. Advertisement

Mr Gomoh was on the phone to his girlfriend when the killers pulled up next to him in the Dodge, said prosecutor Oliver Glasgow.

She could hear someone ask Mr Gomoh 'Where are you from?' and then heard a struggle break out.

CCTV footage showed the moment the car stopped beside Mr Gomoh and he began to run for his life.

'The Dodge Caliber can be seen to be driving along behind him without its headlights on,' said Mr Glasgow.

'The reason for switching them off must have been to enable the car and the three knife-carrying defendants to sneak up on a potential target.

'This is the moment David Gomoh was confronted by the occupants of the Dodge Caliber.

'That must have been all it took for David Gomoh to appreciate that he was in very real danger.

'The chase was clearly on at this point.

'Despite the number of injuries and their severity, the attack was the work of seconds.'

Mr Gomoh struggled back to his house following the attack and collapsed outside after he was stabbed at least nine times.

'He was, in effect a dead-man walking,' Mr Glasgow said.

Paramedics tried to save Mr Gomoh, but he was pronounced dead at the scene.

The gang had already made one attempt to attack an unidentified man prior to coming across Mr Gomoh but he got away.

'The consequence of having a number of gangs who operate in a relatively confined area are not difficult to divine,' said Mr Glasgow.

'Rivalry, hatred, violence and death have all played their part in the ongoing dispute between these groups.

'And it was this ongoing feud that ultimately led to the brutal murder of David Gomoh.

'A young man who had nothing to do with this petty but fatal game of one-upmanship that is played out so often on the streets of London.

'He had no bad blood with anyone and... was ambitious to make something of himself,' said Mr Glasgow.

After the attack, the killers attempted to make a getaway in the Dodge Caliber but one of the wheels came off and they had to walk back to the north side of Newham.

Jurors heard a a detailed 'storyboard cartoon' depicting Mr Gomoh's brutal murder was later found at Ture's home.

Mr Glasgow added: 'That sequence of drawings - childish though they may be - do not tell a childish story.

'They went to Freemason's Road.

'They found someone they thought was involved, but they did not bother to check who he was.

'They stabbed him, and they left him in a pool of blood.

'Whoever drew this was boasting of their gang affiliation and their pride in what they had done.

'A group of young men who have such low regard for the lives of others that they will attack a stranger in the street simply because they assume he is a rival given the area where he lives.'

Mr Gomoh suffered catastrophic injuries, including severed carotid and brachial arteries and his liver had been cut through.

Some of the wounds were as deep as 12.5cm and sliced into the bone.

The 17-year-old's DNA was found on sunglasses dropped near to where Mr Gomoh was attacked.

Jalloh's DNA was found on two earpieces found on the back seat of the Dodge.

Jalloh, of North View, Pinner, north London, Colubali of Kendal Way, Cambridge, Ture, of no fixed address, and the 17-year-old, all denied murder and conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A early section of Hadrian's Wall which lay undiscovered close to a busy road has been found on the outskirts of Newcastle by workmen.

The ten-foot segment of the Roman feat of engineering was stumbled upon by staff at Northumbria Water while they carried out mains work.

It is believed the newly-discovered section of the wall is from one of the earliest phases of the historical landmark as it was constructed using such large blocks of stone.

Northumbrian Water workers discovered an ancient section of Hadrian's Wall buried under the road just east of the Two Ball Lonnen roundabout

Northumbria Water are spending £5 million to upgrade the network to improve tap water quality for half a million customers

Northumbria Water announced the discovery on their Twitter account, describing it as a (Really) old news alert

Later phases of the coast to coast wall, which stretched 84 miles from Wallsend in Newcastle to Bowness on Solway in Cumbria, used much smaller pieces of timber.

During the routine mains works, staff were shocked to discover remnants of the ancient structure in the West Road area of the city, just east of the Two Ball Lonnen roundabout.

Northumbrian Water say they were carrying out part of a £5m project in order to improve tap water quality to around half a million customers across Tyneside when the discovery was made.

Graeme Ridley, Project Manager from Northumbrian Water, said: 'It is amazing that we have been able to make this brilliant discovery, and we are glad to be working with Archaeological Research Services to make sure that it is properly protected going forwards.

'This is an incredibly special part of North East heritage and we are honoured to be a part of it.

'We are still have completed work in the area and this vital work is being carried out in order to futureproof our water supplies and ensure that our customers continue to receive excellent and high-quality tap water.'

Philippa Hunter from Archaeological Research Services Ltd said: 'Despite the route of Hadrian's Wall being fairly well documented in this area of the city, it is always exciting when we encounter the wall's remains and have the opportunity to learn more about this internationally significant site.

'This is particularly true in this instance where we believe that we uncovered part of the wall's earliest phase. It is always a pleasure working closely with Northumbrian Water who take the preservation of archaeological remains such as these very seriously.'

The wall was begun in AD 122 in the reign of the emperor Hadrian and ran from the banks of the River Tyne near the North Sea to the Solway Firth on the Irish Sea. It was the northern limit of the Roman Empire.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Full line-up REVEALED as rugby star Ugo Monye becomes the final contestant for new series joining Tom Fletcher, Corrie's Katie McGlynn, Tilly Ramsay and EastEnders' Nina Wadia

With 9 million TikTok followers and a famous father for her 'dance coach', Tilly Ramsey will make her debut on Strictly Come Dancing. But Gordon has some fatherly advice for her that is rather tongue-in-cheek - or...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Men who suffer erectile dysfunction after surgery for prostate cancer could benefit from a new shockwave therapy.

Participants are needed for a British trial that will establish whether the treatment has ‘life-changing benefits’.

More than 48,500 people are diagnosed with prostate cancer in the UK each year, making it the most common form of the disease in men. But surgery can damage nerves supplying the penis, leaving up to eight in ten patients with erectile dysfunction (ED).

Many will need lifelong medication, such as Viagra, but drugs fail to work in all cases.

Men who suffer erectile dysfunction after surgery for prostate cancer could benefit from a new shockwave therapy (stock image)

Treatment involves delivering a painless acoustic wave to the penis using a specialist probe for 10 to 15 minutes. Volunteers will receive up to ten weekly sessions.

Shockwave therapy has been proven to work in treating joint disorders and kidney stones. And studies have shown it can help regrow nerves and blood vessels.

Tet Yap, consultant urological surgeon and trial lead at Guy’s Hospital, London, said: ‘We are delighted to be able to offer this potentially life-changing treatment to patients with prostate cancer. Most patients who are in remission will lose their sexual function through nerve damage following surgery.

‘This new painless therapy has the potential to restore their erectile function by regenerating new blood vessels and nerves, hopefully helping patients to return to a normal healthy life.’

Surgery can damage nerves supplying the penis, leaving up to eight in ten patients with erectile dysfunction (ED). Many will need lifelong medication, such as Viagra, but drugs fail to work in all cases (stock image)

The trial is recruiting 100 men aged 40 to 65 who had good erectile function before surgery.

Anyone interested in taking part is encouraged to contact their GP, urologist or oncologist.

Guidance from Prostate Cancer UK says: ‘Unfortunately, even with nerve-sparing surgery techniques, ED continues to be a long-term problem for many men.

‘Men with ED after surgery may have difficulty in maintaining sexual and intimate relationships with their partners. Clinicians sometimes overlook the impact of ED on men and their partners.’

Cancer Research UK says prostate cancer survival has tripled in the UK over the past 40 years.

More than eight in ten patients are alive ten years after diagnosis – up from one in four in the 1970s.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'Not all heroes wear capes': Moment Philadelphia 76ers Andre Drummond dives into pool to save his son's life after the two-year-old fell off the edge

Philadelphia 76ers Andre Drummond posts dramatic video of the moment he saves his two-year-old son's life after he fell into a swimming pool.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Daring to bare it all! Hundreds of cyclists strip off as they take part in the annual World Naked Bike Ride around London

Hundreds of cyclists in central London stripped naked for the World Naked Bike Ride. In this video, pedestrians can be heard reacting to the naked riders as they navigated the roads around Marble Arch.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Websites that sell tickets should be subject to tougher rules to protect music and sports fans from rip-off prices, the competition watchdog has said.

The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has called for a new licensing system for 'unscrupulous' platforms that bulk buy tickets and sell them on at inflated places.

It would allow the regulator to act quicker and issue sanctions such as taking down websites, imposing heavy fines, and withdrawing a company's right to operate.

The CMA first announced it would investigate rip-off secondary ticketing sellers – an industry worth £700million a year in the UK alone –in 2016.

Ed Sheeran imposed restrictions on online resales amid fears the platforms are overrun by touts

Some musicians such as Ed Sheeran already impose restrictions on resales through Stubhub and Viagogo, which have a combined market share of over 90 per cent.

They are concerned that the platforms are overrun by touts hoovering up tickets at the expense of fans and selling them on for a profit.

Though the practice is illegal, the CMA said authorities are unable to take swift and effective action under the current law.

With music festivals and large sporting events resuming, it has published a list of recommendations to help toughen up its powers when dealing with such sites.

Alongside a new licensing system, it wants to be able to ban resellers from selling more tickets than they can legally buy from the primary market.

The CMA also wants to ensure platforms are fully responsible for incorrect information about tickets that are listed for sale on their websites.

Music festivals and large sporting events are starting to resume after Covid lockdowns, pushing the issue of ticket sales up the agenda

The regulator said: 'If adopted, these proposals will help prevent people getting ripped off by unscrupulous resellers online and we stand ready to help the Government to implement them.'

Two online touts were jailed last year in a landmark conviction for fraudulently selling almost £11million worth of tickets through secondary ticketing sites.

This year tickets to watch England play in Euro 2020 resold on high-profile websites at a mark-up of more than 4,000 per cent.

Almost 30 seats for the game against Scotland on ticket resale site Ticombo that officially cost £43 were being sold for more than £1,000 – one of which cost £2,000, with a £400 booking fee.

The CMA has previously taken action against secondary ticketing websites to tackle non-compliance in the sector, including requiring Viagogo and StubHub to remove misleading messaging about ticket availability and telling customers if the tickets they buy might lead to them being turned away at the door.

George Lusty, senior director for consumer protection at the CMA, said: 'With live music and sporting events starting back up, we want the Government to take action to strengthen the current laws and introduce a licensing regime for secondary ticketing platforms.'

Adam French, Which? consumer rights expert, said: 'It's positive to see the CMA pushing for changes that should offer all ticket buyers much stronger protections.

'The Government should implement these recommendations as soon as possible and push forward with plans to give the CMA much stronger powers to enforce consumer law.'

Viagogo said the CMA's report highlighted the strength of its customer protections and the importance regulated platforms in ensuring confidence when buying tickets.

A spokesman said: 'The CMA notes their report is not as a result of customer complaints and moreover, that a ban on secondary platforms would lead to an explosion in black market sources for tickets.

'We have argued strongly that the UK should grasp the opportunity of the Covid-19 recovery to improve the events industry and strengthen market collaboration between all players including event organisers, venues, primary and resale platforms.

'We are open to all ideas as to how that is achieved, but it must be carefully considered and focused on improving the industry's service for customers.

'There is a need to address the failings of the primary market and we need to explore the risks of new and unregulated online resale channels.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A London business owner has been forced to spend around £50,000 moving his shop to another premises after a Low-Traffic Neighbourhood (LTN) cut off the business to passing traffic.

Scott Callow, who owns Callow Master Locksmiths in Dulwich, was one of several business owners on Melbourne Grove impacted by the scheme, which triggered protests by residents and business owners earlier this year.

The more than 20-year-old business is set to open in a new premises on Grove Vale on Monday after complaining in March of 'a significant downfall in trade since the road closures were put in place'.

A Twitter account named Reopen Melbourne Grove, which is run by 'worried business owners' in the area said in a post that the locksmiths was the second business to move due to the 'unconsulted' road closure and that three more were also considering relocating.

The road closure scheme, which began in November, has ended motor vehicle access to Melbourne Grove, which remains open to cyclists and pedestrians, as part of a London-wide bid to cut air pollution.

A London business owner was forced to spend around £50,000 moving his shop to another premises after a Low-Traffic Neighbourhood (LTN) cut off the premises to passing traffic

Scott Callow, who owns Callow Master Locksmiths in Dulwich, was one of several business owners on Melbourne Grove impacted by the scheme, which triggered protests by residents and business owners earlier this year. Pictured: Work being done on the exterior of Callow Master Locksmiths' news Grove Street premises

In May, residents of the affluent East Dulwich area held a protest against the closure of the Dulwich Village junction.

At the time, a spokesperson from the Dulwich Alliance, which brings together several interest groups, told Southwark News: 'We were able to put our point across that 24/7 closures stop emergency vehicles getting through, discriminate against elderly, vulnerable and mobility-impaired residents, and push traffic and pollution on to residents and schools in neighbouring streets.

'We want a solution that balances the needs of the whole community, both young and old, and which doesn't empty some streets of traffic by increasing congestion on others.'

Residents were informed of the road closures in a letter from the council in June 2020, which said a consultation would be scheduled for summer this year before any changes were made permanent

In May 2021, Southwark Council launched a review into the road closures in Dulwich Village.

'We are actively listening to local businesses and the needs of traders along Melbourne Grove as part of the current consultation on the Dulwich Streetspace Trials, and will be making a decision in September – in the mean time we have already added more parking for business on and near Melbourne Grove,' Southwark Councillor Catherine Rose, cabinet member for transport, parks and sport told MailOnline in an emailed statement.

'We wish Callow's well for the future in their new, larger premises and are pleased that they've stayed local – we value all our independent businesses and aim to do the best we can for both them, and residents.

'Businesses in the Dulwich area have received over £22m in support via the council and we are engaging on further work, to do even more to support the local economy and our high streets as businesses return to normal, now that restrictions have ended.'

The council is in the process of analysing responses to the consultation on the closures, according to its website.

'In previous consultations with people in Dulwich, respondents raised concerns about high traffic levels and road safety for people walking and cycling.

'Then, in 2020 the new need for social distancing required us to implement measures that would help people remain safe during the COVID-19 pandemic. We also had to support people to limit their car use by creating routes to make walking and cycling safer,' the website read.

The road closure has ended motor vehicle access to Melbourne Grove, which remains open to cyclists and pedestrians, as part of a London-wide bid to cut air pollution

'As a result, the council introduced a number of schemes in 2020 as Experimental Traffic Orders (ETMOs). We introduced these measures at this time to support social distancing on our local high streets, by encouraging more people to walk and cycle locally to help avoid overcrowding on public transport.

'As these are experimental measures, on 17 May 2021 we began a public consultation process to gather and understand local views and experiences.'

LTNs have been introduced to allow for social distancing on footpaths and cycle during the coronavirus pandemic.

But the scheme has caused controversy as many believe it is being implemented to 'punish' motorists.

In March, footage emerged showing a blue-lit fire engine halted, a police car's driver forced to turn around and an ambulance having to weave between traffic after congestion built up on Chiswick High Road in west London due to an LTN.

Video footage taken from a flat overlooking the busy road, which features Cycleway 9, showed the emergency services struggling to get past slow-moving cars and buses in three separate incidents on March 25 and 26.

Furious motorists across the UK have accused the government of a 'war on drivers' with the scheme, which has seen roads blocked, traffic congestion increased and journey times lengthened.

Angry residents in several London boroughs have staged protests against LTN schemes in their areas. MailOnline readers have also previously shared some of their LTN nightmares.

In many cases, residents have complained that the move has resulted in usually quieter side roads being turned into rat-runs by motorists who have had to divert.

Photographs taken across the capital in the likes of Tooting, Streatham, Balham, Islington, Mayfair and Victoria showed how the new cycle lanes were empty while cars and vans sat in heavy traffic alongside them.

The Government is spending £225 million on similar measures across the country, most notably in Oxford, Manchester, Birmingham, York, Edinburgh, Nottingham, Derby and Cardiff.

One van driver complained about a scheme in Bristol, saying it adds 20 minutes to his journeys.

He previously told MailOnline: 'These measures are adding about 20 minutes per hour to every journey. Which means I'm working longer for less. It's crazy.'

'It was 3pm on Wednesday, when traffic would usually be light, but a tailback snaked behind and ahead of Steve for more than a mile.

'On August 3, the council reduced the space for powered vehicles on Lewins Mead from two lanes to one.

'Since then, the nearside lane has become a thoroughfare for bicycles. Incidentally, while at the junction for 30 minutes, I saw only one cyclist use the bike lane.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Hundreds of rowing fans descended onto the streets to enjoy a night out after they attended the fourth day of the Henley Royal Regatta this year.

Revellers appeared in hight spirits as they swapped a night in at home to hit the numerous bars and pubs in Henley-on-Thames in Oxfordshire and prepared to celebrate with their friends into the small hours.

Elsewhere, crowds of attendees were spotted enjoying a drink along the River Thames after a busy day at the races.

The scenes come after it was revealed women would be allowed to wear trousers to the Henley Royal Regatta for the first time in its 182-year history.

Hundreds of revellers appeared in high spirits as they enjoyed a night out after attending the fourth day of the Henley Royal Regatta this year

Rowing fans took to the town's bars and clubs and prepared to celebrate with their friends into the small hours last night

Crowds of attendees were spotted queuing outside a pub as they enjoyed a drink after a busy day at the races

The long-standing sartorial rules - which asked for over-the-knee skirts and no trousers, and a blazer or smart jacket - have been scrapped after campaigners branded the former dress code 'symbolic of an era when women couldn't compete and were just there to look pretty.'

Previously women were required to wear a dress or skirt with a hemline below the knee. Men must wear a lounge suit, or trousers with a jacket or blazer.

Earlier this week, Regatta chairman Sir Steve Redgrave announced the historic update to the dress code, saying 'times have changed' and it is the 'right time' to shake up the rules.

He said: 'We have been asked for a number of years if we could look at the ladies' dress code because times have changed.

'Even though we see ourselves very much as a traditional event with a traditional way of dressing, with the introduction of more women's events in recent years, we felt that it was the right time to make the change.

'It is not a major change by any stretch of the imagination but we still see the regatta as an excuse to dress up like you would for any other celebration.

'If you see the regatta as a social occasion, as I do, people like to dress up and that is what Henley is all about - colour and celebration.'

One reveller lies on the ground after attending the fourth day of the 182-year-old event - which was cancelled last year due to the Covid pandemic

Groups of attendees enjoy a drink along the River Thames after watching the rowing races earlier during the day

Revellers hug police officers and appear in high spirits as they attend the event which sees teams compete in over 300 races of an international standard on the Thames

Crowds of attendees stand outside a pub and enjoy a drink as they join hundreds of others for a night out

The Henley Royal Regatta attracts thousands of visitors over the course of the five-day event and sees teams compete in more than 300 races

The move has given a boost to women's clothes shops in the town and Ailsa Meredith, a style advisor at Whistles in Bell Street, said: 'Some women don't want to be typically dressed.

'Going in something unexpected is nice and a way to show your bold personality.'

The Henley Royal Regatta, which began on August 11, has seen national clubs from up and down the country vying for glory on the Thames in races scheduled until Sunday.

Organisers have ruled it will hold the event as safely as possible, in line with Government and Public Health and those queuing to get had to prove they were 'Covid safe'.

The event attracts thousands of visitors over the course of the five-day event and sees teams compete in over 300 races of an international standard on the Thames, which can include Olympic rowers as well as crews new to the event.

It was first staged in 1839 and has been held annually every year since, except during the two World Wars and 2020 due to Covid-19.

Some revellers lie on the grass after a busy day at the Henley Royal Regatta this year. The even sees national clubs from up and down the country vying for glory on the Thames

The Fire and Rescue Service stand guard as hundreds of revellers enjoy a night along the Thames after the event

Mounted police watch over the crowds as hundreds of spectators arrive for the fourth day of the iconic event

The number of spectators will still be hugely down and the infrastructure has been changed so there will be no grandstand in the stewards' enclosure and no regatta enclosure while the boat tent has been moved to the opposite bank to usual.

Spectators will be encouraged to wear masks in all indoor spaces, such as the on-site shops and restaurants.

A total of 481 crews - 41 from overseas - will take part in the regatta, which began in August 11, and end with 26 finals, including three new ones for women on the Sunday.

Sir Steve said it was 'tremendous' to be able to hold the event, which is one of key dates in the social and sporting calendar.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She welcomed her third child at the end of April.

And Christina Milian, 39, didn't hesitate to take to Instagram and flaunt her curves in a strapless blue bikini on Sunday.

'Who that is? That's just my baby daddy,' wrote the Dip It Low hitmaker as she posed in front of her husband Matthieu Tota in PrettyLittleThing swimwear.

Dip it low: Christina Milian took to Instagram and flaunted her curves in a strapless blue bikini on Sunday

Christina looking sensational as she angled her pert posterior towards the camera with her hand running through her hair.

The singer showcased her thigh tattoos in the skimpy swimwear and accessorised with a dainty gold bracelet.

Her curly raven tresses cascaded over her shoulders and remained slicked back following her swim in the pool.



Christina looked flawless as she went full glam for the at home photo shoot and gave the camera a pensive gaze.

Wow: Christina looking sensational as she angled her pert posterior towards the camera with her hand running through her hair

The mother-of-three announced the arrival of her son in April as she shared a photo of her cradling the newborn and gushed about the new addition to her family.

'Kenna, Welcome to the world baby boy! Wow, What an adventure we've been on since the day he was conceived!', she wrote to Instagram.

'I thank God everyday for blessing me with his super active energy (wonder where he gets it from?) and now to meet our healthy baby boy?! Thankful. Blessed.'

Happy news: The mother-of-three announced the arrival of her son in April as she shared a photo of her cradling the newborn and gushed about the new addition to her family

The actress also has daughter Violet with her ex-husband The-Dream and son Isaiah with beau Matt.

The beauty and her beau, who've been an item for about two-and-a-half-years, welcomed their first child, son Isaiah, on January 20, 2020.

According to the French magazine Public, the couple got married shortly before they made their pregnancy announcement in December, although this is yet to be confirmed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@New Lives in Wild presenter said doesn't have 'tough enough skin to endure it'

Adventurer said he wouldn't appear on reality TV today in 'age of social media'

Ben Fogle has revealed that he doesn't have 'tough enough skin' to take part in a reality show in the 'age of social media' after appearing on Castaway which kickstarted his rise to fame two decades ago.

The New Lives in the Wild presenter, 47, recalled his experience on the BBC reality show which saw him spend a year in Scotland battling the elements.

Speaking to The Express, he revealed that he wouldn't appear in a reality show today, adding: 'Would I do it today? Probably not. In 2021, I don't think I would want to appear on a reality TV show in the age of social media.'

'I don't think I have a tough enough skin to endure it.'

Ben Fogle has revealed that he doesn't have 'tough enough skin' to handle taking on another reality show in the age of social media after appearing on Castaway which kickstarted his rise to fame two decades ago. Pictured, removing a section of barbed wire from a sheep's coat during the show which was se in Taransay Scotland, in 2000

Ben Fogle attend the "Survival Of The Species" photocall as part of the MIPCOM 2018 on October 15, 2018 in Cannes, France.

The adventurer had been working at Condé Nast for a year when the BBC announced the first reality show which Ben then applied to be a part of.

'It was very different to reality shows now, it was for a whole year and it had an innocence about it,' he explained. 'It was pre-social media and a much easier time to be a reality show contestant than it is today.'

After appearing on the show, which was his TV debut, Ben recalled how he suffered a breakdown.

'Back then, yes, I had a small wobble after I came off, but that was pretty short lived,' he explained.

After appearing on the show, which was his TV debut, Ben recalled how he suffered a breakdown. Pictured, on Castaway in 2000

He went on to admit that he would've still participated in the show if he knew of his struggles that would follow his experience - adding that he is 'pretty robust' - but said he wouldn't encourage his children to ' go out of their way to humiliate themselves on TV.'

It comes weeks after Ben told how he was 'bursting with pride' and hoped his children would gain ‘resilience and resourcefulness’ as they set off on a week-long trip to explore the Inner Hebrides.

The New Lives in the Wild presenter waved off his two children Ludovic, 11 and Iona, 10, who he shares with his wife Marina, at Euston station in London in July.

Alongside a sweet snap he posted on Instagram of the siblings with their backpacks on Monday, he penned: ‘I am bursting with pride as Ludo and Iona head off on their first big island adventure together to the Inner Hebrides.

‘When I was eight years old, I went on a trip to the island of Eigg (a visit that would change my life) and now these two are off with their adventure club and some friends on their own island expedition.

‘I was quite teary as I waved my young explorers off…’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daisy Lowe posted a slew of sun-soaked snaps on Instagram from her family holiday, including an image where she plants a sweet kiss on her boyfriend's cheek.

The 32-year-old model looked as happy as ever in the snap with her estate agent beau Jordan Saul, as they posed on the Greek island of Corfu.

The raven-haired beauty was pictured with other members of her family, including a snap with a younger male relative, Etienne Maclaine, as she posed for a windswept snap on a boat with the sun on her smiling face.

Cute: Daisy Lowe, 32, looked as happy as ever in the snap with her estate agent beau Jordan Saul, as they posed on the Greek island of Corfu

In another, she looked gorgeous as she donned a black and yellow granny square crochet dress with her arm around her younger half sister Betty Goffey.

Betty, 16, is from Daisy's mother, Pearl Lowe's, marriage to Supergrass drummer Danny Goffey.

The family were in good spirits as they posed for a photo while enjoying some time at a restaurant.

Glowing: The raven-haired beauty was pictured with other members of her family, including a snap with a younger male relative, Etienne Maclaine

Soaking up the hot Greek weather were Betty and Alfie Goffey with their father Danny, and their mother Pearl.

The last image in the 'photo dump' was a snap of the harbour where the family were staying.

The location looked idyllic with clear still water at sunset with boats on the jetty and mountains in the background.

The family seemed to have given a warm welcome to Daisy's beau Jordan, who works as a new home consultant for an estate agent.

Sisters: In another, she looked gorgeous as she donned a black and yellow granny square crochet dress with her arm around her younger half sister Betty Goffey

They were spotted for the first time together in June 2020 - despite being under government-ordered lockdown for 10 weeks.

Daisy took to Instagram in June to mark their first anniversary and reveal to her followers how she met her beau with a sweet post where she called Jordan her 'hero'.

She captioned the upload: 'A year ago today I went to meet @misstilda for a walk on the Heath…. But I was running a little late- Mercury was in retrograde [crying laughing emoji].

Stunning: The last image in the 'photo dump' was a snap of the harbour where the family were staying. The location looked idyllic with clear still water at sunset with boats on the jetty

'When I arrived, Monty ran straight towards a very handsome Belgium shepherd, attached to this handsome dog was a rather handsome man.

'I dawdled around having some dog chat… we ended up walking together for a couple of hours, what a dog walk!'

She continued: 'Here we are a year later, through countless lockdowns, adventures, disasters and triumphs. You @jordanjaysaul have been my hero.

'Through and through. Thanks for feeling like home & always making me giggle even when I really don’t want to! It’s my absolute favourite making you laugh so much your legs give way….

'I am very happy I was 5 mins late to meet Tilds that day & I am so very grateful you are mine. Happy anniversary my pain in the ass. I love you ♥️.' [sic]
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A dramatic turn of events during Sunday's Love Island has put four couples at risk of being dumped from the villa, including rocky Jake Cornish and Liberty Poole.

The islanders were sat enjoying an evening of romantic dinner dates when Toby Aromolaran received a text explaining that each pair must vote for two couples they consider the 'least compatible' - and submit their decision by text.

Following intense deliberations, it was revealed to the public which four couples are at risk of being dumped as a result of the tough vote.

Plot twist: A dramatic turn of events during Sunday's Love Island has put four couples at risk of being dumped from the island - including rocky Jake Cornish and Liberty Poole

Alongside Jake and Liberty, Teddy Soares and Faye Winters, Brett Staniland and Priya Gopaldas and Mary Bedford and Aaron Simpson face being dumped from the villa in a public vote.

The couples' fates not lying in the hands of the public and are therefore safe are Liam Reardon and Millie Court, Tyler Cruickshank and Kaz Kamwi and Toby and partner Chloe Burrows.

The islanders all appeared in agreement that following Jake and Liberty's 'rocky' week, their compatibility was starting to look doubtful.

Uh oh: The islanders all appeared in coincidental agreement that following Jake and Liberty's 'rocky' week, their compatibility was starting to look doubtful

At risk: Alongside Jake and Liberty, Teddy Soares and Faye Winters (pictured above) Brett Staniland and Priya Gopaldas and Mary Bedford and Aaron Simpson face being dumped from the villa after the islanders voted them the least compatible couples

And in an exclusive clip from Monday night's episode, things look like they are going downhill for Priya and Brett, after she confides in the girls that she finds him 'boring.'

'When he holds my hand, it feels like my dad holding my hand!' she admits to Kaz and Liberty.

She doesn't stop there, and after the girls advise her to 'friendzone' him, she reveals that she's 'got the ick.'

Awks! In an exclusive clip from Monday night's episode, things look like they are going downhill for Priya and Brett, after she confides in the girls that she finds him 'boring'

Revealing all: 'When he holds my hand, it feels like my dad holding my hand!' Priya admits to Kaz and Liberty

Elsewhere on Sunday night, Jake and Liberty faced yet another obstacle in their relationship - which resulted in Jake walking out of the villa.

Jake, 24, who confessed to Lib, 21, that he loved her, found out from Toby that the girls were doubting the sincerity of his feelings.

Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced.

'I need to get out of this place!': Frustrated Jake stormed out of the villa on Sunday night after the girls doubted his feelings for Liberty

Growing increasingly frustrated, Jake snapped: 'I need to get out of this place.'

The water engineer stuck to his word and, despite a concerned Toby following him, he sat on a wall outside the villa to collect his thoughts.

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official.

However Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

Being honest: Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced

Stressed: The water engineer stormed out of the villa to collect his thoughts

The girls had earlier voiced their concerns about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her.

Chloe Burrows responded to her frankly: 'You're going to hate me. Do you not think he's telling you what you want to hear?'

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looked round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye Winter tentatively replied: 'I don’t know baby.'

Unsure: The girls had previously voiced their concerned about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her

Supporting her friend: Faye told Jake in an honest chat that it was the 'worst' time he could tell her Liberty loved her

Liberty seemed a little confused, and asked for advice from her friends: 'Do you think I’m being an idiot?'

Chloe told the beauty: 'I don’t think he would say something if he didn’t mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

Chloe and Faye were later pulled for a chat by Jake, who revealed to Toby and Teddy that he wanted to know 'who the f**k' had questioned his feelings for Liberty.

In an honest yet calm chat, Faye told him: 'Tonight was the worst time to tell her you loved her,' to which he replied, 'I totally understand.'

Once again, Jake and Liberty managed to iron out their issues.

Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time.'

A more relieved-looking Liberty said: 'I trust you to believe that you meant it.'

Love Island continues on Monday on ITV2.

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?

Reassuring: Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to turn heads with her fashionable ensembles.

And Amy Hart certainly commanded attention as she put on a leggy display while heading out for dinner at Quaglino's in London with her pals on Sunday.

The Love Island star, 28, flaunted her sensational figure in a floral blue shirt and matching hot pants.

Here she comes! Amy Hart looked sensational as she put on a leggy display while heading out for dinner at Quaglino's in London with her pals on Sunday

Amy exuded confidence as she strutted along the street showcasing her toned pins in her thigh-skimming shorts.

The beauty flashed a glimpse at her taut midriff by tying her shirt in a knot and worked all her angles for the camera as she posed with one hand on her hip.

She wore her long locks down for the fun night out in the capital and added a little extra height to her frame i a pair of open-toe gold Gucci heels.

Sizzling: The Love Island star, 28, flaunted her sensational figure in a floral blue shirt and matching hot pants

Work it: Amy exuded confidence as she strutted along the street showcasing her toned pins in her thigh-skimming shorts styled with a pair of gold Gucci heels

It comes after Amy's mother Sue revealed how she found it difficult to even leave the house because of the constant questions from strangers about her daughter after her appearance on the hit ITV2 show in 2019.

During that summer's series, Amy's dramatic split from professional dancer Curtis Pritchard left her so devastated that she quit the show.

Speaking to The Telegraph, Sue, opened up about watching her daughter get dumped on the show, revealing that she wanted to 'get on the next plane and drag her out herself.'

'I didn't even feel that I could walk down the road. People were coming up to me and asking, ''How's Amy, is she OK?''', she said.

Poser: The beauty flashed a glimpse at her taut midriff by tying her shirt in a knot and worked all her angles for the camera as she posed with one hand on her hip

Fashion: Amy wowed in the fun blue and white floral ensemble

Candid: It comes after Amy's mother Sue revealed what it was like to watch her daughter have her heartbroken on national television (pictured: Amy with Sue and her grandmother)

The show demands that couple's share a bed with one another, and viewers speculated that Amy and her then half-boyfriend Curtis may have done more than cuddle, though the pair have both denied it.

When asked about watching her daughter be intimate on-screen, Sue said: 'At the end of the day, it's a TV show, and that's what it's there for. You kind of expect it.'

But their romance was short-lived when a stint in rival villa Casa Amor prompted Curtis to dump Amy, later coupling up Maura Higgins - who he dated for seven months.

Sue said that the producers of the ITV show kept in contact with her as her daughter's break up was playing out on screen, and that she would tell them to pass on the message that 'she can come home'.

After five weeks Amy walked out of the villa - a move that Sue believes was the best thing for her daughter's mental health.

Amy had therapy provided by ITV, and in an appearance on the Thank You Next podcast says that she explored feeling 'ugly' and a like 'failure' in her sessions since leaving the villa.

Amy also discussed how anxiety left her unable to enjoy her time after leaving the show, as people would constantly tell her that her new life 'wouldn't last'.

She said: 'Everyone said to me, from literally the day I got home, ''Well yeah, make the most of it because like it'll be over soon, yeah you gotta really milk it. Cos you've only got a year,'' and they said that really gleefully.

'They're like ''Yeah because obviously it's not gonna last forever, is it? So... you know you gotta make the most of it. Amy, are you making the most of it though because, you know, are you actually earning money?'''
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The lawyer representing Prince Andrew's accuser has said the case is now a matter for the courts to decide as he claimed the royal's legal team 'stonewalled' any appeals for information.

David Boies, who represents Virginia Roberts, said it would be 'ill-advised' for the Duke of York 'to thumb his nose at a federal court' after Ms Roberts sued the 61-year-old in New York federal court on Monday.

Ms Roberts, now 38, is seeking 'significant' damages from Prince Andrew claiming she was sexually assaulted by him in New York, the Caribbean and London in 2001 - when she was 17 and he was 41.

She claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Mr Boies said his client ultimately wanted 'vindication' from her civil suit for damages.

David Boies, who represents Virginia Roberts, said the case is now a matter for the courts to decide

The lawyer claimed the Duke of York's legal team had 'stonewalled' any appeals for information

Andrew has vehemently denied the allegations in the past, and a spokesman for the duke said there was 'no comment' when she was asked to respond to Ms Roberts' legal action.

Mr Boies told Channel 4 News: 'He can ignore me and he can ignore Virginia, which is what he's been doing for the last five years.

'We've made every effort to reach out to him to hear his side of the story to understand whether he has anything that he can say that would put his actions in context. And he has simply ignored us, and he can do that, but he can't ignore judicial process.

'This is now a matter for the courts to decide. And it would be very ill advised I think for anyone to sort of thumb their nose at a federal court. If he did, obviously there would be a default judgment entered against him, which I think no one really wants to have happen.'

Mr Boies went on to say that the duke's legal team had 'totally stonewalled' any appeals for information.

He continued: 'They just have totally stonewalled, they have refused to provide any explanation, they refuse to engage in any discussions, they refuse to provide any facts.

'They've even refused to respond to any of the allegations that been made in any reasonable way.

'They have basically simply ignored every letter, every phone call, every outreach that we've made in an attempt to let him provide us with whatever facts he thinks we ought to consider and to try to see whether this can be resolved without the necessity of litigation.

Ms Roberts claims she was sexually assaulted by Prince Andrew in New York, the Caribbean and London in 2001 - when she was 17 and he was 41. The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Virginia Roberts

The accuser claims she was forced to have sex with the Duke of York and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein

Speaking about his client Mr Boies added: 'I think she expects to get vindication and vindication for her and vindication for all the other young women that have been guilty of sex trafficking around the world by various rich and powerful men. This is a case and a cause to which she's dedicated herself over the last few years.

'She has donated a significant amount of the money that she has recovered from Jeffrey Epstein's estate and from Ghislaine Maxwell to a charitable foundation, designed to help other young girls.

Lawyers representing Ms Roberts (pictured) filed the civil suit in New York on Monday

'Her hope is that calling rich and powerful abusers to account will have some effect on reducing the chance that other young girls will suffer which she suffered. So I think what she hopes to get out of this is vindication. And hopefully a better world for other young girls.'

The duke does not have to attend or give evidence in the civil proceedings in New York, but the legal action will be a further blow to his reputation and the standing of the monarchy, according to Joe Little, managing editor of Majesty Magazine.

He said about the Epstein scandal: 'It's damaging not only for Andrew but for the institution of the monarchy itself because all sorts of allegations have been thrown at the institution since all this came to light - and the perception is, most likely incorrectly, they are not taking it seriously.'

Andrew stepped back from public duties after the backlash from his 2019 Newsnight interview, dubbed a 'car crash', which had attempted to draw a line under his relationship with Epstein - but instead saw him heavily criticised for showing little empathy with the sex offender's victims.

'I can't think of any kind of rehabilitation that will bring him back into the royal fold as a working member of the family,' added Mr Little.

Lawyers for Ms Roberts filed the civil suit seeking unspecified damages at a federal court in New York, where the court documents claim she was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by Epstein including while she was still a minor under US law.

Andrew is named as the only defendant in the 15-page suit, brought under New York state's Child Victims Act, although Epstein and his former girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell are mentioned frequently throughout.

It is alleged in the documents Ms Roberts was sexually abused while aged under 18 by the Queen's second son at Maxwell's home in London, at Epstein's New York mansion and at other locations including Epstein's private island in the US Virgin Islands.

British socialite Maxwell has pleaded not guilty to sex-trafficking charges in Manhattan federal court, where she faces trial in November, while Epstein took his own life in a US federal jail in August 2019, a month after he was arrested on the same charges.

The documents claim Ms Roberts 'was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth and authority'.

The duke allegedly engaged in the sexual acts without Ms Roberts' consent, while aware of her age and while 'knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim', the documents claim, adding the alleged assaults 'have caused, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm'.

Mr Boies told Channel 4 News: 'The evidence in terms of what he (Andrew) knew about Jeffrey Epstein's sex-trafficking operation is something that obviously will be for the jury to decide. I think that everybody who was closely associated with Jeffrey Epstein knew that he had these young girls, these young women who he was trafficking.'

Solicitor advocate Nick Goldstone, head of dispute resolution at international law firm Ince, said: 'I don't think Prince Andrew will be compelled to attend the New York court and give evidence to defend himself.

'I don't think he will be compelled to put in any defence in writing because he can maintain his right to silence.

'And under the American terminology, 'take the fifth' - the Fifth Amendment, everybody has a right to silence for fear of self-incrimination.'

If the duke and his legal team do not engage in the civil proceedings, they are expected to continue without their input - with the court making its judgment in due course.

Andrew does not face the prospect of an extradition hearing as this only applies to criminal charges and not civil cases.

In his Newsnight interview with the BBC's Emily Maitlis, Andrew denied claims that he slept with Ms Roberts on three separate occasions, saying: 'I can absolutely categorically tell you it never happened. I have no recollection of ever meeting this lady, none whatsoever.'

The duke also said he has no memory of a well-known photograph of him with his arm around Ms Roberts' waist at Maxwell's house, and has questioned whether it was his own hand in the image.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TV and radio presenter Suzy Klein has been appointed as the BBC's head of arts and classical music TV, the broadcaster has announced.

Klein will lead the BBC's arts and classical music output, focusing on TV, iPlayer and arts digital content, but also collaborating with radio and BBC Sounds to drive reach and impact across the country for all audiences.

She has become a familiar face and voice of BBC culture shows, with her hosting credits including the BBC Proms, The Culture Show and BBC Young Musician Of The Year.

She has also written and presented several BBC TV series, including A History Of Black Classical Composers with Sir Lenny Henry, and she is co-presenter of BBC Radio 3's popular show, Essential Classics, as well as a regular guest presenter of Radio 4's Saturday Live.

Klein (pictured) will lead the BBC's arts and classical music output, focusing on TV, iPlayer and arts digital content, but also collaborating with radio and BBC Sounds to drive reach and impact across the country for all audiences

Klein, who will begin her role on October 4, said: 'I could not be more thrilled to be taking on this exciting new role, flying the flag for the best of arts, culture and classical music at the BBC.

'I joined the corporation almost 25 years ago, first as an arts and music researcher, then assistant producer, director and series producer, eventually going on to present some of the programmes I most cherish.

'If my appointment represents something, it is a long-term commitment to the transformative power, inspiration and joy that the arts bring.

'That's something I can't wait to share with my brilliant commissioning team, as we work together to create the most compelling, unmissable programmes for audiences across the UK.'

After winning the William Hardcastle Award for journalism, she began her professional career as a presenter on radio and TV with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.

On returning to the UK, she produced BBC Radio 4 programmes, including Start the Week and Loose Ends, before moving to television as a director and producer.

Klein, who will begin her role on October 4, said: 'I could not be more thrilled to be taking on this exciting new role, flying the flag for the best of arts, culture and classical music at the BBC'

She has also produced live events, such as BBC Proms, and drama documentaries on Mozart and Beethoven and documentary films on Ted Hughes, Martin Amis, Steve Reich and John Adams.

This newly-created position is part of the broadcasters aim to fully integrate arts and classical music TV commissioning into BBC content.

The BBC hopes this will bring 'specialist depth, modern storytelling and enhanced ambition to the genres', alongside 'new opportunities for collaboration and programming of scale'.

Patrick Holland, director of BBC factual, arts & classical music, said: 'Suzy combines deep subject knowledge with a proselytising passion for great arts and classical music broadcasting.

'Her vision for the future development of the genres on television and iPlayer made her the stand-out candidate for this most important of roles.

'She is an unrivalled communicator with brilliant relationships across the arts and classical music sectors and has a strong track-record in production.

'She will be leading an exceptional team of commissioners in the genre, and we can't wait for her to start.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chinese state media made no mention of the country's huge carbon emissions or pledge to reach net-neutral a decade later than most of the world as the UN released its 'code red' climate report on Monday.

Outlets loyal to Beijing did cover the report, its warnings, and urged the need for 'global action' - but did not point out that China is by far the world's largest carbon emitter and doesn't intend to reduce its output at all until later this decade.

Also conspicuously absent from most Chinese reporting was mention of the 2050 net neutral emissions target that a vast majority of countries are committed to - perhaps to avoid comparison with Beijing's target to be net neutral by 2060.

And in the few places Chinese emissions were mentioned, it was to praise government efforts to cut them without pointing out that the country emits more carbon per year than the US, India and Russia combined.

Indications that Beijing is turning a blind eye to the problem are particularly worrying since its decisions will be vital to avoiding the worst-case scenario of annual extreme heat waves, typhoons and 5ft rises in sea level contained within the report.

China has tripled its emission levels since the 1990s, crossing the 14 gigatons threshold for the first time ever in 2019

In 1999, the country was producing around 899 million tonnes of carbon per year

In 1969, China was producing around 171 million tonnes of carbon per year (pictured). Fifty years later that figure has now jumped to 2,777 million tonnes of carbon per year

For example, a report by China's largest state newspaper China Daily made only brief mention of the 2050 emissions target - saying it 'could help stabilize' temperatures, but without saying that most of the world has committed to it.

The report made no mention of China's 2060 commitment, or the fact that the country currently tops the ranking of carbon-emitting nations.

It was a similar story in official state news agency Xinhua, which did not make explicit reference to the 2050 target or to Chinese emissions.

Instead, its report stressed the need for 'global action' and that 'developed nations' need to increase their efforts to cut carbon.

The only direct reference to China's emissions was a quote from Swiss scientist Gian-Kasper Plattner who praised the country's 'huge steps forward' in recent years.

That is despite data from the Global Carbon Project showing that China's emissions have increased from 2.6billion tons of carbon in 2016 to 2.7billion tons in 2019, the most recent year for which information is available.

By comparison, US emissions have plateaued over the same period at 1.4billion tons.

'I think China and its government have really made huge steps forward,' Plattner told Xinhua, before adding: 'I really hope that world leaders will make a big advance in terms of agreeing on reducing emissions.'

The People's Daily similarly did not make reference to the 2050 target, China's current emissions, or suggest the country should be taking action to cut them.

South China Morning Post did include the 2050 goal in its article but, like China Daily, did not put it in context - making no reference to the fact that the rest of the world has signed up to the target, or that Beijing will miss it by a decade.

Perhaps the most-detailed breakdown of the IPCC report came from the Global Times, a newspaper that is so closely aligned with Beijing that it is viewed as a mouthpiece for the state.

That paper does make explicit reference to China's 2060 target, and even compares it to America's own pledge to go carbon neutral a decade before then.

China's climate commitments lag behind other developed nations, with Xi Jinping pledging carbon emissions will top out this decade before falling to net zero by 2060

However, it does not include the wider context - that most other world nations have also having signed up to the 2050 pledge.

And while it does make mention of China's high emissions it also muddies the waters, saying that China and the US are 'the world's largest carbon dioxide emitters' without making a distinction between them.

In reality, China emitted almost double the carbon that America did in 2019 and has been the world's largest emitter every year since 2006.

The Global Times report also downplays China's role in solving the climate crisis by stressing the need for 'cooperation' with the US - seeming to imply that the task facing both nations is equal in scale and scope.

'China-US cooperation in the area of climate change will help restore the balance of collaboration... and form a united and cooperative system to jointly tackle such a global challenge,' the paper quoted expert Wang Yiwei as saying.

The UN report, the most-detailed assessment of humanity's impact on the climate ever compiled, warned its is now 'incontrovertible' that humans have alerted the world's weather for the worse - largely through burning coal, gas and oil.

Impacts from climate change are being felt in the world today, the report's authors added, with more extreme heatwaves, typhoons and flooding already occurring.

Those effects will continue to get worse, the report said, with a key target of 1.5C of global warming likely to be exceeded within the next two decades even if urgent action is taken to cut emissions.

However, analysts said there is no 'red line' for humanity beyond which the damage becomes unsurvivable and said it is up to world leaders to decide what kind of future they want humanity to inhabit.

The report was produced by 200 scientists from 60 countries, drawing on more than 14,000 scientific papers.

It seeks to paint a picture both of the changes that have already happened - more frequent floods, hotter heatwaves, global sea rises, and landslides - and of how those threats might get worse based on the actions we take.

The UN report projected that changes in extreme weather will be larger in frequency and intensity with every additional increment of global warming

The UN scientists modelled the changes in annual mean temperatures worldwide based on 1.5C, 2C and 4C global warming

These graphs show how human influence has warmed the climate at a rate unprecedented in at least the last 2,000 years

If temperatures continue to rise, there could be devastating effects here on Earth, including a dramatic loss of sea-life, an ice-free Arctic and more regular 'extreme' weather

Limiting temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial norms, the report said, would mean that heatwaves which only struck once every 50 years in pre-industrial times will instead strike every five years and be significantly hotter.

At 4C of warming - the worst-case scenario in which no action is taken - they would occur almost every year.

At 1.5C of warming, sea levels will rise between 1ft and 2ft this century. At 4C, they could rise by up to 5ft - sinking many coastal areas and devastating island communities which will also be at risk from powerful typhoons.

And while some of the damage will be reversible, the report warns of several 'tipping points' the world will pass along the way - damage that likely cannot be undone and will further accelerate the destabilizing of the world's climate.

Such events including the collapse of vast ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland which help control ocean currents.

UN Secretary-General António Guterres called the new report a 'code red for humanity'.

He warned: 'The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.'

How do China's emissions compare to the rest of the world?

China's carbon emissions are vast and growing, and experts say the world cannot win the fight against climate change unless Beijing makes massive reductions.

The eastern superpower released a greater volume of greenhouse gases into Earth's atmosphere in 2019 than all of the world's developed nations put together.

It has also tripled its emission levels since the 1990s, crossing the 14 gigatons threshold for the first time ever in 2019.

China argues that it has a right to do what Western countries have done in the past, releasing carbon dioxide in the process of developing its economy.

Its per-person emissions are also about half those of the US, but because China has a huge 1.4 billion population it is way ahead of other nations in overall emissions.

Has Beijing signed up to the Paris climate agreement?

China formally joined the Paris climate agreement in 2016. The legally binding international treaty, adopted by nearly 200 countries, commits governments to moving their economies away from fossil fuels.

One of the main aims is to keep global temperatures 'well below' 2.0C (3.6F) above pre-industrial times and 'endeavour to limit' them to 1.5C.

China is the largest consumer of coal on the planet and produces around 60 per cent of its energy from the highly-polluting fossil fuel

A key aspect of the Paris Agreement is nationally determined contributions (NDCs) - commitments by individual countries to cut emissions.

But according to independent scientific analysis by Climate Action Tracker, which tracks government climate action, China's NDC rating is 'highly insufficient' and 'not at all consistent with holding warming to below 2C'.

What has China promised to do to curb emissions?

President Xi Jinping has said China will aim for its emissions to reach their highest point before 2030 and for carbon neutrality to be achieved by 2060, but he has not said how the country will do this.

When China set out its economic blueprint for the next five years in March climate campaigners called it 'underwhelming' and said there was 'little sign of the change needed [to meet net zero].'

Again, the plan offered few details on how the world's biggest emitter would meet its target of reaching net zero.

It vowed to reduce its 'emissions intensity' – the amount of CO2 produced per unit of GDP – by 18 per cent from 2021 to 2025, but that target is in line with previous trends and could mean greenhouse gas emissions continuing to rise by 1 per cent a year or more.

Will China actually use less coal?

President Xi has also been accused of not going far enough with a promise to 'phase down' coal use from 2026.

China runs around 1,060 coal plants — more than half the world's capacity — and its regional governors have been building even more in an effort to stimulate the economy, with more than 60 currently being built.

The country uses around half of all the coal that's produced across the world every year.

How do China's commitments compare to other countries?

The UK has vowed to slash greenhouse gas emissions further and faster than any other major economy in the next decade, with a target of 68 per cent cuts from 1990 levels by 2030.

The EU has pledged cuts of 55 per cent, compared with 1990 levels, while the US has promised cuts of around 50 per cent from 2005 levels.

The UK has committed to going further and faster than any other nation to tackle climate change (pictured, the world's largest offshore windfarm at Dogger Bank)

President Joe Biden made the pledge in April when he hosted 40 leaders at a virtual summit in the White House to raise ambition on tackling climate change.

China took part but President Xi didn't offer anything new beyond his previous promise in September last year for carbon neutrality to be achieved by 2060.

The country's only commitment for 2030 is to peak its carbon dioxide emissions by that point.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Fifty-five teenagers at an East London state school today got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge - seven more than the offers made to students at the prestigious Eton College - and more than 150 achieved straight As.

The majority of pupils at Newham's Brampton Manor Academy are from ethnic minority backgrounds, in receipt of free school meals or will be the first in their family to attend university.

Sam Dobin, Brampton's sixth form director, said he was 'delighted' that 55 of its students are now set to study at Oxford or Cambridge University this year - which is more than leading independent schools.

At Eton, the 581-year-old boarding school where British premiers including Boris Johnson, David Cameron and Winston Churchill studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers - a fall from 69 last year.

In all, 350 students took their A levels at the school this year with 330 getting into Russell Group universities, including the 55 who got into Oxbridge. In 2014, just one Brampton student received an offer for Oxbridge, but by last year this had risen to 51.

Brampton Manor Academy tweeted praise for high-flying students Kenny and Iyanuoluwa, who will be flying off to Harvard and Stanford Universities in the United States respectively on full scholarships after scoring top A-level grades.

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Students Ade Olugboji (right) and Nyat Aron-Yohannes celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London

At Eton, the prestigious 581-year-old boarding school where British premiers including Boris Johnson and David Cameron studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers - a fall from 69 last year

Brampton Manor Academy tweeted praise for high-flying students Kenny (left) and Iyanuoluwa (right), who will be flying off to Harvard and Stanford Universities in the United States respectively on full scholarships after scoring top A-level grades

Student Amina Lounici, 18 (centre), celebrates with her friend at Brampton Manor Academy in London

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Left: Rachael Folorunsho, 18, at Brampton Manor Academy in London reacts after receiving her A-Level results at Brampton Manor Academy. Right: Susan Hope, 18, of Dagenham, Essex, who is going to study education at Cambridge with the hope of a career in child psychology at Brampton Manor Academy

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record

Seventy per cent of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39 per cent for a non-selective comprehensive school

KEY STATISTICS IN THIS YEAR'S A-LEVEL RESULTS In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record Here are the main figures in this year's A-level results: - The proportion of candidates receiving top grades is the highest on record. A total of 44.8 per cent of entrants were awarded either an A or A*, up from 38.5 per cent in 2020. - Nearly one in five (19.1 per cent) entrants received an A*. This is another record high, and is up from around one in seven (14.3 per cent) last year. - The overall pass rate (grades A* to E) was 99.5 per cent. This is down very slightly from 99.7 per cent in 2020. - Some 88.5 per cent received a C or above, up from 88.0 per cent in 2020 and the highest since at least 2000. - Girls have extended their lead over boys in the top grades. The proportion of girls who got A or higher was 46.9 per cent, 4.8 percentage points higher than boys (42.1 per cent). Last year, girls led boys by 3.2 percentage points (39.9 per cent girls, 36.7 per centboys). Boys briefly took the lead in 2017 and 2018, following a long period in which girls had been ahead. - Girls have also extended their lead in the highest grade, A*. The proportion of girls who got A* was 19.7 per cent, 1.3 percentage points highest than boys (18.4 per cent). Last year the gap was just 0.2 points (14.4 per cent girls, 14.2 per cent boys). - The most popular subject this year was maths. It was taken by 97,690 entrants, up 3.6 per cent on 2020. - Psychology remains the second most popular subject. It was taken by 71,235 entrants, up 9.2 per cent on 2020. Biology was once again the third most popular subject, taken by 70,055 entrants, a rise of 7.6 per cent. - Chinese saw the biggest percentage drop in candidates for a single subject with more than 1,000 entrants, falling by 18.9 per cent from 1,617 to 1,312. - Geography saw the biggest percentage jump in candidates of any subject with more than 1,000 entrants, rising by 16.8 per cent from 30,203 to 35,268. - There were 824,718 A-levels awarded, up 5.1 per cent on last year's total (784,959). Advertisement

Brampton Manor opened its sixth form in 2012 with the aim of transforming progression rates to Oxford, Cambridge and other elite Russell Group universities for pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The oversubscribed selective sixth form accepts 300 to 400 students a year and some of them travel for as long as two hours each way to attend.

After a bout of excited screaming, hugs and hyperventilating, Nyat Aron-Yohannes said there was 'black excellence in this building' after hearing about how many of her classmates are now heading to Oxford or Cambridge.

The 18-year-old of Purfleet, Essex, who got three A*s and is going to Oxford to study philosophy, politics and economics, said 'the struggle was real'.

She added: 'We woke up early to come into school and sometimes it did not even seem like it was worth it at those times when the grades were not matching up to your work ethic.

'Then lockdown happened and you had to persevere on your own because you did not have your classmates or teachers physically nearby to push you. You had to find strength somewhere else.

'I am just grateful it paid off, we were walking in faith.'

She said she was happy for her relatives, particularly her father Abraham, adding: 'I am the first in my family to go to Oxford.

'My father told me this could be possible. His words were of motivation.'

Ade Olugboji, 18, of Purfleet, Essex, got four A*s and is going to study maths and philosophy at Oxford.

He said: 'Brampton has a philosophy of hard work. I started at 6am and left at 6pm. I knew there was going to be work but I did not understand the level until I got here. The thing is once I saw everyone else working so hard and so well, it did not seem that it (success) was impossible.'

Kenny Ikeji, 18, of Dagenham, Essex, got the three A* grades he needed to study computer science at Harvard.

After picking up his grades, he said: 'The feeling is good and seeing everyone happy as well is great because during the two years (of study) everyone was stressed out but on a day like this, it is as if all the hard work has paid off.

'There are lots of people going to Oxford and Cambridge and I am not surprised because you would expect it when you see how hard everyone here works. Once they had their university offers, there was a new fire in them to study to make sure they got the grades to go.'

He described the school as a place where people do not let their inner city surroundings affect their hopes.

He said: 'It is peer pressure because when everybody around you is studying, you see your friends getting better grades and then you want to get better grades. The teachers all push us and they make you want to do well so that you want to work. They do not force you to do it.'

Mr Dobin said the students had overcome a lot of disruption over the past two years but 'they have kept incredibly determined, focused and motivated'.

He added: 'The results today just demonstrate that they are being rewarded for the immense effort they have put in and the talent they have shown.'

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades after it was revealed nearly half of this morning's results were either A* or A - but the Education Secretary admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers deciding the results again.

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record.

And according to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019, the last time they sat exams, as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show, but on the most popular courses up to a third of students may be rejected or have to go through clearing due to the number of people getting the required grades.

Students Nana Arthur (left) and Kerena Arthur (right, unrelated) celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Students at Brampton Manor Academy in London queue nervously before receiving their A-Level results

Kairon Concepcion (centre) at Brampton Manor Academy in London, celebrates after receiving his A-Level results

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Fifty-five teenagers at an East London state school today got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London

Left: Student Victoria Eingoff, 18, (left) celebrates with her mother Anna at Brampton Manor Academy. Right: Students Nana Arthur (left) and Kerena Arthur (right, unrelated) celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy

Left: Student Kenny Ikeji at Brampton Manor Academy after receiving his A-Level results. Right: Students at Brampton Manor Academy in London react after receiving their A-Level results

Tawyeeb (left) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying Computer science at St Andrews while Keerthi (right) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying medicine at Imperial college

Saihaan (left) achieved A*A*A and will be studying maths and Economics at the LSE, Lamisa (centre) is off to UCL to study biomedical science after achieving A*A*A* and Declan (right) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying Economics at Warwick University

Students celebrating top A-level grades Student, 19, with cerebral palsy says she's 'in shock' after receiving top marks Ellie Curran with her mother Margie at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool Nineteen-year-old Ellie Curran, who has cerebral palsy, celebrated receiving an A* in sociology, a B in business and a distinction in BTEC law when she picked up her results at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool. She said she was 'in shock' but very excited about going on to study criminology at Liverpool Hope University. Miss Curran, who is also a keen wheelchair football player, said: 'It's been hard working from home and trying to get everything done.' Her mother Margie said: 'She's very dedicated, in lockdown she would be up at 8am at her desk. 'She's always been dedicated, I think she just wants to prove everyone wrong and show she can do it.' Student who suffered 'life-threatening' brain tumour achieved three A*s and now hopes to study at Cambridge Melos Krasniqi poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London An A-level student who suffered a 'life-threatening' brain tumour battled back to achieve three A*s and now hopes to study at Cambridge University. Melos Krasniqi celebrated with friends and family after seeing his 'better than expected' results in maths, physics and geography. The 17-year-old, who studied at Kensington Aldridge Academy in west London, said he missed a few months in his first year after doctors discovered a tumour in his brain. He told the PA news agency: 'Midway through October in my first year I had a scan for some headaches and it turned out I wasn't very well. 'I had some complications in my brain and emailed the school to tell them what had happened. The teachers were so supportive. 'I had two surgeries to resolve everything and they removed the tumour, which was life-threatening because it had been going on for some time. 'The teachers recommended that I could skip the rest of the year and re-do Year 12 or do whatever I felt best. 'I came back part-time a few months after my surgery and had catch-up sessions, which was obviously more work on top of the pandemic.' Melos said he had no intention of missing a school year and, during his recovery, he asked his teachers for more work so he could catch up. He now hopes to study engineering at Cambridge University. It came as dozens of students poured into the school, near Grenfell Tower, on Tuesday morning to pick up their results. Another Oxbridge hopeful, Leila Jarvis, 18, had tears in her eyes after seeing she had achieved three A*s and an A. She said: 'The past two years has definitely been challenging - you do kind of wonder what kind of grades you'll get so it has been stressful. 'But the school has been great, they've really rooted for us and given us a lot of help, especially as my time in this school has seen things like the Grenfell tragedy, which has made it really hard for the community. 'I live right around the corner and obviously it's had a big impact - everyone was impacted. 'I now hope to go to Oxford University to study history and politics.' Ahmed El-Bouhy, 18, achieved four A*s and will now study natural sciences at Cambridge University. He said: 'It's been really stressful and, after last year with everyone's issues with the grading system, I was slightly worried it could have been the same situation this year. 'But I'm really happy and delighted with the results and look forward to going to university.' Other students celebrating their results included one who will be the first in her family to attend university, while another is planning to join the RAF. Nottingham students who received four A*s Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School. She said: 'This year in particular has made me more anxious to get my results. We had loads of mini exams so as much as I worked for that, it's still not the same as having one final end-of-year exam. 'I am going to Loughborough University to do Maths and Sports Science. I am not sure what I want to do next, I am taking each step as it comes. I feel university will open more doors for me. 'My friends and family have congratulated me - everyone is really happy and relieved for me. 'Nottingham High School always tends to do above average, around 45 per cent of my school got A*'s this year and 95 per cent got B's and above.' Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School. He said: 'Now I have my results, I am going to the London School of Economics to study PPE – Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Perhaps I would like a career in politics but I am keeping it open. 'This year, with lockdowns, it has been very different with the lack of time to prepare and being unsure about what was going to happen with the exams. 'But with the support of family and friends you get through it and it has turned out okay in the end. My parents are very happy and teary. 'It is nice to get the stress off my shoulders now. It feels like my school has done really well, everyone I have spoken to seems really happy - all my friends have got into their universities.' Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University. He added: 'I did very well, I'm really happy and pleased. My place is now confirmed to do Physics and Philosophy and Oxford University. 'My friends and family knew how much these A-Levels meant to me, they are very pleased and relieved - mainly for my emotional state. 'This year, for me, there has been an increase level of stress, just because normally I would have a set period of time to revise for a large final set of exams. 'The uncertainty was stressful but it has all turned out well in the end. All any of us could do was just work as hard as we could. I feel very lucky. 'I am seeing a lot of happy people, my cohort seemed to be pleased with their results. I am now excited though for what is to come - if I do well in Physics, I'll see if I can solve any big equations.' Advertisement

Headteacher Nikki Clifton said of the three students on GB News: 'They're so brave, but they're a credit to each and every youngster up and down, around the country and I couldn't be happier for them.

'Today's a fabulous day, it's one of my favourite days of the year and I think coming after the two years of disruption, I think I'm really looking forward to having a great day of fun and celebration with the students.'

Asked how she was feeling, Ms Clifton said: 'I'm excited, a little bit nervous as I always am on these days because it is a nervous day and students are nervous. But I'm hopeful that our students will open a set of results that will give (sic) them where they want to go and I hope that is replicated up and down the country.'

She added: 'It has been a very different and rigorous set of processes, and it's very different to any other year. You can't compare this set of year's results with last year, we've got a completely different set of assessment parameters, a whole new policy, a whole different way of working for our students and our staff, and I couldn't be prouder of them.'

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1 per cent - the highest proportion since the top grade was first introduced in 2010.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School.

She said: 'This year in particular has made me more anxious to get my results. We had loads of mini exams so as much as I worked for that, it's still not the same as having one final end-of-year exam.

'I am going to Loughborough University to do Maths and Sports Science. I am not sure what I want to do next, I am taking each step as it comes. I feel university will open more doors for me. My friends and family have congratulated me - everyone is really happy and relieved for me.

'Nottingham High School always tends to do above average, around 45 per cent of my school got A*'s this year and 95 per cent got B's and above.'

Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*'s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School.

He said: 'Now I have my results, I am going to the London School of Economics to study PPE – Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Perhaps I would like a career in politics but I am keeping it open. This year, with lockdowns, it has been very different with the lack of time to prepare and being unsure about what was going to happen with the exams.

'But with the support of family and friends you get through it and it has turned out okay in the end. My parents are very happy and teary. It is nice to get the stress off my shoulders now. It feels like my school has done really well, everyone I have spoken to seems really happy - all my friends have got into their universities.'

Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University.

He added: 'I did very well, I'm really happy and pleased. My place is now confirmed to do Physics and Philosophy and Oxford University.

'My friends and family knew how much these A-Levels meant to me, they are very pleased and relieved - mainly for my emotional state.

'This year, for me, there has been an increase level of stress, just because normally I would have a set period of time to revise for a large final set of exams.

'The uncertainty was stressful but it has all turned out well in the end. All any of us could do was just work as hard as we could. I feel very lucky. I am seeing a lot of happy people, my cohort seemed to be pleased with their results. I am now excited though for what is to come - if I do well in Physics, I'll see if I can solve any big equations.'

One sixth former - David White, 18, from Romford, east London- has won a place at one of Britain's top universities despite only attending school for 63 days in the academic year after catching Covid twice in just six months.

It meant he could only attend for just over nine weeks in his final year of A-level studies with schools also shut during the second lockdown.

David also missed huge chunks in his first year during the initial lockdown and says he has hardly been at school in the last two years for his A Level course

Today, he discovered he scored the top marks in his A-levels to confirm his place to study physics at King's College London in September.

David credits staff at Drapers Academy in Harold Hill, near Romford, with keeping him on track.

He said: 'It has been totally crazy getting Covid twice in the space of six months. I was not really ill either time, but I lost my sense of taste and smell the second time.

'It was more the isolation and the time I had to take off school on top of all the time I had missed because of the lockdown.

'The school has been incredible though. They have made sure I keep up with my studies by getting all students tablets and helping us digitally. That has kept me on the right track.

'It has been a really difficult couple of years for all of us and the young people at schools have had it really hard.

'I am so pleased to get into my first-choice university. I had hardly been in school. I'm proud of what I achieved but think I could have been even better in a normal year.'

David wasn't the only person at the school to contract the virus twice. Head of Sixth Form, Lee Bryant, is still suffering from fatigue some 10 months after a second bout of Covid.

He said: 'I was off from October to December and still need to use the lift rather than the stairs. I can say in the 32 years I have been teaching that this has been the most difficult.

'Our staff have been excellent and the students on returning to class have hit the ground running after overcoming many hurdles and getting used to Zoom, internet. They have adapted so well.'

Despite a challenging year 80 per cent of Drapers Academy A-level students achieved grades A*-C with several off to top London universities.

Other high achievers at the school include Jorja Korosec, 18, of Romford, who will study History at Queen's College, Cambridge.

She said: 'I have to thank the school for their amazing support during what has been a tough year. I am so excited to be going to Cambridge.'

Drapers Academy principal Darren Luckhurst said: 'I have been totally amazed by our students who have shown such resilience. Their determination to succeed is shown through the fruits of their labour.

'I have some excellent staff here who put their heart into teaching and have taken on extra work as well as continuing to teach other school years.'

'Many of our students have parents who work in the care sector or the NHS so we often help homeschool other family members and hold down part time jobs. They worked so hard to achieve their results.'

Evie Smith, 18, gained her place at university after combining her studies with playing for Liverpool women's under-21s.

The Archbishop Blanch School pupil will be able to study sports science at Liverpool John Moores University after achieving a distinction star and distinction BTECs and a B at A-level.

She said the decision on whether she takes up the place could depend on whether she is offered a professional football contract.

She said: 'I'm really happy. I've been playing for the under-21s for the past two seasons while I've been in sixth form. It's difficult trying to balance my time but the club are really supportive with that.'

Pupils at an inner city state school are celebrating after 55 teenagers got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge, which is more than the offers made to Eton College students.

The majority of pupils at Brampton Manor Academy in Newham, east London, are from ethnic minority backgrounds, in receipt of free school meals (FSMs), or will be the first in their family to attend university.

Sam Dobin, Brampton's sixth form director, said he is 'delighted' that 55 of its students are now set to study at Oxford or Cambridge University this year, which is more than leading independent schools.

At Eton, where Boris Johnson studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers, a fall from 69 last year.

After a bout of excited screaming, hugs and hyperventilating, Nyat Aron-Yohannes said there was 'black excellence in this building' after hearing about how many of her classmates are now heading to Oxford or Cambridge.

The 18-year-old of Purfleet, Essex, who got three A*s and is going to Oxford to study philosophy, politics and economics, said 'the struggle was real'.

She added: 'We woke up early to come into school and sometimes it did not even seem like it was worth it at those times when the grades were not matching up to your work ethic.

'Then lockdown happened and you had to persevere on your own because you did not have your classmates or teachers physically nearby to push you. You had to find strength somewhere else. I am just grateful it paid off, we were walking in faith.'

She said she was happy for her relatives, particularly her father Abraham, adding: 'I am the first in my family to go to Oxford. My father told me this could be possible. His words were of motivation.'

Ade Olugboji, 18, of Purfleet, Essex, got four A*s and is going to study maths and philosophy at Oxford.

He said: 'Brampton has a philosophy of hard work. I started at 6am and left at 6pm. I knew there was going to be work but I did not understand the level until I got here.

'The thing is once I saw everyone else working so hard and so well, it did not seem that it (success) was impossible.'

In all, 350 students took their A levels at the school this year with 330 getting into Russell Group universities, including the 55 who got into Oxbridge.

In 2014, just one Brampton student received an offer for Oxbridge, but by last year this had risen to 51.

Brampton Manor opened its sixth form in 2012 with the aim of transforming progression rates to Oxford, Cambridge and other elite Russell Group universities for pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The oversubscribed selective sixth form accepts 300 to 400 students a year and some of them travel for as long as two hours each way to attend. Kenny Ikeji, 18, of Dagenham, east London, got the three A* grades he needed to study computer science at Harvard.

After picking up his grades, he said: 'The feeling is good and seeing everyone happy as well is great because during the two years (of study) everyone was stressed out but on a day like this, it is as if all the hard work has paid off.

'There are lots of people going to Oxford and Cambridge and I am not surprised because you would expect it when you see how hard everyone here works. Once they had their university offers, there was a new fire in them to study to make sure they got the grades to go.'

He described the school as a place where people do not let their inner city surroundings affect their hopes.

He said: 'It is peer pressure because when everybody around you is studying, you see your friends getting better grades and then you want to get better grades. The teachers all push us and they make you want to do well so that you want to work. They do not force you to do it.'

Susan Hope, 18, also from Dagenham, is going to study education at Cambridge with the aim of a career in child psychology. She said: 'I did not want to apply (to Cambridge) because of the fear of me getting rejected, but coming here made me think 'If they can do it, then why can't I?'

'Coming from this area you do not see that many people going to university at all, but if you take that chance, work hard and you can achieve anything - that is what Brampton teaches us.

'I came here expecting to have to work hard, and I think that is just the work ethic the school instils in us. We are all willing to work for it and we are in a support system that just nudges us a bit further to achieve those dreams that we are all pretty much capable of.'

Katerina (left) achieved an A*A*A* and will be going to Exeter University to study medicine while Samin achieved A*A*A* and will be off to Oriel college, Oxford University

Abigail (left) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying liberal arts at Durham University, Chelsea (centre) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying History and Politics at Warwick University and Larisa (right) achieved A*A*A*A and is heading off to Edinburgh University to study computer science

Ratul (left) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying Electrical and Electronic engineering at Imperial College of Science & Technology while Hana (right) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying at LSE

Chloe (left) achieved A*A*A* and will be off to TLucy Cavendish college, Cambridge university, while Tigran (right) achieved A*A*A and will be studying Economics at Warwick

Olaotan (left) achieved A*A*A and will be heading off to Cambridge university to study Law and Lois (right) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying English literature at Durham university

Maryam (left) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying History at the LSE, Yahya (centre) achieved A*A*A* and will be studying medicine at UCL and Sana (right) achieved A*A*A and will be studying biomedical science at Warwick university

Samuel (left) is heading off to LSE to study Economics after achieving an A*A*A* and Chisolum (right) who achieved A*A*A* will be studying Geography at St Catherine's, Oxford University

Left: Head girl Charlotte Maxwell at Regent House School & Preparatory Dept. in Newtownards. Right: Laily Tuhill smiles after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House

Left: Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results. Right: Emelia Ambrose hugs a friend after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea

Students receive their A-level results on August 10, 2021 in London

Students receive their A-level results on August 10, 2021 in London

Faith Bryant (left) and Abbie Hollis at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Leila Jarvis hugs her mother (name not given) after receiving her grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Shalayna Morton reacts as she finds out her A-level results at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) in north London

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Lulu Sorano, 18, with her mother Tracey (left) at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire, as students receive their A-Level results

Fatima Al-Kinani (Left) and Maram Al Dandal at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Ayomide Olumade (L) with Segal Kumar (R), after they received their results at Peter Seymonds College, Winchester

Shy schoolgirl, 18, got top grades to become a doctor after building her confidence by working at a 'Del Boy' market stall Mia Goddard, 18, plucked up the courage to start working on a market stall when she was just 14-years-old A shy schoolgirl got top grades to become a doctor after building her confidence - by working at a 'Del Boy' market stall. Mia Goddard, 18, plucked up the courage to start working on a market stall when she was just 14-years-old. She spent the next two years speaking to passers-by - and was inspired to help her lonely customers by becoming a doctor. Mia has now picked up A* grades in biology, chemistry and maths at A level following her years working at Cardiff Market. She is now set to study at Cardiff University School of Medicine after leaving her Saturday job on the haberdashery stall. Mia said: 'Working at Cardiff Market for two years propelled me to do medicine,' she said. It was a people facing job which gave me a lot of skills and I met a lot of different people. 'Some people would come to the stall telling you they felt isolated or lonely and talking to them and seeing those scenarios has given me more empathy. 'Most of the conditions I saw were things like mental health, people with learning difficulties and people who were lonely. 'We had some elderly customers and some with Alzheimer's who came with their carers, some people just came to talk. That was a big part of my decision to do medicine, I knew I wanted to work with people and it helped give me those skills.' Mia got her grades after getting a full scholarship to take A levels at Cardiff Sixth Form College. The keen runner, who ran for Wales under-17s in cross country, said it had been strange studying for A levels during the pandemic. She added: 'Our lessons continued online at the college but it was hard working from home and being isolated from friends and not able to go out.' Advertisement

Nana Arthur, 18, of Rainham, east London, who is heading to Cambridge University to study philosophy, said: 'We are disadvantaged people and this school gave us a way to move up.

'To be honest, as soon as you come into this school you can't not succeed - it is quite infectious.'

Her friend, Kerena Arthur, of Dalston, east London, also 18, is going to Oxford to study politics, philosophy and economics after getting three A*s.

She said: 'I am very, very pleased. I was not expecting it at all and struggled a lot but I worked hard. It is crazy.

'If you are slacking, your friends will tell you. You were not on your own. It was very much like a family in terms of the way people pushed each other. I can't lie, the teachers push you as well and, if you are slacking, you will know about it.'

Romero Featherstone, 18, of Plaistow, east London, said he was 'a little' surprised but pleased after he got the three A* grades which will take him to Cambridge to study chemical engineering.

He said: 'The school prepares you well. The school regularly get people into Oxbridge, so going here meant that I thought I had a good chance.'

Mr Dobin said the students had overcome a lot of disruption over the past two years but 'they have kept incredibly determined, focused and motivated'.

He added: 'The results today just demonstrate that they are being rewarded for the immense effort they have put in and the talent they have shown.'

Paul Vicars, Headteacher of Birkenhead School said: 'The results are great but students are far more than academic results on a piece of paper.

'I'm immensely proud of all the students and I think they've probably worked harder for these results than any other cohort before them because of the pandemic.

'It's difficult not to get emotional seeing everyone coming to collect their results, knowing what they've achieved and the challenges they have overcome; these days are always impactful to watch as a teacher because you want the students to be rewarded for their efforts and they certainly have been.'

Chloe Byers, 18, got three A*s to study Biochemistry at University of Bath. She said: 'I can't believe it, I was not expecting those results, it's an incredible surprise.

'It's been hard because when you're in school you'll see your mates at break time or you can turn to someone next to you in class if you don't understand something.

'The girls have been great at keeping in touch with each other though, we have set up group FaceTime sessions on the weekends and done quiz nights so we didn't feel like we lost touch.

Her mother Ruth said: 'We've both been in tears, I couldn't be any more proud of Chloe because she has just taken everything in her stride. She was a new student at the sixth form and then went into lockdown so she's really been up against it.

'I think she would have been happy with three As but she ended up with three A*s and you could see how delighted we were it was written all over our faces. I'm a single mum and Chloe and I are very close but the lockdown definitely brought us closer.

'We converted the spare room into her office so she had a space to work without it feeling like schoolwork had taken over her home. I'm just so overwhelmed to come here today and see that all her hard work has been worth it.'

Head girl, Lizzie Hyatt, 18, got three A*s and an A to study General Engineering at University of Durham. She said: 'I think not seeing my friends and having that social interaction has been the hardest part. Coming into school and seeing my friends really helped to motivate me so within a month of sitting and doing online learning at home constantly my motivation just wasn't there anymore.

'I still felt like the quality of learning that we were getting online was great from the school, we could still speak to teachers whenever we needed and they were in touch with us everyday but it was just hard not having the support network of friends around you.

'But to come and get these results today and see everybody without having to socially distance is so special. It feels amazing just to be able to hug my friends and celebrate with them finally.'

Head boy, Archie Parker-Goff, 18, got four A*s to study Economics at University of Bristol. He said: 'It's definitely been more intense doing A-levels through lockdown.

'The learning style was a lot more independent and there were definitely days when you would wake up and couldn't be bothered and it was really hard to get motivated.

Polish teenager who couldn't speak English when he arrived in Britain is off to Cambridge after achieving three A*s Milosz Kowalski poses with his grades at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire A Polish teenager who couldn't speak English when he arrived in Britain 'with nothing' has earned himself a place at Cambridge University after achieving three A* grades in his A Levels. Milosz Kowalski achieved the top grades in history, French and sociology - as well as an another A* in his extended project - and will now go on to study Human Social and Political Sciences at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge. The determined 18 year old graduated from Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hants, after a tumultuous journey for his family who moved from Poland 14 years ago 'without even cutlery to put on the table'. Now 'proud' Milosz, who lives in Southampton, Hants, and plans to work as a sociologist or in politics, says family in his native Poland are in 'disbelief' at his achievement. He said: 'It's a huge achievement coming from an immigrant origin and getting into Cambridge. I feel very proud of myself. 'My family were shocked, surprised and completely amazed - especially those still living in Poland. They were just in disbelief. 'It's been a very special process. When I came to college in 2019 I never though any of this would have have happened. 'I wouldn't say it helped, but lockdowns gave me the opportunity to really focus on my studies. 'I also didn't have to commute the two and a half hours to college on the train each day, which meant I was able to rest and revise more. 'The bad side was not having as much support, and it was more difficult to motivate myself. 'A lot of the time I was quite upset with the long commutes and lockdowns, but it all feels worth it now.' Milosz, who lives with his mother, grandmother and 16 year old brother, said it felt 'special' to have come from an immigrant background and be accepted at one of the most prestigious universities in the world. 'I was born in Poland and lived there for the first three or four years of my life, then I moved here with my mother moved in around 2007,' he said. 'I do remember going to primary school and not speaking a word of English, which is so bizarre when I look back, but I learned the language quickly. 'We moved here for various reasons - economic reasons but also just to have a better life as well. 'To come here as we did with not even any cutlery on the table and to get there is a big development. 'We came here with nothing. It was difficult getting started up; building a life here... especially seeing as my mum is a single mother to me and my younger brother Jakub. 'Now it is better, but then it was quite an industrious life, building everything from scratch, getting a house.' Milosz said he was going to claim a free Nando's, with the chain offering free food for students collecting results, with college friends he has hardly been able to see until recently. He added: 'We're doing a belated birthday party with everyone who had their birthdays during lockdown. 'I didn't see any friends for months on end during lockdowns, especially because my grandmother who lives with us is vulnerable, so I was even more restricted. 'I think the main thing is to celebrate what we have done during the pandemic. Me and my friends supported each other a lot and celebrating everything we have achieved needs to be celebrated.' He now has his sights set on a career as a sociologist - though he admits politics could also be on the cards as a career option. He said: 'I want to become a sociologist, researching society for a research institution. I only recently discovered my passion for sociology whilst doing my extended project. 'Politics is also an option - I'm a bit wary because it's often toxic, but I would definitely consider it. 'I'm excited to start university in October. I'm looking forward to a fresh start. 'These past two years have been difficult, so I'm looking forward to a more normal experience at Cambridge. 'Obviously it will be difficult, but I am optimistic - especially after the pandemic.' Advertisement

'But the teachers and the school have been amazing with their support and I was moving around different rooms in the house just to change the scene when I was studying. I spent a lot of time between home and visiting my grandma as well and it's been lovely to come and collect my results with her because she's so proud.'

His grandmother Sarah Parker said: 'I'm very proud of him. We are quite an upbeat family and we laugh a lot but it has been worrying at times how the lockdown might affect them and you feel really sorry for them because they can't go out and see their friends for a bit of light relief. But to come with him today and share this moment as he opened these results has been wonderful.'

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, Tory chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The Government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

Writing in the Telegraph, Mr Williamson said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year - it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Mr Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, he said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

He said: 'We do have a rigorous system of grading and awarding. People have been awarded this grade on the basis of evidence.

'We took a difficult decision, and that decision was children were to be assessed on what they had been taught. We have seen various amounts of disruption around the country and children's experiences have been different.

'But still, you have a very clear grading system, you still see children who are achieving A*s, As, Bs, Cs, have really achieved so very, very much, and I think employers can have real confidence in the grades that they get. Let's not forget this is an unprecedented year.'

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.'

She added: 'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet.

'Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.'

He added: 'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

The Department for Education has said all A-level grades have been checked by schools as part of a quality assurance (QA) process - and one in five schools had a sample of their grades checked by exam boards.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year there will not be an algorithm used to moderate grades. Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi), said it could be more difficult to get on to a top course this year if grades are missed.

'It could be harder to get in than usual if you fall a grade or two behind your offer and if it is a competitive course,' he said. 'My advice would be to act swiftly if you need to find a place somewhere else.'

An analysis conducted by PA Media suggests that the day before results were due to be released, for applicants living in England, there were more than 26,000 courses with availability.

It shows that, as of Monday afternoon, 14 of the 24 Russell Group universities had vacancies on courses for English residents - around 2,390 courses between them - on the Ucas clearing site. The numbers of courses listed change frequently as different courses are filled, or become available.

At the same point last year, the day before results day, 17 of the Russell Group institutions had around 4,485 undergraduate courses listed on clearing with potential availability for students in England.

Last week, the head of the admissions service warned that clearing is likely to be 'more competitive' for students seeking places at selective universities this year due to uncertainty on teacher-assessed grades.

Left: Georgia Davies laughs after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea. Right: Lanre Dada poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

A student is congratulated by her mother after receiving her A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

Milosz Kowalski, Natasha Pell (centre) and Millie Smith, pose with their grades at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire

Student Amina Lounici, 18 (centre), celebrates with her friend at Brampton Manor Academy in London

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

HOW WILL EXAM RESULTS BE DECIDED AND HOW CAN STUDENTS APPEAL? When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results? Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week. A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12. Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead. The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day. How have the grades been decided this year? All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment. Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades. Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate. Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks. Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted. In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades. Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades. What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades? Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made. Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade. If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf. In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed. Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results? Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn. AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December. The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam. What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022? In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams. But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic. The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term. Advertisement

Clare Marchant, Ucas's chief executive, urged students receiving their grades to make a decision 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks.

But she added: 'On Tuesday, I am expecting to wake up and have record numbers with their first choice.'

Last week, the Medical Schools Council, which represents 44 heads of medical schools across the UK, warned that some schools may still struggle to increase the number of students they admit despite the announcement that medicine and dentistry schools will receive funding to expand courses.

Students who want to study medicine will have the option to defer their places until next year or choose to move to a different medical school amid capacity constraints, the MSC said.

Last night, Ofqual's interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said that traditional tests only provided a 'snapshot' of a pupil's ability and the new system allowed a fairer assessment gauged over a longer time period.

Speaking to the BBC, Mr Lebus admitted that grades may be slightly higher this year, adding: 'I think a good way to think of it is exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph - you capture an instant, it's a form of sampling.

'Whereas teacher assessment, it allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment.

'I think, from that point of view, we can feel satisfied that it's likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.'

Ms Bousted told the Times: 'I think there was a political decision to put teachers in the firing line. We think there will be a rise in the top grades but I've been assured by government that they won't say teachers have been too generous.'

Mr Lebus said that the watchdog wanted to create a system where every student was given a fair chance to show what they can do.

'I'm very confident that, when they get their grades on Tuesday and Thursday this week, they'll be able to feel satisfied that that's happened,' he told the broadcaster.

Mr Lebus said there have been three stages of checks to ensure students can feel they have been 'fairly treated', including Ofqual checking the policies that schools have for awarding grades and exam boards looking over them.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate. Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

It comes as Tory peer Lord Lucas predicted that private school pupils will get short shrift in admissions because universities are prioritising the disadvantaged.

The editor of the Good Schools Guide said yesterday that institutes will be 'pretty cautious' about giving places to fee-paying youngsters who missed their grades as they had 'all the chances' to succeed.

Instead, they will give leg-ups to pupils who experienced 'challenges' such as having 'nowhere to work' during lockdown.

But despite alleged grade inflation, individual pupils could lose out and there is likely to be variability between schools.

Last night, Ofqual defended the system, claiming the results are 'more accurate' than if exams had been held mid-pandemic.

The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time. We know exams are the fairest form of assessment but in their absence this year there is no one better placed to judge their abilities than their teachers.'

Suggestions that almost half of today's grades will be an A or A* were reported in the Times.

Mr Williamson wrote to all teachers, thanking them for their 'hard work' on grading. The Association of School and College Leaders stressed that qualifications had not been 'devalued'.

Lord Lucas said anyone not getting the grades they need for university should call the admissions tutor. But he said that 'tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well'.

He added that institutes will be 'pretty cautious about giving extra space to someone from an independent school' as 'they've had all the chances' to succeed.

'I think admissions tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well,' he said. 'They haven't had half the challenges of someone else who has nowhere to work, or doesn't have an online connection.'

Kate Green, Labour's shadow education secretary, said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard in extraordinary circumstances and should be proud of the results they are receiving today. They have done this in spite of a Conservative government which has let them down at every turn and shown no ambition for their futures.'

It came after Sir Keir Starmer warned that 'chaos and incompetence' in Government had created extra stress for those awaiting their results.

The Labour leader said Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Mr Williamson had failed to act early enough to ensure this summer's results operations run smoothly.

'It frustrates me immensely that this week's big moment in so many young people's lives is being risked by the chaos and incompetence at the top of this Government,' he said.

The Department for Education said it recognises the 'unprecedented challenges pupils and students have faced' during the pandemic and that a 'rigorous system to ensure grades are fair' has been put in place.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@French detectives have blamed 'terrible weather' for their failure to find the body of British hiker Esther Dingley, which was eventually discovered by her own boyfriend in an area already searched by police.

Dan Colegate, 38, uncovered 37-year-old Esther's body on Monday after she vanished last November during a solo hike in the Pyrenees mountains.

Her remains were surrounded by some of her hiking kit, including brightly coloured clothes and a yellow sleeping mat.

Yet specialist French teams made up of mountain police and soldiers supported by aircraft and sniffer dogs had completely failed to locate any of it.

This was despite a bone from Esther's skull being found close to her last known route on the Porte de la Gléré mountain pass between Spain and France.

An investigating source in France said: 'Yes, this failure has raised questions but terrible weather including high winds and rain over the past couple of weeks hampered the search.

'It was impossible to get a drone up, and some of the higher areas were extremely [difficult] to get to as the weather deteriorated.'

The source added: 'The bad weather set in soon after the skull bone was found at the side of the path.'

French detectives have blamed 'terrible weather' for their failure to find the body of British hiker Esther Dingley (right), which was eventually discovered by her own boyfriend Dan Colegate (left) in an area already searched by police

Dan Colegate, 38, uncovered 37-year-old Esther's body on Monday after she vanished last November during a solo hike in the Pyrenees mountains

The French teams included soldiers from the High Mountain Gendarmerie Platoon from nearby Luchon, and also a company of gendarmes from Saint-Gaudens.

It is common for the military to be tasked with search operations in France because of their specialist training.

Christophe Amunzateguy, the public prosecutor in Saint-Gaudens, is coordinating the investigation into Esther's death, and he too has blamed wind and rain for hampering French efforts to gather evidence.

Investigations have been 'complicated by the wind and the weather of recent weeks in the mountains,' said Amunzateguy.

He added that the spot where Esther's body was found was 'not the kind of place you just come across. It is high in the mountains and difficult to access.'

Amunzateguy confirmed that a drone with a remote pilot in Saint-Gaudens had been allocated to search teams, but that it had trouble flying in poor conditions.

In December, French police even claimed to have 'fully searched' 17.4 square miles of the Pyrenees for Esther – including the point where her body was eventually found.

Gendarmerie Captain Jean-Marc Bordinaro said at the time: 'We have searched a very large area – 28 square kilometres in all – with specialist mountain teams, with dogs, with helicopters all along the route she said she was taking, and there is nothing.

'It's not a particularly difficult route and at the time she was on the mountain the weather was good,' he added.

This led to Captain Jean Marc Bordinaro concluding that 'there was no evidence at all that the missing hiker was ever even in France.'

Colegate, who is believed to have been searching alone, alerted officers to his find on Monday morning.

He said he was concentrating his search efforts on the area where Esther's skull bone was found, around Port de Gléré in particular.

Despite the apparent failures in the French police and military searches, Amunzateguy was relying on them for vital information from the scene.

On Wednesday, a team of Criminal Investigation Technicians (ICTs in French) from Toulouse was still up in the mountains, examining the place where Colegate found Esther's 'skeletal remains'.

They were said to be in a 'natural hideaway', such as a gully or cave, said another investigating source.

The breakthrough came soon after French investigators admitted for the first time that Esther's death may have been the result of foul play.

While 'prioritising a tragic accident,' Amunzateguy said: 'The aim is to put forward a scenario to explain the disappearance of Esther Dingley,

'To find out what may have happened — whether it was an accidental thesis, or a criminal thesis, because we are not closing the door to any hypothesis.'

Missing equipment includes Esther's missing yellow Lanshun ½ Ultralight tent, which has always been considered crucial to solving the mystery, because of forensic clues it is likely to yield.

The tent is made of nylon, silicon and aluminium, and so would last in the wilds of the Pyrenees for days, despite exposure to the elements.

A spokesman for Esther's family said before the latest find: 'When this clothing and kit does turn up, it is likely to answer a lot of questions — or pose some more'.

The camper van used by Dingley and Colegate on their European tour remains in a compound belonging to the Spanish Civil Guard, in Besanquein in the Pyrenees

Last month, human remains later confirmed to be Esther's were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain , just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish

Amunzateguy said he had given his team 'a month to investigate, so that they could work in peace and try to find out what happened.'

As public prosecutor of St-Gaudens, Amunzateguy has been tasked with investigating Esther's death, and is being supported by judicial police and other agencies.

He has the power to escalate the case into a full-blown criminal enquiry if compelling evidence of foul play emerges.

Esther went missing on November 22 while solo hiking in the Pyrenees. She was reported missing by Colegate on November 24, just a day before her trip was due to end, sparking a massive manhunt.

The search was suspended in December due to deteriorating weather but resumed in the Spring and human remains, later confirmed to be a piece of Esther's skull, were found a fortnight ago.

Colegate announced Esther's remains had been found in a statement yesterday, adding an accident was 'the most likely hypothesis, given the location and other early indications.

'A full investigation is underway to confirm the details surrounding this tragedy.

'The family remain incredibly grateful for the efforts of the police units involved and their commitment to understanding the exact circumstances of Esther's death', the statement added.

Privately, French and Spanish police are known to have put murder low down on their list of theories and believe the Oxford graduate suffered a mountain accident.

Esther went missing on a mountain pass on France's border with Spain, just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish.

The hotel, near the Spanish town of Besanque in The Pyrenees from where Esther set off on her hiking expedition last November before she disappeared

The 37-year-old Oxford graduate had numerous pieces of kit with her at the time of her disappearance, including a bright red and grey rucksack and a distinctive yellow tent which are yet to be found

Oxford graduate Esther Dingley disappeared while on a solo-hike in the Pyrenees in November

The discovery of a fragment of Esther's skull by Spanish hikers on a mountain pass on France's border with Spain last month sparked a renewed hunt for the rest of her remains and equipment.

Investigators suggested that Esther's remains may have been moved by animals to the well-trodden trail where the initial bone fragment was discovered, after the hiker perhaps died in a fall. 'Everything suggests that these bones were recently moved by animals. They would not have been there a few days earlier', Bordinaro said.

Brown bears and wolves are among the creatures roaming freely in the mountain range, where birds of prey such as vultures are also a common sight.

Dingley had planned a solo hike from the Spanish town of Benasque to Pic de Sauvegarde, a mountaintop in the Pyrenees - which she reached on November 22, sending Colegate a picture via WhatsApp, which was their last contact.

She was seen by several witnesses including an Olympic Spanish skier asking for some fruit hiking on the path leading up to the summit.

From there she planned to walk between Port de la Gléré and Port de Venasque - a route of some eight miles - before hiking back down from the mountains.

The couple, both Oxford graduates, had been travelling around Europe in a camper van for years after quitting their careers and Durham home.

Esther went missing on November 22 while out hiking in the Pyrenees, and last month, human remains were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain

The 37-year-old from Durham was on a month-long solo trip and was supposed to return on November 24

The pass where Esther Dingley went missing was part of an area described as an 'easy' walk for the British hiker by her boyfriend

Dingley's boyfriend Dan Colegate (left) has expressed disbelief at the theory that Esther may have died after becoming injured during her solo hike as she was an experienced hiker who should have had no problem with the route she is believed to have taken

Esther's partner of 20 years Dan Colegate (pictured together) claimed in a recent BBC interview he 'could no longer agree' with the idea she had suffered an accident
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fewer than one in five workers have returned to their offices since 'Freedom Day' last month, according to research.

However, the same data suggests Britons are keener to venture back into town centres to socialise – though overall footfall still remains half that of pre-pandemic levels.

The research is more evidence of the reluctance of many to get back to the office after well over a year of working from home.

Restrictions were eased on July 19 but the Centre for Cities think-tank found only 18 per cent of staff in the 31 largest cities had returned to their city centre workplace a week later. In London, only 15 per cent of workers were back in the week starting July 26.

Yet Brighton saw a six percentage point increase – with almost half of workers (49 per cent) back in the office at the end of last month, compared with the pre-pandemic figure.

The findings, based on anonymised mobile phone data, suggest Britons are keener to return to city centres at night – with average footfall now back at 59 per cent of pre-pandemic levels.

The research is more evidence of the reluctance of many to get back to the office after well over a year of working from home [Stock image]

Night-time footfall in London stands at just 47 per cent, but towns and cities in the North, such as Sunderland at 84 per cent, have seen a greater bounce back. Only Bournemouth and Blackpool – popular tourist destinations – have recovered overall to their pre-pandemic levels.

Centre for Cities' director of policy and research Paul Swinney said: 'People's eagerness, particularly in cities in the North and Midlands, to go out and socialise has been a lifeline for many businesses in the night-time economy.

'But a reluctance to head back to the office in our largest and most economically important cities means that people in the so-called 'sandwich economy' that caters to city centre office workers face an uncertain future as we get closer to the end of the furlough scheme in September.'

25% of companies refuse to give staff paid time off for Covid jabs One in four firms has refused to give staff paid time off for Covid jabs and has no plans to allow it, a survey has revealed. Employers are facing calls to ensure that all workers are allowed time to access the life-saving vaccinations without losing out on earnings. Conciliation service Acas carried out the survey of 2,000 businesses, with 25 per cent saying they do not offer staff paid time off to get vaccinated and will not change their policy. A further 4 per cent said they had not so far allowed this, but plan to in the future. The findings led to calls for employers to provide 'flexibility' for staff who need to take time away from work to get a jab. John Foster, of the Confederation of British Industry, said the vaccination programme was 'crucial' in helping the economy adjust following the pandemic. He added: 'The vast majority of businesses are continuing their commitment to protecting staff and customers during the pandemic. This includes showing flexibility when the time comes for their staff to get the jab. We'd encourage all companies to demonstrate this same level of consideration towards their employees.' Last night Labour warned that failing to allow employees to leave work to get their vaccinations without cutting their pay would put people 'at risk'. Advertisement

The findings prompted fresh calls for the Government to do more to support struggling city centre businesses.

UKHospitality chief executive Kate Nicholls told the Mail: 'City centre hospitality businesses, and sectors such as contract catering, have not only suffered the effects of restrictions and enforced closures but also significantly reduced footfall as a result of the pandemic.

'It's vital that if there is to be a full recovery for the hospitality sector, in turn powering the wider economy, that our city centres are not left deserted and neglected.

'While we have seen a welcome return of loyal customers to many of their favourite venues, we urge the Government to do everything it can to support the thousands of venues in our city centres still struggling to get back on their feet.'

Meanwhile, recruitment firm Reed said it had seen a jump in job vacancies advertising remote working – from 1 per cent before the pandemic to 5 per cent now.

Chris Adcock, managing director of Reed Technology, told the BBC: 'During the pandemic we were forced into home working, and everyone got a bit of a taste for it.

'We've seen people are twice as likely to apply for a job if it's advertised as remote.' It comes following a row over whether civil servants should have their pay cut if they refuse to return to Whitehall.

The suggestion by a Cabinet minister to the Mail, which was slapped down by the Government, sparked a furious backlash from unions.

But senior Conservative backbencher Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown said yesterday that civil servants 'certainly shouldn't be getting London weighting if they aren't coming into the office'.

He said he suspected 'a lot of people are not as productive at home', and that while he was not opposed to flexible working, staff should be encouraged to spend some days each week in the office.

'I would have thought that if you have got a civil servants' job, you should be expected to come back a few days a week. That should be linked in some way to bonuses, because I don't think that you are as productive at home as you are in the office.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Influencer demonstrates how she can edit a bikini snap in SECONDS to trim down her waist and get rid of her cellulite as she warns 'subtle Photoshopping' is everywhere

Danae Mercer took to Instagram to show how images that are posted on social media can be subtly enhanced. Mercer uses her own photo as an example. showing the exact techniques that are used.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

How the Met has TWICE ruled out a criminal investigation into claims Jeffrey Epstein paid Virginia Roberts $15,000 to fly to the UK for sex with Prince Andrew - will the third review have the same result? Scotland Yard has repeatedly been criticised over its decision not to carry out a full criminal investigation the bombshell allegations first made in 2015 by Virgina Roberts. She claims that at 17-years-old she was flown to London by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein and coerced into having sex with the Duke, three times. It was claimed UK incident took place at the Kensington town house of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's former lover and a close friend of the Duke. Andrew is also accused of having sex with Virginia in New York and on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean, nicknamed 'paedo island' because of the scale of Epstein's abuse there. The prince strenuously denies her claims, and said previously he doesn't remember meeting Virginia despite a photograph existing of them together. Other alibis he gave included being in Pizza Express in Woking with his daughter. Virginia said he was sweaty during sex - Andrew said this wasn't possible because he stopped sweating during the Falklands War. Epstein killed himself in his US prison cell while awaiting trial for new sex offences. Review one (2015) Deputy Assistant Commissioner Dean Haydon made the initial decision to shelve the complaint by Miss Roberts - now Giuffre - six years ago. At the time he was the commander in charge of specialist crime investigations. Virginia alleged Epstein paid her $15,000 to have sex with the Duke in London. Andrew and the then 17-year-old were also photographed together with his arm round her waist with Ghislaine Maxwell grinning behind them. The Duke's supporters have repeatedly claimed the photo is fake and edited, which he suggested himself in his disastrous Newsnight interview in 2019. Review two (2019) The Met confirmed in August 2019 a second review had been carried out and was made by Alex Murray, now the Met Police Commander for Specialist Crime. It was sparked when court documents associated with a defamation case between Giuffre and Maxwell revealed that a second girl, Johanna Sjoberg, who gave evidence alleging that Andrew had placed his hand on her breast while in Epstein's mansion posing for a photo with his Spitting Image puppet. Commander Murray defended his position not to launch an inquiry. The force added officers had spoken to other law enforcement agencies but have 'not received a formal request asking for assistance'. He remains in charge of specialist crime, and is expected to carry out the third review ordered by Cressida Dick today. Advertisement

The pressure on Prince Andrew to co-operate with the FBI was cranked up today as the head of Scotland Yard said British police are ready to help foreign detectives and ordered a fresh review into the Duke of York's sex abuse allegations, declaring: 'No one is above the law.'

Dame Cressida Dick revealed a third review into the claims that Jeffrey Epstein trafficked a 17-year-old girl to the UK for sex with Andrew is underway.

But she insisted no Metropolitan Police formal investigation into the royal is taking place with the American authorities currently treating him as a witness rather than a suspect.

The Met has already twice ruled out a full investigation into claims young women and girls were alleged to have been targeted, trafficked, groomed, or abused in the UK by Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell .

One of those victims, Virginia Roberts, claims she was forced to have sex with Andrew at Epstein's behest three times, including once at Maxwell's London mews house, and paid $15,000 after being flown to the UK on her billionaire captor's private jet, nicknamed the 'Lolita Express'.

Andrew has been accused by Ms Roberts of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' and then refusing to cooperate with the FBI, who he has been encouraged to speak to for years.

Ms Roberts, now known as Virginia Giuffre, is now suing Andrew in a New York court for alleged 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, claiming she thought she'd be murdered by Epstein if she didn't sleep with Andrew.

When asked about the decision to sue Andrew in the US, Dame Cressida told LBC: 'Nobody is above the law. As a result of what's going on I've asked my team to have another look at the material.'

And giving tacit confirmation the Met would work with US law enforcement, including the FBI, if needed, she said: 'We are of course open to working with authorities overseas, we will give them every assistance if they ask us for anything within the law obviously'.

The review is likely to involve detectives from the Met's Specialist Crime unit looking at the force's existing case files 'in consultation with the CPS' – but not interviewing alleged victims, witnesses or suspects or looking for new lines of inquiry.

The Duke of York is out in the cold today as it was reported that his older brother Prince Charles believes his brother will never return to public life. The Daily Mail understands that both Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team.

More than 48 hours after Virginia's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp. He is at Balmoral with his mother the Queen and his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson.

Andrew would be consigned to the wilderness – whatever the outcome of the lawsuit he now faces – because of the reputational damage done by his links to paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

The future king is among the senior royals who have privately expressed concern over the handling of the Duke of York's latest legal crisis as it emerged it could overshadow the Queen's historic Platinum Jubilee.

A source told The Times : 'The prince loves his brother and has the ability to have sympathy for the slings and arrows that his brother endures, whatever the reasons may be.'

The source added: 'However, this will be unwelcome reputational damage to the institution. He has long ago concluded that it is probably an unsolvable problem.'

The Daily Mail understands that both Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team.

He has previously denied any wrongdoing and strongly maintained his innocence, claiming to have no recollection of having ever met Miss Roberts.

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, were instrumental in forcing Andrew to step back from royal duties in 2019 in the wake of the disastrous BBC interview he gave in an attempt to clear his name.

A royal insider told the Mail yesterday: 'The family find themselves in an extraordinarily difficult and sensitive situation given the nature of the allegations.

'They are limited in what they can say publicly and now that the Duke of York is no longer a working royal they are actually rather limited in what control they can exert over the situation privately.'

The Met has twice reviewed whether any crimes were committed when Jeffrey Epstein allegedly paid Virginia Roberts $15,000 to fly to London for sex with Prince Andrew in 2001.

In 2015 Scotland Yard's Specialist Crime unit shelved the complaint by Miss Roberts, after consultation with the Crown Prosecution Service. In 2019 the same unit looked at it again when Epstein's PA, Johanna Sjoberg, gave evidence alleging that Andrew had placed his hand on her breast while posing for a photo with his Spitting Image puppet. Commander Alex Murray said at the time: 'Following the legal advice, it was clear that any investigation into human trafficking would be largely focused on activities and relationships outside the UK'. Commander Murray is expected to carry out the third review ordered by Commissioner Dick today.

The head of Scotland Yard Dame Cressida Dick (right today) declared 'no one is above the law' when asked about rape claims made against Prince Andrew by Virginia Roberts (together left)

The Daily Mail understands that both Prince Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, also both fear the scandal could irrevocably damage the reputation of the monarchy, insiders say (file image)

How Prince Andrew, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases. But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence. Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'. If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland. Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'. After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases. He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London. Advertisement

Last night, sources close to the prince's family expressed growing frustration with his legal team for the policy of continued silence.

The duke is said to have personally instructed criminal defence solicitor Gary Bloxsome, of City firm Blackfords, to help mastermind his response to Miss Roberts' allegations.

Mr Bloxsome, a 40-year veteran of the company, has defended British troops against war crimes allegations, as well as footballers in assault cases.

However, a source close to Andrew's family told the Mail yesterday: 'We are beginning to question the tactics of Blackfords.

Not to put out a statement reiterating or expanding on his denial may work in a restricted, legal sense, but in the court of public opinion his reputation is being shredded.'

Miss Roberts' attorney, David Boies, revealed that he anticipates the case could be heard in New York as early as the 'middle of next year'.

The Queen, 95, is due to celebrate her historic Platinum Jubilee with a series of major public celebrations in June.

Asked if he felt the lawsuit would be enough to get the ninth in line to the throne to answer questions about the allegations, Mr Boies told Sky News: 'Prince Andrew is going to have to now. He can't ignore the process.'

Mr Boies has previously accused Andrew and his legal team of 'stonewalling' both Miss Roberts and the FBI, which is investigating the crimes of Andrew's friend Epstein. The prince has said he has offered to co-operate with FBI.

Mr Boies also confirmed new evidence and new witness statements will form part of their case when it comes to court for trial, which he believes will throw further doubt on the Duke of York's account.

It is believed he was referring to Johanna Sjoberg, the only other woman to have publicly accused Andrew of sexual misconduct.

Andrew is currently holidaying with the Queen at Balmoral, her Scottish estate. Sources have denied claims he was summoned by his mother for crisis talks.

The beleaguered royal had always planned to arrive in time for today's 'Glorious Twelfth' – the start of the grouse shooting season – along with his former wife, Sarah, Duchess of York.

He was joined yesterday by his youngest daughter, Princess Eugenie, 31, her husband, Jack Brooksbank, and their six-month-old son, August.

The Princess jetted into Aberdeen Airport with her family on a commercial BA flight from London Heathrow which arrived at around 3.20pm.

Eugenie was first off the plane, followed closely by Jack and their nanny carrying baby son August down the stairs to an awaiting Range Rover.

It is the also the first time the couple have been pictured together since Jack was spotted sipping rosé on a vintage speedboat off the Italian coast while surrounded by bikini-clad models. A source close to Jack said he was on a business trip to Capri for his tequila brand Casamigos.

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank were on their way to Balmoral to join her beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse

The Duke of York's younger daughter will be at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday

How Duke of York's friendship with billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein has brought him decades of trouble Andrew's friendship with Epstein, pictured in Central Park in 2011, has engulfed the royal family and said to have enraged his older brother Charles - 1990s Andrew first meets Epstein, reportedly introduced through his friendship with Ghislaine Maxwell, the daughter of newspaper tycoon Robert Maxwell. Andrew welcomes Epstein to the Queen's private Scottish retreat in Aberdeenshire. Andrew later says he sees Epstein 'infrequently', adding 'probably no more than only once or twice a year'. - 2000 Andrew and Ms Maxwell are seen on holiday with Epstein at Donald Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida. Epstein and Ms Maxwell attend a party at Windsor Castle hosted by the Queen to mark Andrew's 40th birthday, the Princess Royal's 50th, the Queen Mother's 100th and Princess Margaret's 70th. - 2001 Virginia Roberts claims to have had sex with Andrew 'three times, including one orgy', with the first encounter allegedly taking place in Ms Maxwell's London townhouse. Ms Roberts claims to have had sex with Andrew on two more occasions, at Epstein's New York home and at an 'orgy' on his private island in the Caribbean. - 2008 Epstein admits prostituting minors and is sentenced to 18 months in prison. - 2010 Epstein is released from jail. Andrew is photographed with the disgraced Epstein in New York's Central Park. Footage emerges years later, reportedly shot on December 6 2010, showing him inside Epstein's Manhattan mansion, from where he is seen looking out from a large door of the property waving a woman goodbye after Epstein leaves to get into a chauffeur-driven car. - 2011 The duke quits his role as UK trade envoy after the fallout from the Central Park photos. - 2015 Buckingham Palace denies Andrew has committed any impropriety after he is named in US court documents related to Epstein. A woman, later named in reports as Ms Roberts, alleges in papers filed in Florida that she was forced to have sex with Andrew when she was 17, which is under the age of consent in the state. At the World Economic Forum in Davos, Andrew, in his first public engagement since he was embroiled in the allegations, responds, saying: 'Firstly I think I must, and want, for the record, to refer to the events that have taken place in the last few weeks. 'I just wish to reiterate, and to reaffirm, the statements that have already been made on my behalf by Buckingham Palace.' In April the claims against Andrew are struck from US civil court records following a federal judge's ruling. - 2019 Newly released legal documents show that Johanna Sjoberg, another alleged Epstein victim, claimed Andrew touched her breast while sitting on a couch inside the US billionaire's Manhattan apartment in 2001. Buckingham Palace said the allegations are 'categorically untrue'. Epstein is found dead in his jail cell on August 10, having killed himself after being charged with sex trafficking. Later that month a pilot on Epstein's private jet claims Andrew was a passenger on past flights with the financier and Ms Roberts. The Sun newspaper reported that David Rodgers said in a testimony released in August that Epstein, Andrew and the-then 17-year-old travelled to the US Virgin Islands on April 11 2001. Buckingham Palace describes the evidence statement as having 'a number of inconsistencies' and said that Andrew was on a different continent in some cases. Following Epstein's death, a statement from the palace says that Andrew is 'appalled by the recent reports of Jeffrey Epstein's alleged crimes'. Breaking his silence on the issue for the first time since 2015, Andrew then releases a statement on August 24 saying: 'At no stage during the limited time I spent with him (Epstein) did I see, witness or suspect any behaviour of the sort that subsequently led to his arrest and conviction.' On November 16, the prince gave a 'disastrous' BBC interview in which he spoke about his friendship with Epstein and addressed allegations of his own sexual conduct. He faced a barrage of criticism following his television appearance, with the royal accused of a lack of empathy with Epstein's victims. During the interview, Andrew, questioned by Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis, twice stated his relationship with Epstein, who died in jail while facing sex trafficking charges, had some 'seriously beneficial outcomes', giving him the opportunity to meet people and prepare for a future role as a trade envoy. The duke denied he slept with Virginia Giuffre, one of Epstein's victims, on three separate occasions, twice while she was underage, saying one encounter in 2001 did not happen as he spent the day with his daughter Princess Beatrice, taking her to Pizza Express in Woking for a party. The same alleged sexual liaison, which the American said began with the royal sweating heavily as they danced at London nightclub Tramp, was factually wrong as the duke said he had a medical condition at the time which meant he did not sweat. He cast doubt on the authenticity of a picture that appears to show Andrew with his arm around the waist of Mrs Giuffre, when a teenager. 2021 Prince Andrew's accuser filed a bombshell lawsuit in a US court claiming he sexually abused her when she was 17. Virginia Roberts accused the Duke of York of battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress in the lawsuit filed in federal court in New York. The lawsuit - filed on Ms Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was forced to have sex with him three times on the orders of the paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. It was filed under a law in New York that relates to child abuse as Ms Roberts was considered a minor under the state law at the time.She was aged 17 at the time of the alleged offences. It lists Ms Roberts as the plaintiff and the defendant as 'Prince Andrew, Duke of York a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward' as the defendant. Advertisement

The couple appeared to make a quick stop to chat with ground staff while their luggage was offloaded before driving off the tarmac towards Balmoral Castle.

Her father Prince Andrew arrived yesterday, travelling by car with his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Ms Roberts.

The 61-year-old was already on his way to Scotland when the legal summons landed at his Royal Lodge home in Windsor. However, with the legal action hanging over him the prince could be in for some awkward discussions with his mother.

Yesterday Ms Roberts's legal team claimed Prince Andrew had 'stonewalled' against efforts at cooperation 'for the last five years' - as it was revealed that the Duke of York could face a second lawsuit from another of Jeffrey Epstein's victim.

Mrs Boies, who is representing Ms Roberts in her US civil case against Andrew, said the Duke's legal team had been 'totally uncooperative' in attempts to discuss the abuse claims made by his client.

'We've reached out to Prince Andrew's legal team, a number of times over the last five years, we've made an attempt to engage with him to give him an opportunity to tell his side of the story, to provide any explanation or context, that he might have for his actions to try to resolve this without the necessity of litigation. Every such effort has been rebuffed,' he told Sky News today.

He added: 'They have totally stonewalled us just like they've stonewalled the criminal prosecutors in the United States.'

It comes as it was revealed that the Prince could face another US lawsuit from one of Jeffrey Epstein's victims who accused the royal of groping her breasts in a sickening attack involving a Spitting Image puppet of himself gifted to him by Ghislaine Maxwell.

Ms Sjoberg has accused the Duke of York of sexually assaulting her when she was 21 years old and working as paedophile Epstein's PA.

The incident is alleged to have taken place in front of Ms Roberts, now known as Virginia Giuffre, who has launched a bombshell legal action accusing Andrew of rape.

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was 'loaned' to the British royal and forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein, fearing she would be killed if she disobeyed.

Ms Sjoberg, now 43, had previously been unable to sue because of the amount of time since the alleged attack. But a pending US law change could now allow her to bring her ­allegations to court.

In her civil lawsuit filed in New York on Monday, Miss Roberts – who has accused Andrew of having sex with her on three occasions when she was aged 17, knowing that she had been trafficked by Epstein – claims his actions amounted to 'rape in the first degree'.

He has 21 days to respond and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without a trial.

It would raise the prospect of Andrew facing demands for damages. But if he does decide to come out fighting he could face having to give an account of his dealings with Epstein, as well as his previous sexual history.

Lawyers could also demand access to any communications with Epstein, as well as their mutual friend Ghislaine Maxwell.

She is due to go on trial later this year for allegedly acting as his 'madam' and helping to traffick vulnerable young victims.

But the prince can – and this is the most likely option for his team – also ask the court to dismiss the case as groundless or try to challenge it on other legal grounds.

Andrew's accuser Ms Roberts says she was forced to sleep with the Duke of York at Ghislaine Maxwell's home London, in New York and the US Virgin Islands as a 17-year-old in 2001.

While her claims were first made public in 2015 with the opening of US court documents, and the scandal worsened for the Prince following his decision to clear the air with a BBC Newsnight interview two years ago.

Andrew has always vehemently denied the allegations he had sex with Virginia three times.

On November 16 2019, the prince gave a 'disastrous' BBC interview in which he spoke about his friendship with Epstein and addressed allegations of his own sexual conduct.

He faced a barrage of criticism following his television appearance, with the royal accused of a lack of empathy with Epstein's victims.

During the interview, Andrew, questioned by Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis, twice stated his relationship with Epstein, who died in jail while facing sex trafficking charges, had some 'seriously beneficial outcomes', giving him the opportunity to meet people and prepare for a future role as a trade envoy.

The duke denied he slept with Virginia on three separate occasions, twice while she was underage, saying one encounter in 2001 did not happen as he spent the day with his daughter Princess Beatrice, taking her to Pizza Express in Woking for a party.

The same alleged sexual liaison, which the American said began with the royal sweating heavily as they danced at London nightclub Tramp, was factually wrong as the duke said he had a medical condition at the time which meant he did not sweat.

He cast doubt on the authenticity of a picture that appears to show Andrew with his arm around the waist of Virginia.

The Duke's supporters have repeatedly claimed the photo is fake and edited, which he also suggested himself.

As Prince Andrew is again hit by accusations of sexual abuse from Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts, he appears to have an unlikely companion at his side.

In one of the most dramatic cases of royal redemption, the Prince's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson is accompanying him to Balmoral where he will face his mother for the first time since a civil suit was filed against him in New York.

Fergie was exiled from the firm following her divorce from Andrew in 1996.

The Duchess of York has however become a lodger at her ex-husband's Royal Lodge home in Windsor, and has slowly but surely been welcomed back into the fold.

And last week, the Mail revealed that Fergie had been invited to stay at the Queen's Scottish retreat this summer.

There will also be a major difference because, unlike previous visits, when she had to make a quick getaway before Prince Philip arrived, the Duchess can stay at Balmoral for as long as her ex-husband

It is believed The Queen has appreciate the loyalty that Sarah has demonstrated to the Royal Family since her divorce and has been impressed by the close relationship she has maintained with Andrew, 61.

The Duchess has also said she is '100 per cent' certain that Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.'

When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.'

The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1996, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms.

'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added.

More than 48 hours after Virginia Roberts Giuffre's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp. Pictured: Johanna Sjoberg who has publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexual misconduct

Pictured: Princess Eugenie arrives at Balmoral castle on August 11

Prince Andrew's Spitting Image puppet, which Ms Sjoberg says was gifted to the royal by Ghislaine Maxwell (right with Jeffrey Epstein)

'Handpicked' to defend the Duke: Leading solicitor who represented clients facing cartel charges, and QC whose clients include Argentinian dictator Augusto Pinochet Solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases From alleged criminal cartels to Premier League football stars, high-ranking solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases. He famously defended Wimbledon's Des Byrne in 2002, when he and Chelsea stars John Terry and Jody Morris were hauled before the courts accused of being involved in a nightclub brawl. Terry and Morris were cleared on all charges, while Byrne was found guilty of possessing a bottle as an offensive weapon - but avoided jail and instead was ordered to pay a £2,000 fine. More recently, Mr Bloxsome defended Crystal Palace star Jason Puncheon after he too was accused of being involved in a night club brawl in 2017. The forward, who last season turned out for Cypriot side Pafos, initially denied a charge of assault, before later pleading guilty. He was ordered to do 210 hours of community work. Mr Bloxsome has also previously worked on cases including defending British troops against war crime allegations. He also was involved in defending an alleged criminal cartel case involving the Office of Fair Trading's review into the passenger fuel surcharge. Mr Bloxsome is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery (pictured) - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet Mr Bloxsome is thought to have been chosen by the Duke himself. He is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet. Ms Montgomery, of Matrix Chambers, is a specialist with dealing with 'cross border challenges', according to her resume. Among her long list of defence clients are Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator of Chile who was indicted for crimes against humanity by Spain during the 90s. General Pinochet was indicted on an international arrest warrant for human rights violations by Spain, before being arrested in a London hospital where he was undergoing minor surgery in 1998. In 1998 Mrs Montgomery represented the dictator in his case before the House of Lords -then the highest court in the country - in a hard-fought 16-month-long legal battle. She also represented the former Prime Minister of Thailand after he was ousted in a military coup in 2011; and Vijay Mallya, who India seeks to extradite from the UK to face financial crime charges. Advertisement

The US legal heavyweight who took on Microsoft, George Bush and represented Harvey Weinstein: David Boies is representing Virginia Roberts in Prince Andrew civil law suit When it comes to US lawyers, few are bigger than David Boies. The 80-year-old is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew. It is a case that will have the world's attention. But it won't be the first time Mr Boies has been in the media spotlight. One of his long-term clients was Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood film producer, who was found guilty of sex offences in February 2020, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison. But while his professional relationship with Weinstein proved somewhat of a PR disaster for Mr Boies, he maintains a stellar reputation. Famously, he represented the plaintiff in the famous case of Hollingsworth v. Perry. The judgment invalidated California's Proposition 8 - the law banning same-sex marriage. David Boies, 80, is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew Mr Boies also represented Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore in his fight against Republican candidate George Bush. The 2000 case saw a court decide on a controversial recount on the votes in Florida after claims the counting machines had missed votes. The courts eventually decided that Bush had fairly won Florida - giving him enough electoral college votes to take the Presidency. However, perhaps Mr Boies' biggest case was United States v. Microsoft Corp. The case saw the U.S. government accuse Microsoft of illegally maintaining its monopoly in the world of computers. Mr Boies initially represented the US Department of Justice in the case. After initially deciding in favour of the DoJ, the case was taken to appeal and eventually ended in a settlement between Microsoft and the US government. Advertisement

'Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old': The bombshell Giuffre v Duke of York court documents in full

Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit against Prince Andrew, formally accusing him of sexually abusing her while she was being trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Over 15 pages of court documents filed at New York's southern district court, the 38-year-old makes claims that the Duke of York 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

VIRGINIA L. GIUFFRE, Plaintiff

vs.

PRINCE ANDREW, DUKE OF YORK, a/k/a ANDREW ALBERT CHRISTIAN EDWARD, in his personal capacity, Defendant.

COMPLAINT

Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre, by her attorneys Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, for her Complaint against Defendant Prince Andrew, Duke of York, a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward ('Prince Andrew'), avers upon personal knowledge as to her own acts and status and upon information and belief and to all other matters as follows:

NATURE OF THE ACTION

Virginia Giuffre filed the complaint against Prince Andrew at the Southern District Court of New York

1. This suit arises out of Defendant's sexual abuse of Plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.

2. During 2000–2002, beginning when Plaintiff was 16, Plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

3. Epstein's trafficking scheme involved recruiting young girls, often by claiming they would be paid $200 for simply providing a massage to a wealthy billionaire. This same pattern was repeated numerous times with countless children and young women.

4. As United States District Judge Kenneth Marra found, 'From between about 1999 and 2007, Jeffrey Epstein sexually abused more than 30 minor girls... at his mansion in Palm Beach, Florida, and elsewhere in the United States and overseas...

'In addition to his own sexual abuse of the victims, Epstein directed other persons to abuse the girls sexually. Epstein used paid employees to find and bring minor girls to him.

'Epstein worked in concert with others to obtain minors not only for his own sexual gratification, but also for the sexual gratification of others.'

Opinion and Order, Doc. No. 435 at 1–2, Jane Doe 1 and Jane Doe 2 v. United States, Case No. 9:08-cv-80736 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2019).

5. Like other minor children who came before and after her, Plaintiff was initially recruited to provide massages, and thereafter to engage in a variety of sexual acts, for Epstein.

Plaintiff was required to be on call for Epstein for sexual purposes and frequently traveled with him both nationally and internationally. Plaintiff was regularly abused by Epstein and was lent out by Epstein to other powerful men for sexual purposes.

6. One such powerful man to whom Plaintiff was lent out for sexual purposes was the Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.

7. Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein's sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including Plaintiff.

8. According to Prince Andrew, he met Epstein through Maxwell in 1999. Prince Andrew thereafter became a frequent guest in Epstein's various homes around the world, including New York City where he sexually abused Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation when she was a minor.

9. After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

10. Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to Plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

11. This action has been timely filed pursuant to the Child Victims Act, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g. The actions described herein constitute sexual offenses by Defendant under New York Penal Law Article 130, and were committed against Plaintiff when she was a child less than eighteen years of age, for which she suffered physical, psychological, and other injuries as a result.

PARTIES

12. Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre is an individual who is a citizen of the State of Colorado.

13. Defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

14. This Court has diversity jurisdiction over this dispute pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(2). Plaintiff is a citizen of a State and Defendant is a citizen of a foreign state, and the amount in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00 excluding interests and costs.

15. Venue is proper in this Court as a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this District. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2).

16. This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant as Defendant sexually abused Plaintiff in this state, and has thus committed a tortious action within this State pursuant to New York's long-arm statute, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2).

Defendant also visited Jeffrey Epstein in this State on numerous occasions. Defendant could reasonably anticipate that a suit based upon his acts and omissions with respect to Plaintiff could result in him being subject to suit in this State, and this suit arises directly out of the Defendant's acts or omissions with respect to Plaintiff in this state.

FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A. Epstein's Sex Trafficking Enterprise

17. Jeffrey Epstein was widely renowned as a billionaire who used his vast connections to powerful individuals, and seemingly unlimited wealth and resources, to create a web of transcontinental sex trafficking that served himself, his coconspirators, and some of the most powerful people in the world.

18. Ghislaine Maxwell is a British socialite and the daughter of disgraced publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell. Maxwell was the highest-ranking recruiter in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is currently facing criminal charges in the Southern District of New York stemming from her role in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise, and is set to face trial in the fall.

19. Epstein had perfected a scheme for manipulation and abuse of young females. As part of the scheme, Maxwell or another female recruiter would approach a young girl and strike up a conversation in an effort to quickly learn about the girl's background and any vulnerabilities they could expose. Epstein's recruiters found their targets everywhere and anywhere, including schools, spas, trailer parks, and the street.

20. The recruiter would then manipulate the young female into coming back to one of Epstein's residences by offering the young girl something she needed, depending on her situation. In many cases, the recruiter sought out girls who wanted to be professional masseuses and invited them to one of Epstein's homes by offering them what appeared to be legitimate masseuse positions.

21. Once in the residence, Epstein and his co-conspirators would work in concert to impress and intimidate the young female with displays of vast wealth and power. They would brag about their connections to very powerful political and social figures, and display photographs of themselves with those figures around Epstein's homes. They would normalize the sexual abuse by displaying photographs and art displaying nude females, and a massage table and spa related products in an effort to legitimize the area where the abuse was set to occur.

22. Once abused, Epstein and Maxwell continued to manipulate their victims, using their financial power, promises, and threats to ensure that the victim returned as directed and remained compliant with their demands. Epstein and his lawyers would even gather information about the victims to use against them if they ever disobeyed him, and his homes were under constant surveillance.

23. Message pads recovered during trash pulls at Epstein's Palm Beach mansion reflect messages that his staff took to relay to Epstein. They show the constant flow of girls to Epstein, sometimes three per day. Epstein's employees have also described young girls constantly being present at Epstein's different homes.

Epstein's constant access to young girls is also evidenced in his 'Black Book,' a book of phone numbers and contact information listing girls to call for 'massages' in various cities, flight logs documenting his frequent travel with young girls and powerful individuals on his private plane, and troves of lewd photographs of young girls recovered from his homes. In his Black Book, Epstein had at least 12 different contact numbers listed for Prince Andrew.

24. Plaintiff became a victim of sex trafficking and repeated sexual abuse after Maxwell recruited her into Epstein's sex-trafficking operation when Plaintiff was working at the Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida.

25. Between 2000 and 2002, Epstein sexually abused Plaintiff at numerous locations including his mansion in this District, at 9 East 71st Street, New York, New York 10021.

26. Epstein also flew Plaintiff on his plane nationally and internationally numerous times when she was under the age of 18.

Only portions of the flight logs of Epstein's private planes have yet been recovered, and Epstein also flew Plaintiff frequently on commercial airlines to meet him and others.

However, the chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking.

27. In addition to being abused by Epstein himself, Plaintiff was also forced to have sex with Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, at Epstein and Maxwell's direction.

28. As part of their sex trafficking efforts, Epstein and Maxwell intimidated Plaintiff into remaining silent about what had happened to her.

29. After years of abuse, Epstein sent Plaintiff to Thailand in September 2002. One of Plaintiff's assignments from Epstein was to bring a young girl back to Epstein in the United States. Fearing for her life, and not wanting to subject another young girl to the abuse she was forced to endure, Plaintiff fled from Thailand to Australia to escape from Epstein.

'The chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking,' reads the document

B. Defendant's Relationship with Epstein and Maxwell

30. According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew's close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.

31. According to available flight logs, Prince Andrew began flying with Epstein on his private plane as early as 1999, when he flew with Epstein and Maxwell to Epstein's private island, Little St. James. Prince Andrew's name also appears in other available flight log entries from around the same time, showing travel with Epstein and Maxwell to and from other locations, including West Palm Beach, Florida, and Teterboro, New Jersey.

32. In 2000, Epstein and Maxwell attended Prince Andrew's 40th birthday party. That same year, Prince Andrew threw Maxwell a birthday party in Sandringham, United Kingdom, and Epstein was among the guests.

33. In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter's 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.

34. Prince Andrew has himself confirmed that he has been on Epstein's private plane, stayed at Epstein's private island, and stayed at Epstein's homes in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York, New York. See Prince Andrew's links to Jeffrey Epstein, BBC News (Nov. 16, 2019), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-49411215.

35. Members of Epstein's house staff have confirmed witnessing Prince Andrew visit Epstein's numerous homes, both to the media and in sworn testimony.

C. Defendant's Sexual Abuse of Plaintiff

'The photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff,' the document claims

36. Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old.

37. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell's home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.

38. The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff.

39. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in Epstein's New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.

40. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein's private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.

41. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

42. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew acted with intent to compel Plaintiff's submission.

43. Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

44. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew.

45. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew knew Plaintiff's age based on communications from Epstein and Maxwell.

46. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.

47. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew was acting in his individual, personal capacity, and was not performing any duty relating to his former role as a trade envoy, any duty relating to his role as a member of the Royal Family of the United Kingdom, or any other official or diplomatic duty or function.

48. Defendant's sexual assault and battery of Plaintiff have caused her, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.

D. The Arrest, Prosecution, and Death of Epstein, and Prince Andrew's Refusal to Cooperate with the Authorities

49. In 2008, Epstein pled guilty in Florida to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution.

50. In 2010, after Epstein had served his sentence and registered as a sex offender, Prince Andrew was photographed with Epstein in Central Park and stayed at Epstein's New York City mansion.

51. Epstein flippantly referred to his sexual abuse of multiple minors, and the slap on the wrist he had received for it, in a 2011 interview with the New York Post: 'Billionaire pervert Jeffrey Epstein is back in New York City—and making wisecracks about his just-ended jail stint for having sex with an underage girl. 'I am not a sexual predator, I'm an 'offender,' the financier told The Post yesterday. 'It's the difference between a murderer and a person who steals a bagel,' said Epstein.' See Amber Sutherland, Billionaire Jeffrey Epstein: I'm a Sex Offender, Not A Predator, New York Post (Feb. 25, 2011), available at https://bit.ly/2s3ebwk.

52. Around the same time, Prince Andrew began to face criticism over his well- publicized friendship with Epstein.

53. In early 2015, after Plaintiff had publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexually abusing her, Prince Andrew emailed Maxwell stating, 'Let me know when we can talk. Got some specific questions to ask you about Virginia Roberts.'

54. On July 2, 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York ('SDNY') charged Epstein with sex trafficking conspiracy and sex trafficking in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1591.

55. Epstein was arrested on July 8, 2019, pursuant to a Sealed Two Count Indictment.

56. Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center on August 10, 2019.

57. Just one year before his death, Epstein told a New York Times reporter 'that criminalizing sex with teenage girls was a cultural aberration and that at times in history it was perfectly acceptable.' James B. Stewart, The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People, N.Y. Times (Aug. 12, 2019), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/12/business/jeffrey-epstein-interview.html.

58. After Epstein's second arrest and death, numerous of his co-conspirators and the wealthy individuals to whom he trafficked girls—including Prince Andrew—began to face increased public scrutiny for having close ties to a convicted sex offender.

59. In November 2019, in response to this renewed scrutiny, Prince Andrew sat for an interview with BBC Newsnight. Prince Andrew stated that he did not regret his friendship with Epstein and that he had no recollection of meeting Plaintiff, despite photographic evidence to the contrary.

60. Prince Andrew publicly pledged, including in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview, to assist the U.S. authorities with their criminal investigation of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

A statement by His Royal Highness The Duke of York (Nov. 20 2019), available at https://www.royal.uk/statement-his-royal-highness-duke-york ('Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.').

61. Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities. Former SDNY U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman stated that Prince Andrew had provided 'zero co-operation' despite U.S. prosecutors and the FBI contacting Prince Andrew's counsel. Prince Andrew gives 'zero co-operation' over Epstein inquiry, US prosecutor says, BBC News (Jan. 27, 2020), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51271871.

62. Prince Andrew and his counsel have also refused to cooperate with counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking. Counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking, including counsel for Plaintiff, have repeatedly asked for a meeting or telephone call with Prince Andrew and/or his representatives to enable Prince Andrew to provide whatever facts, context, or explanation he might have, and to explore alternative dispute resolution approaches. Prince Andrew and his representatives have rejected all such requests, and responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on Plaintiff and others.

63. On July 19, 2021, counsel for Plaintiff proposed a tolling agreement that would have enabled Plaintiff not to sue Prince Andrew at this time, while avoiding any argument that her failure to do so caused her claims to be time-barred. Again Prince Andrew stonewalled—ignoring Plaintiff's letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now. A copy of the July 19, 2021, letter proposing a tolling agreement is attached as Exhibit A to this Complaint.

64. In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION (Battery)

65. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

66. Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor. As described above, on multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched Plaintiff in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent.

67. Prince Andrew's actions constitute sexual offenses as defined in New York Penal Law Article 130, including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined in Article 130.20, rape in the third degree as defined in Article 130.25, rape in the first degree as defined in Article 130.35, forcible touching as defined in Article 130.52, sexual abuse in the third degree as defined in Article 130.55, and sexual abuse in the first degree as defined in Article 130.65. See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g.

68. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION (Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress)

69. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

70. As a direct result of these allegations as stated, Prince Andrew committed intentional infliction of emotional distress against Plaintiff.

71. Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.

72. Prince Andrew knew or disregarded the substantial likelihood that these actions would cause Plaintiff severe emotional distress.

73. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

PRAYER FOR RELIEF

WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests judgment against Defendant, awarding compensatory, consequential, exemplary, and punitive damages in an amount to be determined at trial; costs of suit; attorneys' fees; and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper.

JURY DEMAND

Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury on all causes of action asserted within this pleading.

Dated: August 9, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lewis Hamilton has sparked a furious backlash on social media after boasting about his dog's planet-saving vegan diet - while sitting on a gas-guzzling private jet.

The F1 champion's bulldog Roscoe has been on a plant-based diet for the last two years.

Fellow vegan Hamilton, 36, photographed his pet on the plane with a plate of fruit including strawberries, pineapple and kiwis.

Next to it was also a packed bowl of vegetables including broccoli, peppers and green beans.

Lewis Hamilton posted a picture of his bulldog Roscoe enjoying a plate of fruit on a private jet

Hamilton shared a snap of Roscoe from the pet's Instagram account - which has 374,000 follows

Many vegans adopt the diet because it is deemed healthier but also because it is said to help the planet.

Cutting out meat and dairy products is thought to reduce the eater's carbon footprint by reducing greenhouse gases from cattle.

But the issue sparked discussion last year, with animal nutritionists warning meat-free food for dogs can be deficient in vital vitamins.

Nicole Paley, of the Pet Food Manufacturers' Association, said: 'We advise that vegan diets – with no animal products – are carefully checked by a vet or animal nutritionist.'

And television vet Dr Scott Miller, who has appeared as an expert on BBC's Crufts, said a vegan diet could be 'extremely dangerous' for dogs, and often removing meat from them was purely due to the preference of the owner.

He said: 'Dogs and cats have sharper teeth for catching meat. As much as it makes sense for you to be a vegan, when it comes to our pets it's going to prove problematic.'

The Formula 1 star, pictured trackside with his beloved pet, has been mocked for the post on social media

He has posted pictures on Instagram previously of his dog eating vegan food. Pictured: Last year

Hamilton (pictured yesterday) often opens up about his move to a vegan diet on his social media

The F1 star frequently shares pictures of his dog's vegan diet on Instagram, such as this alternative birthday cake

Hamilton caused a stir when he filmed himself taking a bite out of the same slice of cake as his dog

The racing driver has long promoted the benefits of eating a plant based diet, pictured

Roscoe enjoys a bone-shaped cake; one of the many images Hamilton has shared on social media

Hamilton shared a snap of Roscoe from the pet's Instagram account - which has 374,000 follows.

Speaking as the pooch, he said: 'I loves beings a vegans. I gets all the vegetables ands fruits I wants.

'My favs are watermelons ands pineapples. I've lost 5kgs ands feels betters thans evers.'

But private jets have huge carbon footprints due to them having fewer people flying on them.

Fan George Drake ranted: 'Talks about saving the environment whilst flying his dogs around first class/on private jets.

'If everyone had a carbon footprint as big as Lewis Hamilton we wouldn't have an earth left.'

Jonas Tillmann fumed: 'He's flying with a private jet and telling everybody that he would live so consistently. Excuse me?'

Alex Caprowski joked: 'Doesn't eats meat, flies on a jet.' Others questioned feeding the dog a meat-free diet.

One - called - Avniq - said: 'What do you feed for protein?' Another said: 'Dogs are carnivores.'

Hamilton put Roscoe on a meat-free diet to help cure his ailments. His other bulldog Coco died of heart problems, and the breed naturally suffers from breathing issues.

Hamilton has been approached for comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'She loves to humiliate him!' Love Island fans are enraged as Faye announces that Teddy only lasted '3 pumps' during steamy bedroom session

Faye said Teddy only lasted 'three pumps' during sex on Love Island last night. Four different couples disappeared under the sheets and appeared to have sex last night.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: China 'is prepared to recognize the Taliban as Afghanistan's legitimate rulers as soon as Kabul falls' in a blow to Biden's strategy of international isolation and political pressure

Taliban insurgents detained veteran commander Mohammad Ismail Khan. Khan had been leading fighters against the Taliban, and was recorded answering questions about how he felt since he had been captured.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Biden argues that 'an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable' to him

He is concerned about the 'psychological collapse' that is likely to follow when Afghan troops cannot fight the Taliban without support they're accustomed to

General David Petraeus has called the withdrawal a 'serious mistake' and says the decision could be 'catastrophic for the United States and th

Pentagon officials estimate that 30,000 people will have to be evacuated

President Joe Biden says approximately 5,000 U.S. soldiers will assist in the nation's evacuation from Afghanistan

President Biden must take responsibility for his decision to withdraw from Afghanistan, as Taliban warlords roll into its capital Kabul, a top US general has warned

General David Petraeus the former Commander of US and International Forces in Afghanistan, is calling the withdrawal a 'serious mistake' and says the decision could be 'catastrophic for the United States and the world'.

'This is an enormous national security setback and it is on the verge of getting much worse unless we decide to take really significant action,' Petraeus told host WABC Radio Rita Cosby.

'The outcome, whether it is the Taliban taking over the country or it's the kind of civil war that we saw in the wake of the collapse of the post-Soviet government, there are no good outcomes here,' Petraeus said. 'In fact there is nothing more than horrible outcomes unless we are willing to acknowledge that this is not going as more optimistic projections laid out and take stock.'

Petraeus spoke after President Biden has reaffirmed his administration's plan to withdraw U.S. troops from Afghanistan as Taliban forces continue to advance on the country.

Biden announced in a statement Saturday that 'approximately 5,000' U.S. soldiers will assist with the evacuation process.

The president has set an August 31 deadline for the competition of the withdrawal. The pentagon estimates that 30,000 people will need to be evacuated in this process.

General David Petraeus (pictured), the former Commander of US and International Forces in Afghanistan, is calling the withdrawal a 'serious mistake' and says the decision could be 'catastrophic for the United States and the world'

According to Biden, he and his security team made the decision in an effort to 'protect our interests and values as we end our military mission in Afghanistan.'

Government leaders are trying to ensure an 'orderly and safe drawdown of U.S. personnel and other allied personnel' and an 'orderly and safe evacuation of Afghans who helped our troops during our mission and those at special risk from the Taliban advance'.

The president says the U.S. government is also actively working to 'process, transport, and relocate Afghan Special Immigrant Visa applicants and other Afghan allies'.

However, Petraeus is concerned about the 'psychological collapse' that is likely to follow when Afghan troops are 'unable to uphold the level of support they are accustomed to' when fighting the Taliban.

'We are now in a situation where the Taliban are trying to encircle Kabul – a city of 5 or 6 million – before hundreds of thousands of refugees starting flooding into it,' he argued. 'If we communicate effectively with the Taliban that they need to halt what they are doing, or we will bring the might of the U.S. military down upon them, we can stop this.'

President Joe Biden (pictured) has reaffirmed his administration's plan to withdraw U.S. troops from Afghanistan as Taliban forces continue to advance on the country. He announced Saturday that 'approximately 5,000' U.S. soldiers will assist with the evacuation process

Petraeus is concerned about the 'psychological collapse' that is likely to follow when Afghan troops are 'unable to uphold the level of support they are accustomed to' in their fight against the Taliban (pictured: Taliban fighters in Jalalabad province on August 15, 2021)

Biden, on the other hand, argued that the U.S. has spent 20 years in Afghanistan. The U.S. deployed the nation's 'finest young men and women,' invested nearly $1trillion in efforts there, trained more than 300,000 Afghan soldiers and police officers, and aided the Afghan military.

He claimed that given the current situation, he had no choice but to evacuate, and claimed former President Donald Trump had forced his hand.

'When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor... that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001 and imposed a May 1, 2021, deadline on US forces,' Biden said.

'I faced a choice -- follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict.'

He continued: 'I was the fourth president to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan -- two Republicans, two Democrats. I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.'

Meanwhile, Taliban insurgents entered the Afghan capital of Kabul on Sunday, stating they expected to take power within days and promised to moderate their earlier hardline Islamist rule even as foreign diplomats and many locals tried to leave.

American diplomats were evacuated from the U.S. embassy by chopper after the lightning advance.

'Core' U.S. team members worked from the airport, while a NATO official said several European Union staff had moved to a safer location in the capital.

The U.S. has spent 20 years in Afghanistan. Biden argued that during that time the government deployed the nation's 'finest young men and women,' invested nearly $1trillion in efforts there, trained more than 300,000 Afghan soldiers and police officers, and aided the Afghan military

The above map depicts the areas of Afghanistan currently controlled by the Taliban compared to what they controlled in April 2021

Earlier on Sunday, the insurgents captured the eastern city of Jalalabad without a fight, giving them control of one of the main highways into landlocked Afghanistan. They also took over the nearby Torkham border post with Pakistan, leaving Kabul airport the only way out of Afghanistan still in government hands.

After U.S.-led forces withdrew the bulk of their remaining troops in the last month, the Taliban campaign accelerated as the Afghan military's defenses appeared to collapse.

President Joe Biden on Saturday authorized the deployment of 5,000 U.S. troops to help evacuate citizens and ensure an 'orderly and safe' drawdown of military personnel. A U.S. defense official said that included 1,000 newly approved troops from the 82nd Airborne Division.

The Taliban said its rapid gains showed it was popularly accepted by the Afghan people.

Biden said his administration had told Taliban officials in talks in Qatar that any action that put U.S. personnel at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong U.S. military response.'

He has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to a plan, initiated by his Republican predecessor Donald Trump, to end the U.S. military mission in Afghanistan by Aug. 31.

The president argued that 'an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me'.

Biden has been slammed by several Republicans, with House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy hitting out at the 'complete mismanagement' of the Afghanistan withdrawal.

Biden has been slammed by several Republicans for his decision to evacuate Afghanistan

McCarthy said: 'The White House has no discernible plan other than pleading with the Taliban. The bungled withdrawal, reminiscent of his failed withdrawal from Iraq, is an embarrassment to our nation.'

'President Biden must continue to provide the close air support necessary for the Afghan government to protect themselves from the Taliban and make sure al Qaeda and ISIS do not gain a foothold due to the Biden administration's disastrous policies.'

Senator Tom Cotton tweeted that the 'fiasco' was 'predictable' and had 'humiliated' the US.

'The fiasco in Afghanistan wasn't just predictable, it was predicted. Joe Biden's ill-planned retreat has now humiliated America and put at risk thousands of Americans left in Kabul,' he said.

'At a minimum, President Biden must unleash American air power to destroy every Taliban fighter in the vicinity of Kabul until we can save our fellow Americans. Anything less will further confirm Joe Biden's impotence to the world.'

Senator Mitt Romney posted that he could not understand why the US had pulled out of the country 'without an effective strategy to defend our partners.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A tenant from hell wrecked his two-bedroom rental flat, leaving behind 8,000 beer cans, rotting food and a toilet piled with waste.

Cleaner and wastewater management expert Freddie Gillium-Webb, 29, from Hampshire, was given the task of clearing up the property by the landlord once the problem tenant finally left after a year of paying no rent and trashing the flat.

Horrendous photos show the living room piled with so many cans of beer that the entire sofa is almost obscured from view under them - while spiders had began to swipe cans and lift them up in their webs.

The tenant from hell transformed the pleasant two bedroom flat into a sea of 8,000 beer cans and rotting food

Meanwhile the bathroom toilet had 'never been flushed' and instead toilet paper and excrement had seemingly been carefully piled up in a 'leaning tower of poo-sa' four feet in the air (left, and right, the bath)

Cleaner and wastewater management expert Freddie Gillium-Webb, 29, from Hampshire, was given the task of clearing up the stomach-churning mess by his landlord pal once the problem tenant finally left after a year of paying no rent and trashing the flat

The bathroom toilet had 'never been flushed' and instead toilet paper and excrement had seemingly been carefully piled up in a 'leaning tower of poo-sa' four feet in the air.

The kitchen was so bad that the dining chair and table are swamped and barely visible in a sea of trash that Freddie had to wade through.

Freddie was forced to spend almost 30 hours across three days clearing out the property and was sick multiple times in the process as he waded through the appalling mess.

It took a whopping 10 bottles of bleach to return the flat to normality and they even had to use a digger to crush the mess in order to get it to fit inside the giant skip.

Freddie was forced to spend almost 30 hours across three days clearing out the property and was sick multiple times in the process as he waded through the appalling mess

It took a whopping 10 bottles of bleach to return the flat to normality and they even had to use a digger to crush the mess in order to get it to fit inside the giant skip

Unbelievably the tenant had taken off with only a text message to the landlord to say he 'might have left a bit of a mess' - while the landlord lost more than £12,000 on the tenant's behaviour.

Freddie said: 'As soon as I walked through the door there were beer cans everywhere and the smell was terrible.

'He clearly didn't use the bin at all because the kitchen was full of food waste and in the living room there were half eaten kebabs and mouldy loaves of bread all over the floor.

'Upstairs there were bin bags full of cigarette ends and you couldn't see the floor because there were that many beer cans - I think I removed about 8,000 in total.

'The toilet was piled high with toilet paper and faeces, it was disgusting. He'd never flushed it by the looks of it.

'The clean-up was just never ending. After the first day it didn't even look like I'd made a difference.'

Freddie, who works in wastewater management as well as doing other jobs like cleaning, building and plastering, was tasked with cleaning the flat, which is one of numerous owned by the property developer who builds, rents and sells flats and houses in the area.

Despite his strong stomach from working with sewage, the rotten waste and overall stench of the flat was enough to make him vomit three times during the clean-up.

Freddie found tons of beer cans within the flat , some of which were suspended by spider webs, and rotten foot scattered around the home (pictured)

Freddie admitted he thought the flat had been in a state for 'a while' because it was in 'really bad' condition (pictured, the sea of 8,000 cans)

Freddie said: 'It had to have been like that for a while because it was really bad. He was just living in it and topping up the mess.

'The landlord had a skip at one of his building sites so most of the rubbish went there and he used a digger to squash it down to fit it all in.

'I think I went through about 100 big bags and ten bottles of bleach.

'Because I work in wastewater I don't heave or throw up very easily but cleaning that mess up I must have gagged about 20 times and was sick three times.'

The cleaner believes he went through 100 bin bags and ten bottles of bleach in order to clean the flat from top to bottom

The property owner had tried repeatedly to arrange a flat inspection after the nightmare tenant failed to pay any rent month after month, but he always made excuses to get out of it (pictured, the hallway)

The property owner had tried repeatedly to arrange a flat inspection after the nightmare tenant failed to pay any rent month after month, but he always made excuses to get out of it.

A problem with the toilet's flush was identified and quickly dealt with during the clean-up, which may explain the mountain of used toilet paper and faeces that was left.

But the tenant failed to ever report this, not wanting his living habits to be revealed.

Much to the landlord's relief, after moving towards the eviction process the tenant decided to leave of his own accord, allowing him to retake control of the property.

A problem with the toilet's flush was identified and quickly dealt with during the clean-up, which may explain the mountain of used toilet paper and faeces that was left (pictured)

After taking off to avoid eviction, the tenant alluded to the vile state of the flat soon to be discovered in a text message to his former landlord that said 'I might have left a bit of a mess'

After taking off to avoid eviction, the tenant alluded to the vile state of the flat soon to be discovered in a text message to his former landlord that said 'I might have left a bit of a mess'.

Freddie said: 'You'd think renting through an estate agent would be fail safe because they have guarantors so I can't see how it's been allowed to happen.

'It just shouldn't be able to happen and tenants like that should be blacklisted from renting again because otherwise it could just happen again and again to more landlords.

'The tenant might have had depression and he probably had a drinking problem based on the amount of cans - you need help sometimes but you can't live like that, there's no excuse for it to get that bad.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Boris Johnson urges the West NOT to recognise Taliban government in speech just hours after clowning around with Olympic athletes - and Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was on HOLIDAY

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab is due to land back in the UK today after taking a foreign holiday in the week that the Taliban recaptured Afghanistan, in what is being called 'the single biggest foreign policy...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Things turned nasty on The Voice Australia on Monday night.

A furious Rita Ora confronted Keith Urban after she was blocked from recruiting contestant Chantel Cofie onto her team.

Each coach has two 'blocks' they can secretly use during the auditions this year, which means they're able to block another coach from getting a singer they want.

'You're dead to me': Furious Rita Ora, 30, (pictured) blasted Keith Urban, 53, on The Voice for 'blocking' her during Monday night's episode

Chantel, 23, had all four coaches impressed as she sang her original song 2020, inspired by the death of George Floyd and the injustices black people face daily.

However, as the coaches started pitching for the artist to join their teams, the Let Me Love You singer was blocked from potentially getting her on Team Rita.

'I'm p***ed,' Rita shouted. 'In the words of Boy George last season, you're dead to me,' she said, trying to figure out who blocked her.

Wow: Chantel, 23, had all four coaches impressed as she sang her original song 2020, inspired by the death of George Floyd and the injustices black people face daily

Blocked: However, as the coaches started pitching for the artist to join their teams, the Let Me Love You singer was blocked from potentially getting her on Team Rita

'Whoa, they're strong words,' fellow coach Guy Sebastian replied, before asking: 'Who did the block?'

'It was you wasn't it?' Rita asked Keith, who began grinning.

'You blocked me didn't you?' she once again asked as he smile grew.

'I knew it! You blocked me!'

Not impressed! 'I'm p***ed,' Rita shouted. 'In the words of Boy George last season, you're dead to me.'

Not happy: 'It was you wasn't it?' Rita asked Keith, who began grinning

'Listen I am angry, but that doesn't dispute that that was one of the best auditions I've ever seen,' Rita then told the singer.

'You need someone that will kill for you, and I did,' added Rita.

Keith then attempt to woo Chantel over over his team, before she decided to go with Guy Sebastian.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

An SAS soldier who fought terrorists in a Kenyan hotel siege while off-duty has been forced to reveal his identity after people kept impersonating him on social media and in pubs near the elite force's Hereford base.

The Special Forces veteran, who uses the pseudonym Chris Craighead on Instagram, shared a photograph showing his face for the first time.

The image shows Craighead leading Kenyan security forces towards the luxury DusitD2 hotel in Nairobi in 2019 before storming the complex and defeating al-Shabaab terrorists.

In previously published pictures, his features were hidden - either by clothing or the blurring of images - to protect his identity after he ended the terror siege on the hotel which left at least 21 people dead.

But now, Craighead has decided to post an image showing his face because the 'actions of others have forced my hand'.

A close friend of Craighead told MailOnline that the SAS veteran made the decision because people were impersonating him on social media and on the streets of Hereford.

The source said Craighead has also received threatening messages on social media saying 'I know who you are' and 'I know what you look like' after images circulated online.

Given that the images of him were becoming 'increasingly available', Craighead wanted to have the power to share the first image of his face.

The Special Forces veteran, who uses the pseudonym Chris Craighead on Instagram, shared a photograph showing his face for the first time. The image shows Craighead (right) leading Kenyan security forces towards the luxury DusitD2 hotel in Nairobi in 2019 before storming the complex and defeating al-Shabaab terrorists

In previously published pictures, his features were hidden so as to protect his identity. Pictured: Craighead and a security officer escort an injured man who was attacked in the terror siege

Craighead posted on Instagram: 'I’m doing this earlier than I planned, but the actions of others have forced my hand into prematurely revealing my face.

'This photo and others like it are becoming increasingly available, so I thought I should be the one to share the first with you.'

Craighead added: 'Thank you to all those close to me who support, guide, assist, and keep me balanced during this time in my life.

'Another big thank you to everyone around this planet who supports my page and its message.'

A source, who has been a close friend of Craighead for eight years, exclusively told MailOnline: 'There's a very specific reason why he has revealed his identity. And that is because he's had a lot of people impersonating him with stolen valour claiming they are him. They have created a lot of fictitious accounts.

'And on top of that as well, he's had people sending him messages saying "we know who you are" and "we know what you look like".'

The close friend added that there are a number of Walter Mitty types - referring to the character in the film The Secret Live of Walter Mitty who lives in a world of daydreams where he is a hero - who are claiming to be Craighead.

They have even been seen walking around Hereford and boasting to friends at the pub that they are Craighead and saved hundreds of people in Nairobi.

Craighead was awarded a Conspicuous Gallantry Cross, a bravery medal second only to a Victoria Cross, for his response to the gun and grenade attack by the terrorists.

Images from the scene in Nairobi show the off-duty SAS hero wearing combat gear over a purple shirt and jeans as he entered the complex before emerging with terrified survivors.

The source said: '[Christian] knows of people are going round as Walter Mitty types - the regiment has a Walter Mitty hunters club where they basically go out and find these people who are impersonating and saying they've been in the regiment.

'He knows of several individuals who've been running round claiming to be Christian Craighead.

'They are running round with this stolen valour, which is the most despicable crime if you think about the honour and bravery you've got to have to rescue all those people.'

The source added: 'It's really disconcerting the amount of Walter Mitty's running around claiming to be him. You've got to be a pretty despicable person to claim that you're this hero who has been in this situation.

'There are a number of them around, including in Hereford itself, it's really quite something.'

Craighead was awarded a Conspicuous Gallantry Cross, a bravery medal second only to a Victoria Cross, for his response to the gun and grenade attack by the terrorists

The source continued: '[Craighead] has heard - and it's quite a common thing for people to do - someone goes into a pub, and say the old line 'I can neither confirm or deny' and you think 'really?'.

'And when people make those claims after having a couple of beers at the pub, people in the know will ask them a question about it.

'There's been this movement of people who want to claim that heroic act and claim they are him - these are people who are not in the military and have nothing to do with the military.

'The thing about Hereford is that you can go around and individuals will wear certain elements of clothing that imply that they are in the special forces - certain gear that special forces would wear.'

It is also not just people who are impersonating Craighead in person - there have been scores of social media accounts.

'There are a lot of social media accounts flying around of people claiming to be him.

'People have got hold of images of him unmasked that were initially published at the time, and now the cat's out of the bag so you might as well do it as yourself.'

Images from the scene show the off-duty SAS hero wearing combat gear over a purple shirt and jeans as he entered the complex before emerging with terrified survivors

Craighead is publishing a book entitled 'One Man In: The Explosive Firsthand Account of the Lone Special-Ops Soldier Who Fought Off a Major Terrorist Attack in Kenya' but the publication date has been delayed from July 2021.

This is because Craighead is working with the Ministry of Defence to check for confidentiality issues.

Under strict rules, Special Forces troops must not discuss their missions in public or seek to ‘cash in’ on operations.

The rules were introduced following the furore over books by ex-troopers Chris Ryan and Andy McNab which dramatically raised the SAS’s public profile and led to concerns over Special Forces troops leaking sensitive information which could compromise future operations.

Speaking about the book, Craighead's close friend said: 'Who knows about when the book will come out, but Chris has worked with the MOD right from the very start and continues to do so.

'Most people in the world knew it happened , but nobody knows what actually happened, so hopefully it should be cleared.

'Many of Chris’s peers past and present are hugely supportive of him and the book. A number of the guys from the regiment have also pre ordered copies of the book.'

Craighead had been stationed in Kenya to help train the nation's soldiers and was off-duty when heavily armed jihadis from the al-Shabaab terror group seized the Dusit D2 luxury hotel complex, setting fire to vehicles, detonating explosions and embarking on a mass shooting.

The 19-hour siege left 21 dead, including British charity worker Luke Potter.

Craighead has previously published photos of himself during the hotel siege, but they have always had his features covered.

In one image posted on his Instagram account, he can be seen holding up his rifle while inside the hotel complex as he is joined by members of the security forces. Speaking about the image, he said: 'This would have been taken around two hours or so into the incident. By this time I was working alongside members of the security forces, pictured in the foreground'

In one image, he can be seen holding up his rifle while inside the hotel complex as he is joined by members of the security forces.

Speaking about the image, he said: 'This would have been taken around two hours or so into the incident. By this time I was working alongside members of the security forces, pictured in the foreground.'

Craighead also shared an image of him and former U.S. President Donald Trump in 2019 after the President personally thanked the former SAS soldier for his efforts in the siege.

Craighead, whose lower part of his face is blurred in the image, wrote on Instagram in November 2020: 'Last year I met the 45th President of the United States Donald J. Trump.

'When he heard from key figures of the administration that I was in town, he took the time to thank me personally for saving American lives.'

His close friend said: 'Lets not forget what happened in Nairobi on that day when he went in single handedly - one man in on his own - and saved many many lives, over 700 people were rescued on that day.

'His actions were truly heroic on that day, so many will have followed that story and been inspired by his heroism and bravery.

Many lives were saved on that day, you only have to look at the comments on his Instagram account and that says it all.

'Chris is a super humble guy, one of the geezers, he didn’t ask for the attention to fall on him, he just did what anyone else would do in that situation and that is to preserve and save lives. He is very proud of the regiment and what it stands for.'

The al-Shabaab terror group claimed that the attack was a response to US President Donald Trump’s controversial decision to recognise Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. Pictured: Craighead storming the hotel

Craighead shared a photo of himself meeting President Donald Trump on Instagram

The al-Shabaab terror group claimed that the attack was a response to US President Donald Trump’s controversial decision to recognise Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

At the time, Joshua Kwambai, who rushed out of a restaurant as the terrorists opened fire, said Craighead was one of the first people to get out there.

Mr Kwambi added that the soldier was wearing a mask but it was obvious he was white - and he could see him speaking with the police and army, who were listening to him.

They had been looking at paper - possible plans of the building, he said.

Witness Lucy Njeri said the soldier carried out one of the wounded then went back inside to do so a second time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: PICTURED: Sorority student LA Dodgers ball girl, 24, who tackled field invader and knocked him over a barrier after SEVEN security guards failed

A Los Angeles Dodgers ball girl manages to tackle a pitch invader during a game against their town rivals The Angels. As he evades security on the ground, she grabs his feet sending him flying over the fence...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Moment man grabs 64-year-old by the neck and punches him to the ground in latest example of New York street violence

Police are searching for a man who was caught on camera punching and choking a 64-year-old man in New York City.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'Should be going home soon': Tyson Fury shares adorable video of himself feeding newborn daughter Athena as he reveals she's out of intensive care and 'on the mend'

Boxing champion Tyson Fury reveals his sweet newborn daughter named Athena is finally off the ventilator and urges fans to donate to Ronald McDonald House Charities for Alder Hey Children's Hospital.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British lawyers could practise in Australia without having to requalify under plans to slash red tape.

Regulators are considering removing barriers to UK solicitors practising domestic law Down Under.

The UK-Australia trade deal, agreed in June, enables Britons to provide UK and international legal services in Australia with their existing qualifications. But new provisions mean regulators could scrap the requirement for lawyers to sit up to 11 exams to requalify there.

Liz Truss, pictured, wants to sign a deal to allow British lawyers practice in Australia without having to sit any further exams

Almost £85 million worth of legal services were exported to Australia in 2019, and the industry in the UK contributes £22 billion to the economy

International Trade Secretary Liz Truss said the deal gives the industry ‘more certainty and support’.

She added: 'This deal will reduce barriers to trade, make it easier for our people to travel and work together, and will bring big benefits to our consumers and businesses.'

Almost £85 million worth of legal services were exported to Australia in 2019, and the industry in the UK contributes £22 billion to the economy.

Law Society of England and Wales President, I. Stephanie Boyce, said the proposal was a 'step in the right direction'.

'The free trade agreement establishes and drives collaboration between the relevant bodies with the aim of addressing remaining barriers to practise as a local lawyer in the other country's territory.

'We now look forward to taking new steps to facilitating international business with our colleagues in Australia.

'While the final agreement is yet to come, these commitments are a step in the right direction for both our legal professions and we will continue to seek the best deal for members in these discussions.'

Rebecca Maslen-Stannage, chair and senior partner, Herbert Smith Freehills added: 'Leading multinational law firms such as Herbert Smith Freehills, with major operations in both countries, are looking for certainty on mobility and RPQ provisions relating to the legal profession.

'We are delighted that the UK and Australian governments have included these provisions which will help us to work more easily across regions.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A permanent furlough system should be baked into the UK economy to help workers see off the impact of future crisis, union leaders demanded today.

The TUC called for a 'daughter of furlough' scheme based on Rishi Sunak's eye-wateringly expensive Job Retention Scheme.

It argues that climate change, technological change and the threat of future pandemics mean that such a scheme may be required in future.

It argues that such a scheme would lessen the impact on the economy in terms of lowering unemployment, boost recovery through support of retail spending and 'prevent widening inequalities', which see women, disabled workers and minorities become the first to lose jobs.

However the eye-watering outlay is likely to raise eyebrows at the Treasury. The furlough scheme has cost the taxpayer around £66billion over the past 18 months and is due to be wound down at the end of September - six weeks' time.

But TUC general secretary Frances O'Grady said: 'The pandemic shows how an unexpected economic shock can wreak havoc on jobs and livelihoods with little warning.

The TUC called for a 'daughter of furlough' scheme based on Rishi Sunak's eye-wateringly expensive Job Retention Scheme.

Mr Sunak's furlough scheme has cost the taxpayer around £66billion over the past 18 months and is due to be wound down at the end of September - six weeks' time.

'In a changing and unpredictable world – as we battle climate change and new technologies emerge – a permanent short-time working scheme would help make our labour market more resilient and protect jobs and livelihoods.

'Too often in the past, periods of economic and industrial change have been badly mismanaged – increasing inequalities and leaving working people and whole communities abandoned.

'Setting up a ''daughter of furlough'' to provide certainty to workers and firms through future industrial change would be a fitting pandemic legacy.

'Furlough has been a lifeline for millions of working people during the pandemic. Now is the time for the government to build on the success of furlough with a short-time working scheme – not throw away its good work.'

Ms O'Grady's comments come after MPs warned taxpayers will pay the price of Covid 'for decades' to come with the cost of Government measures already surpassing £370 billion.

The TUC's plan includes:

Workers getting 80 per cent of their wages, plus a guarantee that their pay for normal hours will not fall below the minimum wage

Any worker working less than 90 per cent of their normal working hours must be offered funded training.

Agreements between firms and workers negotiated by unions of recognised internal consultation mechanisms.

A commitment by business that to get on the scheme they pay UK corporation tax and pay out no dividends to shareholders

Discussing the upcoming end to furlough, Ms O'Grady added: 'The jobs market is still fragile, with more than a million people still on furlough.

'An abrupt and premature end to the furlough scheme will needlessly cost jobs and harm our economic recovery.

'Instead of pulling the rug out from under the feet of businesses and workers, the chancellor must extend the furlough scheme for as long as is needed to protect jobs and livelihoods.'

The calls come just a month after MPs warned taxpayers will pay the price of Covid for decades.

The government racked up another £22.8billion of liabilities, the second highest on record for June - but down from £28.2billion a year earlier

The amount of debt sat at an eye-watering £2.2trillion at the end of June, or around 99.7 per cent of GDP, the highest ratio since the 102.5 per cent recorded in March 1961

Closely-watched PMI figures suggested the economy has drastically slowed down in June- with managers blaming shortages of workers and raw materials

Last month, two reports from the Commons Public Accounts Committee (PAC) released on Sunday slammed the Government's spending on unusable personal protective equipment (PPE).

The reports also warned that an inquiry into the pandemic and its handling by the government - expected next year - will not come quick enough to learn the lessons needed.

The PAC said the taxpayer would be exposed to 'significant financial risks for decades to come' - putting the Covid bill to date at £372 billion.

OBR says pension costs will fall due to Covid deaths Excess deaths as a result of coronavirus will reduce spending on the state pension and increase inheritance tax receipts, according to analysis of Budget data. More than 144,000 deaths involving Covid-19 have occurred in the UK since the start of the pandemic, figures published by the UK's statistics agencies show. Most coronavirus deaths have been in people aged over 65, many of whom will have been receiving the state pension. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) estimated that will partly cause the Government's pensioner spending to fall by £600million in 2020/21 and £900 million in 2021/22, relative to its March 2020 forecast. While the fiscal watchdog said the 'primary driver of lower spending is the weaker outlook for average earnings growth', excess coronavirus deaths have also reduced the number of people receiving pensions relative to previous assumptions. 'Indeed, with virus-related deaths rising sharply again in recent months, we have revised up the number of excess pensioner-age deaths in 2020-21 from 90,000 in our November forecast to around 100,000 in this one,' the OBR said in its report alongside the Budget. 'This revision may appear small given the severity of the current wave, but the lockdown brought in to control the coronavirus has also dramatically reduced the number of influenza deaths this winter relative to a normal year. 'Our forecast now also assumes some excess deaths in 2021-22, drawing on academic modelling published alongside the Government's road map. 'Excess deaths lower pensioner spending by £0.6 billion in 2020-21 and by £0.9 billion in 2021-22 relative to our March 2020 forecast.' On inheritance tax, the Treasury forecasts that receipts will increase from £5.1 billion in 2019/20 to £6 billion in 2021/22, before falling to £5.8 billion the following year. While the rise is attributed to the freeze of inheritance tax thresholds until April 2026 and the growth in the value of estates, higher Covid-19 deaths will also contribute. The OBR said it had 'revised up our assumption for excess deaths this year and next relative to November'. It said that 'higher virus-related deaths in the current wave of the virus have outweighed the effect of lockdown reducing deaths from other causes, particularly from influenza and other respiratory diseases'. However, the OBR said receipts have been 'revised down substantially relative to our pre-pandemic forecast thanks to lower equity prices and lower house prices'. 'The effect of these on growth in the value of estates more than offsets the small lift to receipts due to the increase in deaths this year,' the watchdog said. Advertisement

The committee also 'remains concerned that despite spending over £10 billion on supplies, the PPE stockpile is not fit for purpose'.

It added that as of May this year, out of 32 billion items of PPE ordered by the Department of Health and Social Care, some 11 billion had been distributed, while 12.6 billion remain in storage.

Meanwhile some 8.4 billion on order from other parts of the world have still not arrived to Britain.

But MPs were concerned the stockpile was costing around £6.7 million a week to store, with potential waste levels 'unacceptably high'.

Dame Meg Hillier, chairwoman of the Public Accounts Committee, said: 'With eye-watering sums of money spent on Covid measures so far, the Government needs to be clear, now, how this will be managed going forward, and over what period of time.

'The ongoing risk to the taxpayer will run for 20 years on things like arts and culture recovery loans, let alone the other new risks that departments across Government must quickly learn to manage.'

A promised public inquiry into the pandemic is not expected to start until spring next year, and will likely be long-running.

The PAC report said it was 'clear that Government cannot wait for the review before learning important lessons' and must instead present a Covid recovery plan in the autumn spending review.

Dame Meg added: 'If coronavirus is with us for a long time, the financial hangover could leave future generations with a big headache.'

It came as PMI figures suggested the economy has drastically slowed down last month - with managers blaming absence of workers and shortages of raw materials. Although the index indicated growth continuing, the reading was the lowest since the lockdown started easing in March.

In June figures revealed the UK debt pile hit £2.2trillion - the highest relative to GDP since 1961 - but borrowing started to ease as the economy recovered.

The government racked up another £22.8billion of liabilities, the second highest on record for June - but down from £28.2billion a year earlier.

Although the figure was slightly above the expectations of analysts, it was below the estimates from the OBR watchdog in the spring, giving Rishi Sunak some much-needed breathing room.

In a worrying sign, the official data showed that the government spent £8.7billion on interest payments for its debts - up from just £2.7billion in June 2020 as rates have increased.

The Chancellor pointed to the huge package of support he had implemented to shore up jobs and businesses, but stressed he was taking 'tough choices' to get debt back under control.

According to the Office for National Statistics, borrowing so far this financial year has reached £69.5billion since the end of March – £49.8billion less than the same period a year ago

The ONS revised down estimates for borrowing in April and May, by £2.9billion and £3.7billion respectively, with National Insurance tax revenues higher than previously thought as pandemic restrictions have eased.

It also revised down borrowing for the financial year to the end of March again, by £1.5billion to £297.7 billion, though this was still the highest since the end of the Second World War and equivalent to 14.2 per cent of GDP.

The amount of debt sat at an eye-watering £2.2trillion at the end of June, or around 99.7 per cent of GDP, the highest ratio since the 102.5 per cent recorded in March 1961.

Speaking at the time Mr Sunak said: 'I'm proud of the unprecedented package of support we put in place to protect jobs and help thousands of businesses survive the pandemic, and that we are continuing to support those who need it.

'However, it's also right that we ensure debt remains under control in the medium term, and that's why I made some tough choices at the last Budget to put the public finances on a sustainable path.'

The ONS said central government receipts in June hit £62.2billion – a £9.5billion or 18 per cent increase year on year, which was driven higher by a 22 per cent jump in tax revenues to £45.5billion amid the wider economy rebound.

Borrowing in 2021-22 is looking likely to undershoot the £234billion predicted by the OBR at the March Budget due to the marked recovery.

But while debt levels are coming down from last year's highs, influential think-tank the Institute for Fiscal Studies warned separately that any respite will prove short-lived for the Chancellor.

The IFS said the economy will be 3 per cent smaller than official pre-Covid forecasts by the middle of the decade as the pandemic leaves permanent scars.

Official numbers published this year showed state debt was above £2.1trillion in January

The Budget Red Book showed that while the Budget decisions mean the government spends an extra £58billion in 2021-22, by 2025-6 it is bringing in nearly £30billion more than previously expected - with Treasury officials claiming that 'goes a long way' towards balancing the books

The Office for National Statistics has said over the whole of 2020 the economy dived by 9.9 per cent - the worst annual performance since the Great Frost devastated Europe in 1709

This year the Budget Red Book showed that while policy decisions mean the government spends an extra £58billion in 2021-22, by 2025-6 it is bringing in nearly £30billion a year more than previously expected - with Treasury officials claiming that 'goes a long way' towards balancing the books.

The OBR estimates that by the end of its forecast period the government's deficit will be almost eradicated, at £900million, finally stopping debt rising.

While upping the outlook for next year, the OBR also slashed its GDP forecast for every other year until 2025, including a cut for this year to 4 per cent from the 5.5 per cent growth previously pencilled in.

This follows the biggest plunge in the UK economy for more than 300 years in 2020, with GDP tumbling 10%.

The independent forecaster also laid bare the toll on the public finances from more than £400 billion of Covid-19 support to businesses and households.

It is predicting Government borrowing will soar to £355 billion in 2020/21 – lower than the £394 billion first forecast but still 17 per cent of national income and the highest level since the Second World War.

Borrowing will remain at eye-watering levels in 2021/22 at £234billion, up from the £164.2billion pencilled in before and 10.3 per cent of GDP, but will fall gradually to 2.8 per cent in 2025/25.

In his budget the Chancellor said he knew the revenue-raising measures - which will take the burden to the highest since the 1960s - would be 'unpopular'.

But Mr Sunak insisted the alternative of 'doing nothing' was not right, pointing out the bulk of the measures will not be implemented until the recovery is well established.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Almost 60,000 EU citizens missed the deadline to apply to live and work in the UK after Brexit, raising fears over their future in Britain.

More than 58,000 applications were made to the EU Settlement Scheme in the month after the deadline passed, official Home Office figures reveal.

EU citizens and their families were asked to apply to the Home Office by June 30 in order to carry on living and working in the UK after freedom of movement ended following the Brexit transition period.

According to provisional Home Office figures, 58,200 applications were received after the deadline up to the end of July.

While the Government has not set a cut off for making applications, there are limited reasonable grounds for submitting late applications.

They include parents, guardians or councils failing to apply on behalf of a child; those with serious medical conditions preventing them from applying in time; or 'compelling or compassionate reasons' in light of the coronavirus pandemic.

It means that many could face an anxious wait to see if they are able to stay under the terms of the scheme.

More than six million applications (6,015,400) were submitted between the launch of the scheme in March 2019 and the closing date of June 30 2021, and more than five million have already been given permanent or temporary leave to remain.

Poles, Romanians and Italians led the way in terms of applications to stay, with 1,091,500, 1,067,200 and 545,600 applications respectively. They were followed by Portuguese, Spanish and Bulgarian nationals.

More than 2.8 million of those (2,846,700) were granted settled status, allowing them permanent leave to remain.

A further 2.3 million (2,329,400) were granted pre-settled status, meaning they need to reapply after living in the country for five years to gain permanent residence.

The Home Office said 8 per cent of the applications were from 'repeat applicants' (464,000) - suggesting an estimated 5.5 million people had applied to the scheme before the deadline.

Some 109,400 applications were refused, 80,800 were withdrawn or void, and 79,800 were deemed invalid - where the Home Office decides someone is not eligible to apply or has failed to provide sufficient proof of residence.

The applications received after June 30 will include a mix of late submissions, those from family members, and requests to move from pre-settled to settled status, the Government department said.

It is not known how many people in the UK are eligible for the scheme but could remain in the country undocumented.

Anyone who is yet to apply effectively loses their lawful immigration status after the deadline. This could prevent them getting a new job or moving house until their status is confirmed under the scheme.

Campaigners have previously called for the law to be changed to automatically protect the rights of EU citizens and their families continuing to live in the UK to make sure they do not face discrimination or lose access to services like healthcare.

There are limited reasonable grounds for submitting late applications, including where parents, guardians or councils have failed to apply on behalf of a child; those with serious medical conditions preventing them from applying in time; or 'compelling or compassionate reasons' in light of the coronavirus pandemic.

The Government insisted that those who applied by the deadline but have yet to receive a decision will have their existing rights protected, subject to the outcome of the application and any appeal.

However, those who do not apply and continue to live in the UK without being able to prove their immigration status have been warned they could face enforcement action.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Rishi Sunak insisted this morning that he was focused on 'the economy, jobs, recovery' - before heading to Lords to watch the cricket with his wife.

The Chancellor and Akshata Murthy were spotted enjoying the first day of the second test between England and India after he had tried to sidestep questions about his political ambitions.

Mr Sunak is the Tory favourite to replace Boris Johnson in No10 but declined three times in an interview today to say if he harbours ambitions for the top job.

Relations between the Chancellor and PM are said to be strained amid claims Mr Johnson threatened to demote him in a row over lockdown.

More than half of Tory voters want the finance chief to replace Boris Johnson when he leaves No 10, the Mail revealed on Wednesday.

And some 47 per cent of Conservatives who hold this view think the handover should take place in the next 12 months.

But asked about his popularity by ITV today, Mr Sunak declined to answer, instead focusing on positive GDP figures released this morning.

The Chancellor and Akshata Murthy were spotted enjoying the first day of the second test between England and India after he had tried to sidestep questions about his political ambitions.

More than half of Tory voters want the finance chief to replace Boris Johnson when he leaves No 10, the Mail revealed on Wednesday.

Some 47 per cent of Conservatives who hold this view think the handover should take place in the next 12 months

Akshata runs fashion label Akshata Designs and is also a director of a venture capital firm founded by her father in 2010. Her shareholding in Infosys alone is estimated at £185million.

The PM reportedly made the threat over a leaked letter from the Chancellor demanding more and swifter action to ease Covid curbs.

The Chancellor declined three times to answer questions on whether he wanted to step into Mr Johnson's shoes, at a time when polls suggest he is far more popular.

More than half of Tory voters want the finance chief to replace Boris Johnson when he leaves No 10, the Mail revealed on Wednesday.

The findings come from research by pollsters JL Partners for the Daily Mail in the wake of claims of a rift between the two men

GDP boost for Sunak as economy bounces back The great British pub helped boost the UK economy out of lockdown, spearheading a 4.8 per cent increase in GDP in the second quarter of 2021, new figures revealed today. The country's gross domestic product (GDP) increased by a further 1 per cent in June, creating five consecutive months of growth, following a 0.6 per cent rise in May, the Office for National Statistics said. Chancellor Rishi Sunak hailed the figures, saying they were the best of any G7 nation. Lockdown restrictions slowly eased through much of the quarter, with outdoor dining opened again in April and further restrictions were lifted in May. However, GDP is still around two percentage points below its pre-pandemic peak. Another major contributor to the growth was GP surgeries across the country. The number of people visiting their doctors for non-Covid complaints rose, increasing the consumption of health services by 5.1% in the second quarter. This was also helped by Government spending on Test and Trace and the vaccination programme, the ONS said. Advertisement

'What I am focused on is the economy, jobs, recovery,' he said.

'Today’s figures are what I am focused on and today’s figures show the plan I have put in place, our plan for jobs, is working.'

Hours later he was in the members' pavilion at Lords, watching England struggle in the field against India, the country of his wife's birth.

Mr Sunak also denied that Mr Johnson had threatened to demote him to health secretary over a leaked letter.

The PM reportedly made the threat over a leaked letter from the Chancellor demanding more and swifter action to ease Covid curbs.

Asked about the row by ITV, Mr Sunak said: 'I don’t pay much attention to all of these things so i don’t think there is anything more I can add to that.'

But pressed on the PM's demotion threat and whether it happened, he said 'No.'

'Like every Cabinet minister I work for the Prime Minister and he and I work really well and really closely together as people have seen over the past 12-18 months,' he added.

Asked if the Chancellor should take over when Mr Johnson steps down, 56 per cent of Conservative voters say he should, more than three times the number (18 per cent) who disagree.

Of the Tories who want Mr Sunak to succeed Mr Johnson, 11 per cent want him to do so now, while a further 36 per cent want him to do so within a year.

Even more astonishing, nearly four in five (77 per cent) of such voters think the Chancellor should be given the reins of power within three years.

That would probably mean Mr Johnson going before the next election, due by December 2024. Among all voters, 40 per cent say Mr Sunak is more likely to win an election – 27 per cent say Mr Johnson.

Meanwhile, the Chancellor thrashes the current PM in a light-hearted personal contest.

Some 21 per cent of men would be content for their partners to have dinner with Mr Johnson. Nearly double – 41 per cent – would be happy for them to dine with the Chancellor.

JL Partners interviewed 1,019 adults on Monday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: President Biden has yet ANOTHER 'senior moment' by confusing Gov. Gretchen Whitmer with Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm a day after he ignored Secret Service agent directing him into the White House

Where are you going, Joe? Another 'senior moment' as confused President Biden ignores Secret Service agent directions into White House and bizarrely walks onto lawn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'Why is the FBI not doing anything?': Sean Hannity says feds are not properly investigating Hunter Biden's laptop after DailyMail.com revealed new video from it of president's son saying Russian drug dealers stole his computer

Hunter Biden reveals he almost overdosed in Las Vegas and Russians stole another of his laptops in 2018 in an unearthed video obtained by the Daily Mail.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'I sent Meghan roses for her 40th birthday… I didn't hear back': Thomas Markle tells Dan Wootton on GB News how he tried to rebuild bridges with estranged daughter and wished her 'brighter days ahead' but was rebuffed

In an interview with GB News, Meghan Markle's father Thomas insisted that Lili was a perfect name for his granddaughter but turned his nose up at the name Lilibet. Having not yet met her, Markle expressed a desire...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Duchess of Windsor rather baffled me,’ observed Wallis Simpson’s wartime aide, Rene MacColl. ‘I was never at my ease with her. What causes one human being to fall madly in love with another is occasionally clear to third persons. But more often it remains a mystery to the onlooker. So far as I was concerned, it was emphatically a mystery in this case.’

It is a question that has continued to intrigue Royal analysts and the public nearly 50 years after the Duke of Windsor’s death and 35 years after his wife’s. What was the couple’s relationship really like?

Did they feel they had to pretend to live out a fairytale romance, as a result of the former King’s sensational decision to quit his Royal duties and move abroad with the woman he adored? Or was theirs a genuine love story?

The Duke of Windsor, right, remained besotted with his wife Wallace Simpson until he died

What is certain is that the Duke of Windsor remained besotted with his wife until he died. ‘I have never known any person so totally possessed by the personality of another,’ wrote the journalist Kenneth de Courcy, a longtime confidant of Edward. ‘He seemed to me to retain no individuality at all whenever she was present.’

‘He watched her every movement, listened to her every word and responded to every inflection in her voice,’ remembered Mona Eldridge, who met the Windsors on numerous occasions. ‘He often said that nothing was too good for her.’

Winston Churchill noticed how ‘he delighted in her company, and found her qualities as necessary to his happiness as the air he breathed. Those who knew him well and watched him closely noticed that many little tricks and fidgetings of nervousness fell away from him. He was a completed being, instead of a sick and harassed soul’.

However, the evidence of Wallis’s affection for her husband is less apparent. ‘Did she love the Duke of Windsor? I am afraid the sad answer is that she did not,’ said de Courcy. ‘She never learnt to love the Duke and, in my opinion, she never ever experienced love at all for anyone.’

Even before they married, the socialite Lady Diana Cooper had noticed that during a cruise in 1936 Wallis did not want to be left alone with Edward. ‘The truth is she’s bored stiff with him,’ wrote Cooper in her diary, ‘and her picking on him and her coldness towards him are irritation and boredom.’

One area of conflict throughout their relationship was Wallis’s status and how she was treated by the Royals and the British Establishment. It began as soon as Edward abdicated, and continued throughout the 35 years they were married, much of her venom directed against his family. ‘She went at him morning, noon and night and right up to one o’clock in the morning, two o’clock in the morning, steaming up against his family,’ remembered de Courcy. ‘She went on and on and on and on.’

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex pictured in Australia ahead of the announcement that they were stepping back from Royal life

‘The Duchess was a complicated person – cold, mean-spirited, a bully and a sadist,’ observed Dr Gaea Leinhardt, stepdaughter of Wallis’s ghostwriter, Cleveland Amory. ‘My parents found the Duke not very bright, a wimp, and basically a very sad man.

‘He had made an appalling choice and knew that he had taken the wrong path and now had to live with the consequences. They found him pathetic.’

Yet it was Wallis’s domineering behaviour that most appealed to the Duke, both sexually and in their everyday life. As a man who had been mercilessly bullied in childhood, submission lay at the heart of his character and marriage.

Writing to Freda Dudley Ward, who had been his mistress before he became King, Edward had told her in 1920: ‘I think I’m the kind of man who needs a certain amount of cruelty without which he gets abominably spoilt & soft. I feel that’s what’s the matter with me.’

Weak and with below average intelligence – he had once told the actress Lilli Palmer: ‘You know, I’ve got a low IQ’ – the Duke needed a woman to control him completely.

‘The Duchess of Windsor was harsh, dominating, often abominably rude,’ wrote Royal biographer Philip Ziegler. ‘She treated the Prince at the best like a child who needed keeping in order, at the worst with contempt. But he invited it and begged for more.’

‘The Duchess of Windsor was harsh, dominating, often abominably rude,’ wrote Royal biographer Philip Ziegler. ‘She treated the Prince at the best like a child who needed keeping in order, at the worst with contempt. But he invited it and begged for more’

‘She dominated the Duke but he did not just put up with it. He actually liked it,’ remembered Cleveland Amory.

‘She had a way of denigrating him by reminding him that he had let her down again,’ remembered Mona Elridge. ‘People on her staff told me how she would reprimand the Duke like a harsh mother with a naughty child, not infrequently reducing him to tears. Paradoxically, this only caused him to cling more tightly to her.’

Edward’s ghostwriter Charles Murphy remembered how a journalist called at their Paris home to collect a manuscript from the Duke, only to hear the Duchess rant at him for littering the dinner table with his papers. ‘I’ve got 20 guests dining here in two hours,’ she scolded. ‘Why didn’t you make this mess somewhere else?’

The dining room was his only office and he had no other choice, replying – and the journalist never forgot his exact words – ‘Darling, are you going to send me to bed in tears again tonight?’

The photographer Cecil Beaton, a frequent guest at the Windsors’ various homes, believed their relationship was like that of a mother and child. The Duke called Wallis ‘Fredie-Wedie’ and their correspondence was marked by lots of baby talk (‘vewy angwy’, ‘your own little David is cwying so hard inside’) and dirty jokes.

Beaton also sympathised with the Duchess as she faced the challenge of how to keep her husband occupied day after day.

‘She looks after him like a child and yet makes entertainment for him as she did in the days when he was the Prince coming to her home for relaxation at the end of a long day,’ he said.

‘She now gives him the antidote to hard work, but he has none of the hard work. He has nothing to do. She is nearly driven mad trying to find ways of amusing him. He has no interests. He thought he was bored at being Royalty and he has no reason since to consider he has stopped being bored. He has no intellect. He never opens a book.’

The couple’s domestic roles were replicated in the bedroom, according to those who knew them best. Sir Dudley Forwood, equerry to the Duke of Windsor for two years after the Abdication, is doubtful whether the couple ever actually had sexual intercourse in the normal sense

The Duchess herself recalled the moment she realised precisely what she had let herself in for. ‘I remember like yesterday the morning after we were married,’ she told the US author Gore Vidal. ‘I woke up and there was [the Duke] standing beside the bed with this innocent smile, saying, “And now what do we do?”

‘My heart sank. Here was someone whose every day had been arranged for him all his life and now I was the one who was going to take the place of the entire British government, trying to think up things for him to do.’

The couple’s domestic roles were replicated in the bedroom, according to those who knew them best. Sir Dudley Forwood, equerry to the Duke of Windsor for two years after the Abdication, is doubtful whether the couple ever actually had sexual intercourse in the normal sense.

‘At his request, they became involved in elaborate erotic games,’ said Forwood. ‘These included nanny-child scenes: he wore diapers; she was the master. She was dominant, he happily submissive.’

According to a FBI report on the couple, a cousin of Edward who became a Benedictine monk said the Duchess was the only woman who had been able to satisfactorily gratify the Duke’s sexual desires.

Apparently, she had learned ‘special ways’ in China.

Forwood recalled that these techniques ‘did not entirely overcome the Prince’s extreme lack of virility,’ adding: ‘It is doubtful whether he and Wallis ever actually had sexual intercourse in the normal sense of the word. However, she did manage to give him relief. He had always been a repressed foot fetishist, and she discovered this and indulged the perversity completely.’

Interior designer Nicky Haslam, who knew the couple well, agrees with the ‘nanny-child’ assessment.

‘I mean nappies,’ he told me earlier this year. ‘They were all sexually screwed up by Queen Mary [Edward’s mother].

‘Potty Gloucester [the Duke’s brother, the Duke of Gloucester] liked wearing Queen Mary’s clothes, though he wasn’t gay. The Duke [of Windsor] was certainly gay. I know that for a fact.’

Queen Mary, the last Royal to believe in the divine right of kings, had never intervened in the callous bullying that her husband George V meted out to his children. Consequently, all were affected in different ways.

Diana Mosley, wife of the Fascist leader Oswald Mosley, remembered: ‘There’s a ghastly photograph where they’re being drilled by their father and they’re all in floods. Oh, I mean, too awful.’

‘Being treated as a little boy, given orders, and punished when naughty,’ historian Michael Bloch gathered from various sources, were to the Duke’s taste.

Charles Wilson, whose mother was married to the Keeper of the Privy Purse, was told by her that ‘Edward gained pleasure from being beaten by Wallis, who delivered the strokes with her own small whip.

‘There is no doubt that Edward loved Wallis, but he was frightened of her – this she was quick to exploit.’

As their marriage moved into its middle years, Wallis used her numerous lovers, often much younger, to humiliate and belittle her husband, according to friends

As their marriage moved into its middle years, Wallis used her numerous lovers, often much younger, to humiliate and belittle her husband, according to friends.

One of these young men was Jimmy Donahue, a flamboyant heir to the Woolworth fortune and a publicly gay socialite. He and Wallis hit it off immediately after meeting in Palm Beach in 1941, with their friendship swiftly becoming an affair. He was quoted as saying: ‘It was like going to bed with a very old sailor.’

‘Jimmy said that she resented the fact that the Duke had lost his throne,’ wrote Mona Eldridge. ‘Naively, she had believed his promise of making her Queen. She despised his weakness and boring ways. With Jimmy, she found revenge and enjoyed humiliating her husband – in public if necessary.’

It was a view shared by Kenneth de Courcy. ‘I think she enjoyed annoying the Duke of Windsor over that. I think it gave her a kick to see him enraged by it, which he was.

‘It gave her a feeling of power, that after all those years she could still make him extremely jealous and angry over another man.’

But there are suggestions that it was not only Wallis who was attracted to Donahue.

‘I think the Duke was in love with Jimmy,’ claims Nicky Haslam.

In 2012, Scotty Bowers, a Hollywood barman, published his memoirs, including a chapter on the Windsors. In it he claimed that ‘during the late Forties and early Fifties’, Cecil Beaton introduced them to Bowers, saying the Duke was ‘a classic example of a bisexual man’, that ‘Wallis Simpson shared similar bisexual urges’.

According to Bowers: ‘He [Edward] and I slipped into a guesthouse at the end of the garden, stripped off, and began making out. Eddy was good. Really good.’

Over the next few days, writes Bowers, he supplied ‘a nice young guy for Eddy and a pretty dark-haired girl for Wally. Each time I sent somebody different. The Royal couple enjoyed variety.’

Edward's dependence on his adored wife lasted literally until his dying day.

The night nurse who cared for him in his final weeks, Julie Chatard Alexander, was shocked that Wallis, whose bedroom was on the same floor as his at their Paris home, ‘never came to see him or kiss him goodnight or see how he was.

‘Not once. Poor fellow. He would call her name over and over: “Wallis, Wallis, Wallis, Wallis.” Or “Darling, darling, darling, darling.” It was pitiful and pathetic. Just so sad, like a lamb calling for its mother.’

Even in the Duke’s last moments, the controversy which had surrounded the couple would not go away. According to Wallis’s friend the Countess of Romanones, the Duchess was called in the middle of the night and rushed to his bedside. ‘I took him in my arms,’ she is reported to have said. ‘His blue eyes looked up at me, and he started to talk. He could only say, “Darling.” Then his eyes closed, and he died in my arms.’

The Abdication remains one of the most traumatic episodes in Britain’s history and the tension between public obligations and private desires continues to be a significant trope in the story of the Royal Family

It’s an account confirmed by a nurse, who said Wallis was woken and kissed her husband’s forehead. But the couple’s secretary said the Duchess was asleep when the Duke died and he had to wake her. The full story will never be known.

The Abdication remains one of the most traumatic episodes in Britain’s history and the tension between public obligations and private desires continues to be a significant trope in the story of the Royal Family.

The country was lucky that in the crisis which Edward VIII generated, George VI and his daughter Elizabeth rose to the challenge. Edward’s refusal to discharge his duties as King as he would wish was, ironically, the making of the modern British Royal Family.

If Edward’s renunciation of the throne threatened to destroy the monarchy, his brother and niece saved it.

Abridged, edited extract from Traitor King: The Scandalous Exile Of The Duke And Duchess Of Windsor, by Andrew Lownie, published by Blink on August 19 at £25. To pre-order a copy for £22.25, with free UK delivery, go to mailshop.co.uk/books or call 020 3308 9193 before August 29.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lily Allen is facing a bitter row with a man she accuses of sexual abuse.

The 36-year-old is preparing to release a new album in which every song will be named after a man in the music industry she says has previously taken advantage of her.

But The Mail on Sunday has learnt that at least one of the men – a senior figure in the music industry himself – is planning to openly challenge the singer's claims.

One friend of the individual confirmed that he would not be attempting to prevent Allen from releasing the song about him.

Lily Allen (above in July) is facing a bitter row with a man she accuses of sexual abuse. The 36-year-old is preparing to release a new album in which every song will be named after a man in the music industry she says has previously taken advantage of her

The Mail on Sunday has learnt that at least one of the men – a senior figure in the music industry himself – is planning to openly challenge the singer's claims. One friend of the individual confirmed that he would not be attempting to prevent Allen (above in 2014) from releasing the song about him

But the friend said he would be making evidence available which, he claimed, would cast doubt over claims he was in an abusive relationship with the singer.

'If Lily wants to make these allegations in her songs, she must be prepared for very serious claims to be challenged,' said the friend.

'There will be no legal move made to prevent the release of this particular track. But the person being accused of committing these acts is convinced they have the evidence to disprove the allegation. They are prepared to fight fire with fire.'

Ms Allen spoke in 2018 about being sexually assaulted and claimed that she woke up in bed with a record industry executive during a work trip.

She said: 'I woke up at 5am because I could feel someone next to me pressing their naked body against my back. I was naked, too.

'I moved away as quickly as possible and jumped out of the bed, full of alarm… I found my clothes quickly… and ran out of his room and into my own.'

Lily Allen recently revealed she is two years sober, has made her West End debut in the play 2:22 A Ghost Story, and is happily married again, to US actor David Harbour, 46. (Above together in June)

The mother-of-two has enjoyed a remarkable turnaround in her life over the past few years following the collapse of her first marriage, and claims she was struggling with a hedonistic lifestyle that threatened her health and her career.

She recently revealed she is two years sober, has made her West End debut in the play 2:22 A Ghost Story, and is happily married again, to US actor David Harbour, 46.

Allen initially revealed she was self-funding her hotly awaited new music album, but she has now been signed to the BMG label, which will put out the release later this year.

She has previously alleged that sexual abuse is 'rife' in the music industry and too many people are still silent on the issue, despite the flourishing #MeToo movement.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Epstein worker 'will swear on oath that he saw Prince Andrew groping Virginia Roberts on billionaire's island' - amid claims that Royal aides fear 'inconsistencies' in Prince's story if sex assault claims go to trial

Jeffrey Epstein's telecoms specialist Steve Scully 'will swear on oath' that he saw Prince Andrew groping Virginia Roberts on the billionaire's island. He recalls seeing Andrew 'grabbing and grinding against a young...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaz Kamwi

Name: Kaz Kamwi

Age: 26

Location: Essex

Occupation: Fashion Blogger

Who is their type on paper? 'I like meeting new people, I'm ready to be in a relationship. Why not be in a place where people are looking for the same things as me?'

Chloe Burrows

Name: Chloe Burrows

Age: 25

Location: Bicester

Occupation: Financial Services Marketing Executive

Who is their type on paper? 'I like a good build. I go to the gym. I want someone who is funny. Really funny and caring and will do nice little things for you.'

Faye Winter

Name: Faye Winter

Age: 26

Location: Devon

Occupation: Letting Manager

What is her type on paper? 'Someone that will put me in my place. Someone that makes me laugh. But also someone that takes my banter. I’m like a five-year-old in a playground, if I like you, I will make a mockery of you and laugh and joke. That is my really terrible flirting skills. I need someone who can take that.'

Rachel Finni

Name: Rachel Finni

Age: 29

Location: London

Occupation: Luxury travel specialist

Why did you sign up for Love Island? I've scraped the bottom of the dirtiest barrels, that’s how I describe my dating life. So I thought "why not? Let’s apply. If it happens, it happens".'

Lucinda Strafford

Name: Lucinda Strafford

Age: 21

Location: Brighton

Occupation: Online fashion boutique owner

Which boy do you have your eye on? I really fancy Brad. And then possibly Liam. But obviously I’m open to getting to know any of the other boys.

AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Name: AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Age: 28

Location: Hertfordshire

Occupation: Hair extension technician

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I’ve had the worst luck with men. I feel like this is the one thing I haven’t tried. I thought why not? Let’s give it a go.'

Georgia Townend

Name: Georgia Townend

Age: 28

Location: Essex

Occupation: Marketing executive

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I've been single for a really long time. Five years. I haven’t done the maths but it’s at least that. I feel like I’ve exhausted all the other options on how to meet people.'

Mary Bedford

Name: Mary Bedford

Age: 22

Location: Wakefield

Occupation: Model

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I have the worst luck, ever, with boys. Genuinely the worst ever. I always get dragged into the same circle of boys. So I was like, I need to go in another direction.'

Kaila Troy

Name: Kaila Troy

Age: 28

Location: Dublin

Occupation: DJ

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'Real life dating has not been doing me any favours at all. I’ve had it.'

Matthew Macnabb

Name: Matthew Macnabb

Age: 26

Location: Belfast

Occupation: Strategic Marketing Consultant

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I feel like I’m pretty chilled and very adventurous. I’m very laid-back in the sense I like to laugh and I don’t care too much about what people think.'

Amy Day

Name: Amy Day

Age: 25

From: Surrey

Occupation: Performer

Why have you signed up for Love Island: I’m clearly not very good at dating myself. I’m looking forward to the experience and the potential of finding someone I might not have met.

Lillie Hayes

Name: Lillie Haynes

Age: 22

From: South Shields

Occupation: Trainee accountant

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’ve definitely got my eye on Jake. He’s 100% the type of boy I would go for at home. It’s too good of a match not to just go for. Liam is definitely a dark horse for me, he’s like James Bond when you look at him, absolutely gorgeous. So he could be a very close second.

Jack Barlow

Name: Jack Barlow

Age: 26

From: East Sussex

Occupation: Racing driver/coach

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’m very much a connection type of person so I’ll be able to tell more in person. From what I’ve seen and going off their energy, Chloe has been top of my list. It’s been nice to see her be herself and not care what anyone thinks. I think she’ll be a lot of fun.

Jack Barlow

Name: Aaron Simpson

Age: 24

From: Kent

Occupation: Footballer

What is it like dating as a footballer? Does it make things easier or does it stand in the way? A lot of people have an assumption of me as being a typical player, but I got all of that out of my system when I was younger and now I’m a lot more laid-back when it comes to dating. A lot of people would assume that I go on lots of dates but I’m actually quite picky when it comes to who I date. Sometimes it can be hard to know if someone is genuine or not. My mum is really protective over me. The approval is always needed from mumsy, for sure.

Brett Staniland

Name: Brett Staniland

Age: 27

From: Derbyshire

Occupation: PhD student and model

Why have you signed up to Love Island? I've never had a serious relationship and the last 18 months has been really stagnant in terms of meeting new people and dating. Lots of my friends have settled down, had kids. I'm kind of the one that's left back from all of that. Now is the right time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for her eccentric style and is never shy to show off a bold look.

And Jonathan Ross' daughter Honey flaunted her new pastel orange hair on Sunday after a trip to the salon as she declared that 'change is good'.

The writer and activist, 24, took to Instagram to give fans a glimpse of the new colour as she left her appointment wearing her face mask.

Bright: Jonathan Ross' daughter Honey flaunted her bold new pastel orange hair on Sunday after a trip to the salon as she declared that 'change is good'

She captioned the snaps: 'Change is good! thank you for fulfilling my fruit salad fantasy @nosebleedsaresexy' as she tagged the stylist.

The evening before Honey had been showing off her curves in a daring cut-out purple dress as she headed on a night out with friends.

The tight and revealing number showed off her ample assets and legs as she posed up a storm with a mirror selfie.

Wow: The evening before Honey had been showing off her curves in a daring cut-out purple dress as she headed on a night out with friends

Bold: The writer and activist, 24, took to Instagram to give fans a glimpse of the new colour as she left her appointment wearing her face mask

Honey was not joined by her boyfriend Zane Saz in the snaps, after she recently shared a raunchy picture with his hand down her skirt.

In the image shared with her Instagram followers, Honey teased her midriff in a baby blue and white floral crop top and skirt.

Honey wrote an article last year for The Sunday Times Style mag detailing the difficulties she's faced in her dating life.

Here we go! She also snapped a picture as she sat in the salon with the dye working its magic on her tresses

Figure: The tight and revealing number showed off her ample assets and legs as she posed up a storm in the middle of the road

Curves: She wasn't shy showing off her figure in the racy number as she uploaded a video to her TikTok

She explained that men would frequently try to chat her up on social media, but would never do the same offline.

'Strangers and mutuals alike are privately trying to get my attention. But note the word "privately": most of these men who message and follow me would never publicly like or comment on my pictures.'

She believed that being attracted to someone who's 'fat' is still seen as taboo - branding men's desire for larger bodies as 'their dirty secret'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jake Cornish and Liberty Poole faced yet another obstacle in their relationship during Sunday's instalment of Love Island - which resulted in Jake walking out of the villa.

Jake, 24, who confessed to Lib, 21, that he loved her during Friday's episode, found out from Toby Aromolaran that the girls were doubting the sincerity of his feelings.

Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced.

'I need to get out of this place!': Frustrated Jake stormed out of the villa on Sunday night after the girls doubted his feelings for Liberty

Growing increasingly frustrated, Jake snapped: 'I need to get out of this place.'

The water engineer stuck to his word and, despite a concerned Toby following him, he sat on a wall outside the villa to collect his thoughts.

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official.

However Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

Being honest: Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced

Stressed: The water engineer stormed out of the villa to collect his thoughts

The girls had earlier voiced their concerns about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her.

Chloe Burrows responded to her frankly: 'You're going to hate me. Do you not think he's telling you what you want to hear?'

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looked round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye Winter tentatively replied: 'I don’t know baby.'

Unsure: The girls had previously voiced their concerned about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her

Supporting her friend: Faye told Jake in an honest chat that it was the 'worst' time he could tell her Liberty loved her

Liberty seemed a little confused, and asked for advice from her friends: 'Do you think I’m being an idiot?'

Chloe told the beauty: 'I don’t think he would say something if he didn’t mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

Chloe and Faye were later pulled for a chat by Jake, who revealed to Toby and Teddy that he wanted to know 'who the f**k' had questioned his feelings for Liberty.

In an honest yet calm chat, Faye told him: 'Tonight was the worst time to tell her you loved her,' to which he replied, 'I totally understand.'

Once again, Jake and Liberty managed to iron out their issues.

Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time.'

A more relieved-looking Liberty said: 'I trust you to believe that you meant it.'

Love Island continues on Monday on ITV2.

Reassuring: Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time'

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Today show newsreader Alex Cullen and his wife Bonnie Campbell have welcomed their third child.

Hosts Karl Stefanovic and Allison Langdon made the exciting announcement on the Channel Nine breakfast show on Monday.

'We have some exciting baby news today,' Karl told viewers.

It's a boy! Today show newsreader Alex Cullen and his wife Bonnie have welcomed their third child together

'[Alex] is no longer the only man in his house. His beautiful wife Bonnie delivered a healthy baby boy early yesterday morning,' Allison said.

'Lucky it's just one this time. His twin girls Audrey and Evie are very excited to have a little brother. Very cute bub without a name as yet.'

Alex announced in February he and Bonnie were expecting their third child.

'I should also say, Bonnie is pregnant. I meant to tell you that. [We have] another one on the way, which is extremely stressful,' he said on air.

New addition: Today hosts Karl Stefanovic and Allison Langdon made the announcement on the Channel Nine breakfast show on Monday

'What? Three cheers for Alex. How old will the twins be when the new baby arrives?' Karl asked.

'Two and a half,' Alex replied. 'It was slightly earlier than we'd planned and three under three will be a challenge, but we're over the moon!'

'It's exciting [and] terrifying,' he added.

Wonderful news: '[Alex] is no longer the only man in his house. His beautiful wife Bonnie delivered a healthy baby boy early yesterday morning,' Allison announced on Monday

Adorable: The couple haven't yet decided on a name for their baby boy

Alex married TV producer Bonnie in April 2017 in the scenic Hunter Valley.

They announced they were expecting twins in September 2018, and welcomed daughters Audrey and Evie in January 2019.

Sharing the happy news on Instagram at the time, Alex wrote: 'Our new family. Our beautiful girls were born in the very early hours of January 20.

'Mum is doing great. Girls are too. We couldn't be happier.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wrath of Man action star Scott Eastwood affectionately wrapped his arms around a mystery woman while vacationing on the Amalfi Coast in Southern Italy on Saturday.

The 35-year-old third-generation Californian beamed as he canoodled with his brunette companion while swimming in the Tyrrhenian Sea located in the Gulf of Salerno.

Eastwood (born Reeves) and his lady friend then sunbathed together side by side on lounge chairs as she sipped wine.

New flame? Wrath of Man action star Scott Eastwood affectionately wrapped his arms around a mystery woman while vacationing on the Amalfi Coast in Southern Italy on Saturday

Scott was previously romantically linked to Ashton Kutcher mistress Sara Leal, One Tree Hill alum Jana Kramer, and Playboy 2015 cover model Brittany Brousseau.

And back in 2016, The Outpost actor told GQ Australia that it was 'harder to date' after his girlfriend Jewel Brangman was killed in 2014 from a defective airbag in her car.

On Saturday, Eastwood posted a video of himself enjoying a female acrobat's limber performance at the nightclub Lío Ibiza in the 'amazing country' of Spain.

Intimate: The 35-year-old third-generation Californian beamed as he canoodled with his brunette companion while swimming in the Tyrrhenian Sea located in the Gulf of Salerno

Bronzing their bodies: Eastwood (born Reeves) and his lady friend then sunbathed together side by side on lounge chairs as she sipped wine

Bachelor: Scott was previously romantically linked to Ashton Kutcher mistress Sara Leal, One Tree Hill alum Jana Kramer, and Playboy 2015 cover model Brittany Brousseau

Scott - who boasts 5.2M social media followers - gushed: 'Amazing few days in the islands!'

The 5ft11in heartthrob doesn't fall far from the tree as his famous father - four-time Oscar winner Clint Eastwood - is a notorious womanizer.

The legendary 91-year-old fathered Eastwood and his sister Kathryn from his secret romance with flight attendant Jacelyn Reeves.

Tragedy: And back in 2016, The Outpost actor told GQ Australia that it was 'harder to date' after his girlfriend Jewel Brangman was killed in 2014 from a defective airbag in her car

Perched: On Saturday, Eastwood posted a video of himself enjoying a female acrobat's limber performance at the nightclub Lío Ibiza in the 'amazing country' of Spain

Scott - who boasts 5.2M social media followers - gushed: 'Amazing few days in the islands!'

Clint fathered six more children from his relationships with girlfriends Roxanne Tunis and Frances Fisher, as well as wives Maggie Johnson and Dina Ruiz.

Eastwood - who directs and stars in western Cry Macho premiering September 17 on HBO Max - just endorsed Larry Elder for California governor in the recall election.

'Clint Eastwood just contacted me with a message of his support,' the 69-year-old Republican candidate tweeted last Tuesday.

Mini-me: The 5ft11in heartthrob doesn't fall far from the tree as his famous father - four-time Oscar winner Clint Eastwood (R, pictured in 2019) - is a notorious womanizer

Childhood snaps: The legendary 91-year-old (L) fathered Eastwood and his sister Kathryn from his secret romance with flight attendant Jacelyn Reeves (R)

Fertile: Clint fathered six more children from his relationships with girlfriends Roxanne Tunis and Frances Fisher, as well as wives Maggie Johnson and Dina Ruiz (pictured in 2018)

'A shout out to Mr. Eastwood. You made my day. #WeveGotAStateToSave #RecallGavinNewsom.'

Scott has acted in four of his dad's films - Flags of Our Fathers (2006), Grand Torino (2008), Invictus (2009), and Trouble with the Curve (2012).

The LMU grad has three upcoming films - David Hackl's thriller Dangerous, Jason Orley's comedy I Want You Back, and Ariel Vromen's LA riot drama April 29, 1992.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jada Pinkett Smith has unveiled a new tattoo and also promised her Instagram followers that there are many more to come.

On Sunday, the 49-year-old Girls Trip star shared an image in which she was seen crouching on the floor in a light green sweatsuit and extending her arm to show off her new ink.

'I always said I would get a sleeve at 60 but tomorrow is not promised. Soooo … I’m starting to build my sleeve now!' Jada exclaimed in the caption.

New ink: Jada Pinkett Smith got a new tattoo and promised her Instagram followers that there are many more to come

She continued, 'Repp’n the Divine Feminine journey within and without. ✨Jai Ma✨ #MataSita #Allat #Oshun #QuanYin.

Jada's tattoo is an intricate rendering of Mata Sita, a Hindu goddess and the heroine of the Sanskrit epic Ramayana. She is the goddess of sacrifice, purity, love and simplicity.

The other goddesses that Pinkett-Smith hashtagged in her caption include Arabian goddess Allat, African goddess Oshun and Quan Yin, the Buddhist bodhisattva of compassion.

More to come: Jada exclaimed in the caption: 'I always said I would get a sleeve at 60 but tomorrow is not promised. Soooo … I’m starting to build my sleeve now!' Seen in 2020

Pinkett-Smith's new tattoo was inked just above the tattoo that she got in May along with her daughter Willow, and mother Adrienne 'Gammy' Banfield-Norris. The trio all got matching tattoos of three blossoming lotuses.

Jada showcased the ink on her Instagram account, where she shared photos of the tattoo process followed by the finished product.

The ink was done by tattoo artist-to-the-stars Dr. Woo, and the process was all documented on their hit Facebook Watch series, Red Table Talk.

'Now I want a sleeve!' Jada Pinkett Smith, her daughter Willow, and mother Adrienne 'Gammy' Banfield-Norris all got matching lotus tattoos representing their three generations

All three women received tattoos of three blossoming lotuses, from bud to fully grown.

The three different tattoos varied slightly in design, with Jada and Adrienne opting for a small flowers sprouting in a downward direction while Willow opted for a larger design that bloomed in an upward trajectory.

'Look what we did!!! Thank you @_dr_woo_ for your patience and generosity of your craft and spirit. Now I want a sleeve!!!!' Jada captioned the slideshow.

Willow pitched the lotus design several days prior to their tattoo appointment on their show.

Flower power: All three women received tattoos of three blossoming lotuses, from bud to fully grown

Significant: Willow said the tattoo had spiritual and familial significance

'I thought that was brilliant': Adrienne was a fan of Willow's interpretation of the tattoo design

'You know what we could get? A lotus,' Willow said, as her mother and grandmother expressed their approval.

'I'm down for that!' Jada said.

The tattoos were a long time coming, with Willow and Adrienne previously expressing their interest in getting one done before Jada finally committed and got an appointment with Dr. Woo.

Inked! The ink was done by tattoo artist-to-the-stars Dr. Woo, and the process was all documented on their hit Facebook Watch series, Red Table Talk

Girl power! Jada shared an embrace with her mother as they savored the special moment

Deep meaning: Willow revealed the tattoo 'expresses the spiritual journey but also the three of us'

As Willow got her tattoo done, she explained the significance of the flower.

'The lotus represents spiritual enlightenment,' Willow said. 'And we hear this saying, "through the mud grows the lotus."'

'That's definitely my story,' Adrienne chimed in.

'Yes, 100%, and I think all of us from different perspectives in life have had that journey,' Willow continued. 'The bud to the little blossom to the bloom, also I feel like expresses the spiritual journey but also the three of us. I'm the youngest, you know my mom is the middle and Gam is the fully-bloomed lotus.'

Tatt's enough! Adrienne sat for Dr. Woo as he tattooed her arm

'And it means something different for each of us,' Adrienne added. 'Our stories, our journeys, are different. But it still represents us so well. I thought that was brilliant.

'"Out of the mud comes the lotus." You have to go through the mud, the dirt and still something beautiful is created,' Adrienne said. 'And that kind of describes my journey. I kind of been through some really tough times.

'But I'm still worthy, you know, and there's still room for me to grow and change even now, at 67. I'm still growing and changing and trying to be better. So getting the lotus was just everything.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A retired Met Police detective superintendent who was locked in a dispute with neighbours died in a car fire, an inquest heard.

Fire fighters who arrived in the village of Cavendish in Suffolk on March 6 described a car 'fully involved in fire', with the blaze starting to spread to two nearby cars.

Mark Hill, watch manager of Clare fire station, said in a statement that a man at the scene told him: 'That's my neighbour's car', and suggested there was an occupant.

Retired Met detective Edwin Williams, pictured, took his own life outside his neighbour's home in Cavendish in Suffolk on March 6

Firefighters discovered Edwin Williams' body inside the badly burnt wreckage of his car in Cavendish in Suffolk on March 6

PC Emma Stacey told the inquest a friend who had been staying with Mr Williams in the days before his death said that he was involved in an 'ongoing neighbour dispute which had been going on for 11 years and was due to be heard in court'

The fire was extinguished and it was identified that a body was in the driver's seat of the vehicle, whose registered keeper was 74-year-old Edwin Williams.

The body was formally identified as Mr Williams by dental records.

Pc Emma Stacey said a friend who had been staying with Mr Williams in the days before his death said that he was involved in an 'ongoing neighbour dispute which had been going on for 11 years and was due to be heard in court'.

Mr Williams had received a letter from solicitors stating he could have four further weeks to prepare for the trial but not the eight weeks he had sought, the friend said.

Suffolk's senior coroner, Nigel Parsley, said the dispute concerned water ingress, guttering and roofing.

He said that Mr Williams had started the legal proceedings with his previous neighbours and then with the new owners of the house.

Mr Williams's wife Jean Williams, who was separated from him, said she thought that leaving the police force had a 'considerable effect on Ed'.

'I believe he found it quite hard to adjust to the outside world,' she said.

She said he had a distinguished career, working on high profile cases before retiring from the Met in 1995 after 30 years of service, then working as a teacher.

His GP notes said he had a history of depression.

Coroner Mr Parsley, recording that Mr Williams died by suicide, said that fire investigation officers 'believe the most likely cause of the fire was it was started deliberately from inside the vehicle'.

The fire service report said there was no indication Mr Williams had been trapped.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A mother who killed her three-year-old daughter because she was getting in the way of her sex life posted a sick TikTok video saying 'I messed up bad' a month after her child's death.

Nicola Priest, 23, was jailed for 15 years for manslaughter last week after her daughter Kaylee-Jayde was found dead with chest and abdominal injuries at the flat where she lived in Birmingham on August 9 last year.

Priest's boyfriend Callum Redfern, 22, was jailed for 14 years for manslaughter, with the couple killing Kaylee after she interrupted them while they had sex.

Now, it has emerged that Priest set-up a TikTok account a month after killing her daughter.

In one sick video, Priest hangs her head in shame and seems to wipe tears from her eyes as a song plays in the background.

She then mouths the words to the song: 'I'm sorry mum and dad. I know I messed up bad. I should've done, should've done better.'

In other clips, she posts twisted tributes to her daughter - before turning her attention to viral dances.

Nikki Priest set-up a TikTok account a month after killing her daughter. In one sick video, Priest hangs her head in shame and seems to wipe tears from her eyes as a song plays in the background. She then mouths the words to the song: 'I'm sorry mum and dad. I know I messed up bad. I should've done, should've done better'

Pictured: Nicola Priest (left) and lover Callum Redfern (right) were both were unanimously cleared of murder but convicted of the child's manslaughter on Thursday. Priest was sentenced to 15 years and Redfern has been jailed for 14 years

Three-year-old Kaylee-Jayde Priest (pictured) was found dead on August 9, 2020 at the flat where she lived with her mother in Birmingham after a court heard her mother and boyfriend thought she got in the way of them having sex

Priest and Redfern were convicted of manslaughter after a jury heard Priest rang 999 only after the youngster was dead.

The mother was sentenced to 15 years for manslaughter and a three year concurrent sentence for child cruelty.

Sentencing Priest and Redfern last week, Mr Justice Foxton QC said: 'On the evening of August 8 you Redfern went to Priest's flat. The two of you went to have sex. Kaylee wanted to stay up and play. There is no direct evidence of what happened next.

'Kaylee was sick more than once during the night as a result of the severe beating. You lost your tempers and it is clear you were joint participants in that assault. You both knew you had seriously injured Kaylee.

'You, Priest did nothing to seek medical help. A prompt call could have saved Kaylee's life. You both lied repeatedly during interviews.

'From the severity of the injuries caused by the assault it is clear there was an intention to cause serious harm. The injuries were caused by a ferocious assault.

'You and Redfern were equally responsible. You had ample opportunity to raise any concerns. Kaylee was very vulnerable and you were in a position of trust. You did nothing to summon help.'

After the sentencing, Redfern's father Andrew branded Priest an 'evil mother' and said 'she doesn't deserve kids'. He said his son was misled by Priest and 'got caught up in it', describing him as a 'kid' incapable of manipulating his ex-girlfriend.

He also claimed Priest would refuse to change Kaylee's nappy, telling her daughter 'you can just stay in it' while smoking outside the house.

The final moments leading up to the death of Kaylee-Jayde Priest were revealed in chilling CCTV footage.

In the footage played to court, Kaylee-Jayde and her mother were seen together just hours before the youngster's fatal collapse, using a lift at the block of flats where they lived in Kingshurst House, Solihull.

The footage showed Priest's total disinterest in her daughter; repeatedly checking her reflection in the mirror and scrolling through her phone, while the youngster periodically gazed up at her mother's face.

Kaylee-Jayde's mother Nicola Priest, 23, and 22-year-old Callum Redfern denied murdering the little girl but were both convicted of manslaughter

Pictured: A screen grab from CCTV footage issued by West Midlands Police of Kaylee-Jade Priest and her mother Nicola Priest by the lift in their apartment building, hours before the young girl was killed on August 9 last year

At no point in the footage was there any physical contact between the pair, with Priest neglecting even to reach out to hold her daughter's hand.

Hours later, the youngster described in court as a 'happy child', died from serious chest and abdominal injuries.

Medical examinations later showed she had also suffered historical injuries including broken ribs, lower leg fractures and a broken sternum, Birmingham Crown Court heard.

Priest and her 22-year-old lover Callum Redfern pointed the finger of blame at each other during their trial, but were at the time in a 'close sexual relationship'.

Both were unanimously cleared of murder but convicted of the child's manslaughter on Thursday.

Jurors had heard how Priest would hit Kaylee around the head and refer to her as a 'f****** brat', while the youngster was also heard crying 'in a fearful tone'.

On one occasion, neighbours in a flat below at Kingshurst House, Solihull, recalled hearing a bang above and then Kaylee crying, before allegedly hearing Priest say: 'I'll just say she fell off the bed.'

The same residents claimed they noticed that 'when Kaylee cried, the response appeared to be to drown out her crying with music'.

In a text message exchange on July 24 2020, days before Kaylee's death, Priest told Redfern: 'I'm gonna kill her... because she keeps leaving the living room or going in the kitchen, so I've paled (hit) her one and smacked her for s**tting in her nappy.'

Redfern said: 'Good - give her one from me.'

Priest replied: 'I will, babe.'

Three days later, Redfern messaged Priest saying: 'I'm going to keep the little brat away from me... sick of your spunking daughter.'

Pictured: A screen grab from CCTV footage of Kaylee-Jade Priest (left) and her mother Nicola Priest (right) outside their Kingshurst House, Solihull apartment building, hours before the young girl was killed on August 9 last year

The CCTV footage (pictured) showed Priest's (left) total disinterest in her daughter; repeatedly checking her reflection in the mirror and scrolling through her phone, while the youngster (right) periodically gazed up at her mother's face

Prosecutors said the messages painted a vivid picture of the 'uncaring attitude from Priest and Redfern towards Kaylee'.

Andrew Redfern told the Sun: 'Nikki is an evil mother - she doesn't deserve kids.

'She was stood outside this house smoking and Kaylee's nappy needed changing. She said 'you can just stay in it' - that was her attitude. She wouldn't come in the house to take her to the toilet.'

Of his son, Andrew said he 'got caught up in it' and that 'he was only there so he could have sex at the end of the day'.

'He's too much like a kid himself to be manipulating her', he added.

Opening the case at the start of the trial, prosecution barrister Andrew Smith QC said: 'The prosecution case is that her death was caused by her having received serious injuries to her chest and abdomen in a sustained assault on August 8 of last year.

'That intentional assault occurred when both of the defendants were alone with Kaylee-Jayde.'

Floral tributes to the young girl were left outside the flat after families learned of her death last year

From the time Priest moved in to the flat in mid-2019, neighbours heard her 'shouting with real regularity' at Kaylee, including comments like 'Shut up', 'Go away' or 'Leave me alone' - and 'never anything positive or kind'.

Priest was also found guilty of cruelty to a child, relating to the youngster's historical injuries, but Redfern was cleared of that charge.

In a statement released through police after the verdicts, Kaylee's grandmother Debbie Windmill said the impact of her death would live with her for the rest of her life.

She said: 'I could never stop staring at the smile on her beautiful face. I loved every moment watching her develop to nearly school age; preparing to buy my first grandchild her pre-school uniform was something that filled me with such happiness.

'I couldn't wait to see her in it, but this opportunity was stolen from me in the most brutal of ways.

'Everybody deserves the gift of life. Kaylee-Jayde deserved to show the world who she could have been and what greatness she could have brought to this world. Nanny will forever hold you in her heart.'

Speaking afterwards, Detective Inspector Adam Jobson, said: 'This is a really horrific set of circumstances and I cannot imagine for one second what Kaylee-Jayde's family must be going through, they've lost their three-year-old family member at the hands of her own mother and Nicky Priest's boyfriend, Callum.

'It is a grim picture.

'I don't think, sadly, we will ever fully know what has happened, we'll never get that full picture, both have not admitted their own responsibility.

'One thing is clear, Nicky Priest has failed her daughter, she's failed to protect her and she should be - being a mother to that little girl - the one person who should have been able to protect her.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Hundreds of thousands of teenagers will find out their A-level results this morning, with unions urging parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results and appealing if they miss out on grades needed to meet their university offers.

Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half will be given A* and A grades.

It is hoped the school-based assessments system will be a major improvement on last year's computer algorithm fiasco which saw a massive public outcry over some unfairly low marks.

However, it is feared that there could be fierce competition for places at leading institutions among students who miss out on the grades needed to meet their university offers, as there could be fewer selective courses available in clearing.

Unions representing school leaders and teachers have even urged parents and students against using law firms to challenge their results - and appealing against grades just 'for the sake of appealing'.

Here, MailOnline breaks down what students should do if they are unhappy with their final grades, and what to expect today.

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Leila Jarvis hugs her mother (name not given) after receiving her grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Faith Bryant (left) and Abbie Hollis at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Left: Students at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) embrace after receiving their A-Level results in north London. Right: Ffion Young (right) hugs her friend Sara Rafique after opening their A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea

What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades?

Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made.

Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade.

If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf.

In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed.

Unions have urged parents and students against hiring lawyers to appeal the grades.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record

Seventy per cent of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39 per cent for a non-selective comprehensive school

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

A student at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) finds out his A-Level results in north London

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Lanre Dada poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet. Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.

'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Faith Bryant (left) and Abbie Hollis at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

How does clearing work?

Ucas, the university applications body, has said competition for places is tougher than ever thanks to inflated grades and a lack of courses.

It warned students going through clearing - which helps people find courses with places remaining - are likely to find it harder to get onto the courses they want as a greater proportion of people receive the top grades.

Clearing is a way for universities to fill any places they still have empty, while applicants who did not receive an offer have another chance at getting into higher education.

Around 90,000 students will be aiming to join different courses, with many trying to switch.

Applications chief Clare ­Marchant said a record number of students will take up places through clearing. She warned that 'for those most selective courses at the most selective institutions, it is likely to be more competitive'.

Ms Marchant has urged students to make a decision about courses 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks as she expects the system to be 'active'.

Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results?

Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn.

AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December.

The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam.

When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results?

Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week.

A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12.

Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead.

The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended this year's grade inflation, saying students 'deserve to be rewarded' after another year of disruption due to the Covid crisis

How have the grades been decided this year?

All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment.

Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate.

Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022?

In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams.

But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic.

The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Dutch tourist choked to death after swallowing his car keys while in Spain because locals could not understand him as he begged for help.

The unnamed 37-year-old swallowed his car keys by accident while on holiday in Barcelona with his family.

He entered a shopping centre in the district of Sarria-Sant Gervasi and pleaded for help but was kicked out by security because they could not understand what he was saying.

He collapsed outside the centre and security guards attempted to resuscitate him before paramedics arrived and discovered the car keys lodged in his throat.

Medics removed the keys and managed to stabilise the 37-year-old before taking him to Sant Pau Hospital, but he died a short while later on August 5.

A Dutch tourist choked to death after swallowing his car keys while in Spain because locals in a shopping centre in Sarria-Sant Gervasi (pictured) could not understand him as he begged for help

Security officers said the man entered the shopping centre in the morning and appeared animated and excited.

It it is unclear if shoppers could not understand him because he was speaking Dutch or because he was unable to speak at all because he had swallowed the car keys.

Security asked the man to leave because he was creating a disturbance and forced him out of the centre when he refused.

The unnamed 37-year-old swallowed his car keys by accident while on holiday in Barcelona with his family

It remains unclear how, or why, the man swallowed his car keys and Barcelona police have taken over the case.

The family were staying near the shopping centre on Riera de Cassoles avenue in Barcelona.

Authorities are supporting the family and have informed the Dutch consulate, as well as the Barcelona City Council, of the incident.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Charles is among the senior royals who have privately expressed concern over the legal crisis engulfing duke

Advertisement

Prince Charles believes his brother will never return to public life, it was reported last night.

Andrew would be consigned to the wilderness – whatever the outcome of the lawsuit he now faces – because of the reputational damage done by his links to paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

The future king is among the senior royals who have privately expressed concern over the handling of the Duke of York's latest legal crisis as it emerged it could overshadow the Queen's historic Platinum Jubilee.

A source told The Times: 'The prince loves his brother and has the ability to have sympathy for the slings and arrows that his brother endures, whatever the reasons may be.'

The source added: 'However, this will be unwelcome reputational damage to the institution.

'He has long ago concluded that it is probably an unsolvable problem.'

The Daily Mail understands that both Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team.

More than 48 hours after Virginia Roberts Giuffre's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp.

Senior royals have privately expressed concern over the handling of Prince Andrew's latest legal crisis as it emerged it could overshadow the Queen's historic Platinum Jubilee. Pictured: Prince Andrew alongside Virginia Roberts and Ghislaine Maxwell

The Daily Mail understands that both Prince Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, also both fear the scandal could irrevocably damage the reputation of the monarchy, insiders say (file image)

He has previously denied any wrongdoing and strongly maintained his innocence, claiming to have no recollection of having ever met Miss Roberts.

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, were instrumental in forcing Andrew to step back from royal duties in 2019 in the wake of the disastrous BBC interview he gave in an attempt to clear his name.

How Prince Andrew, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases. But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence. Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'. If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland. Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'. After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases. He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London. Advertisement

A royal insider told the Mail yesterday: 'The family find themselves in an extraordinarily difficult and sensitive situation given the nature of the allegations.

'They are limited in what they can say publicly and now that the Duke of York is no longer a working royal they are actually rather limited in what control they can exert over the situation privately.'

Last night, sources close to the prince's family expressed growing frustration with his legal team for the policy of continued silence.

The duke is said to have personally instructed criminal defence solicitor Gary Bloxsome, of City firm Blackfords, to help mastermind his response to Miss Roberts' allegations.

Mr Bloxsome, a 40-year veteran of the company, has defended British troops against war crimes allegations, as well as footballers in assault cases.

However, a source close to Andrew's family told the Mail yesterday: 'We are beginning to question the tactics of Blackfords.

Not to put out a statement reiterating or expanding on his denial may work in a restricted, legal sense, but in the court of public opinion his reputation is being shredded.'

Miss Roberts' attorney, David Boies, revealed that he anticipates the case could be heard in New York as early as the 'middle of next year'.

The Queen, 95, is due to celebrate her historic Platinum Jubilee with a series of major public celebrations in June.

Asked if he felt the lawsuit would be enough to get the ninth in line to the throne to answer questions about the allegations, Mr Boies told Sky News: 'Prince Andrew is going to have to now. He can't ignore the process.'

Mr Boies has previously accused Andrew and his legal team of 'stonewalling' both Miss Roberts and the FBI, which is investigating the crimes of Andrew's friend Epstein. The prince has said he has offered to co-operate with FBI.

Mr Boies also confirmed new evidence and new witness statements will form part of their case when it comes to court for trial, which he believes will throw further doubt on the Duke of York's account.

It is believed he was referring to Johanna Sjoberg, the only other woman to have publicly accused Andrew of sexual misconduct.

Andrew is currently holidaying with the Queen at Balmoral, her Scottish estate. Sources have denied claims he was summoned by his mother for crisis talks.

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank were on their way to Balmoral today to join her beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse

The Duke of York's younger daughter will be at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday

The beleaguered royal had always planned to arrive in time for today's 'Glorious Twelfth' – the start of the grouse shooting season – along with his former wife, Sarah, Duchess of York.

Prince Andrew has ex-wife Fergie at his side after Duchess is brought back into royal fold As Prince Andrew is again hit by accusations of sexual abuse from Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts, he appears to have an unlikely companion at his side. In one of the most dramatic cases of royal redemption, the Prince's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson is accompanying him to Balmoral where he will face his mother for the first time since a civil suit was filed against him in New York. Fergie was exiled from the firm following her divorce from Andrew in 1996. The Duchess of York has however become a lodger at her ex-husband's Royal Lodge home in Windsor, and has slowly but surely been welcomed back into the fold. And last week, the Mail revealed that Fergie had been invited to stay at the Queen's Scottish retreat this summer. There will also be a major difference because, unlike previous visits, when she had to make a quick getaway before Prince Philip arrived, the Duchess can stay at Balmoral for as long as her ex-husband It is believed The Queen has appreciate the loyalty that Sarah has demonstrated to the Royal Family since her divorce and has been impressed by the close relationship she has maintained with Andrew, 61. The Duchess has also said she is '100 per cent' certain that Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.' The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1996, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms. 'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added. Advertisement

He was joined yesterday by his youngest daughter, Princess Eugenie, 31, her husband, Jack Brooksbank, and their six-month-old son, August.

The Princess jetted into Aberdeen Airport with her family on a commercial BA flight from London Heathrow which arrived at around 3.20pm.

Eugenie was first off the plane, followed closely by Jack and their nanny carrying baby son August down the stairs to an awaiting Range Rover.

It is the also the first time the couple have been pictured together since Jack was spotted sipping rosé on a vintage speedboat off the Italian coast while surrounded by bikini-clad models. A source close to Jack said he was on a business trip to Capri for his tequila brand Casamigos.

The couple appeared to make a quick stop to chat with ground staff while their luggage was offloaded before driving off the tarmac towards Balmoral Castle.

Her father Prince Andrew arrived yesterday, travelling by car with his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Ms Roberts.

The 61-year-old was already on his way to Scotland when the legal summons landed at his Royal Lodge home in Windsor. However, with the legal action hanging over him the prince could be in for some awkward discussions with his mother.

Yesterday Ms Roberts's legal team claimed Prince Andrew had 'stonewalled' against efforts at cooperation 'for the last five years' - as it was revealed that the Duke of York could face a second lawsuit from another of Jeffrey Epstein's victim.

Mrs Boies, who is representing Ms Roberts in her US civil case against Andrew, said the Duke's legal team had been 'totally uncooperative' in attempts to discuss the abuse claims made by his client.

'We've reached out to Prince Andrew's legal team, a number of times over the last five years, we've made an attempt to engage with him to give him an opportunity to tell his side of the story, to provide any explanation or context, that he might have for his actions to try to resolve this without the necessity of litigation. Every such effort has been rebuffed,' he told Sky News today.

He added: 'They have totally stonewalled us just like they've stonewalled the criminal prosecutors in the United States.'

It comes as it was today revealed that the Prince could face another US lawsuit from one of Jeffrey Epstein's victims who accused the royal of groping her breasts in a sickening attack involving a Spitting Image puppet of himself gifted to him by Ghislaine Maxwell.

Ms Sjoberg has accused the Duke of York of sexually assaulting her when she was 21 years old and working as paedophile Epstein’s PA.

The incident is alleged to have taken place in front of Ms Roberts, now known as Virginia Giuffre, who has launched a bombshell legal action accusing Andrew of rape.

More than 48 hours after Virginia Roberts Giuffre's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp. Pictured: Johanna Sjoberg who has publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexual misconduct

Pictured: Princess Eugenie arrives at Balmoral castle on August 11

Prince Andrew's Spitting Image puppet, which Ms Sjoberg says was gifted to the royal by Ghislaine Maxwell (right with Jeffrey Epstein)

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was 'loaned' to the British royal and forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein, fearing she would be killed if she disobeyed.

Ms Sjoberg, now 43, had previously been unable to sue because of the amount of time since the alleged attack. But a pending US law change could now allow her to bring her ­allegations to court.

In her civil lawsuit filed in New York on Monday, Miss Roberts – who has accused Andrew of having sex with her on three occasions when she was aged 17, knowing that she had been trafficked by Epstein – claims his actions amounted to 'rape in the first degree'.

He has 21 days to respond and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without a trial.

It would raise the prospect of Andrew facing demands for damages. But if he does decide to come out fighting he could face having to give an account of his dealings with Epstein, as well as his previous sexual history.

Lawyers could also demand access to any communications with Epstein, as well as their mutual friend Ghislaine Maxwell.

She is due to go on trial later this year for allegedly acting as his 'madam' and helping to traffick vulnerable young victims.

But the prince can – and this is the most likely option for his team – also ask the court to dismiss the case as groundless or try to challenge it on other legal grounds.

'Handpicked' to defend the Duke: Leading solicitor who represented clients facing cartel charges, and QC whose clients include Argentinian dictator Augusto Pinochet Solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases From alleged criminal cartels to Premier League football stars, high-ranking solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases. He famously defended Wimbledon's Des Byrne in 2002, when he and Chelsea stars John Terry and Jody Morris were hauled before the courts accused of being involved in a nightclub brawl. Terry and Morris were cleared on all charges, while Byrne was found guilty of possessing a bottle as an offensive weapon - but avoided jail and instead was ordered to pay a £2,000 fine. More recently, Mr Bloxsome defended Crystal Palace star Jason Puncheon after he too was accused of being involved in a night club brawl in 2017. The forward, who last season turned out for Cypriot side Pafos, initially denied a charge of assault, before later pleading guilty. He was ordered to do 210 hours of community work. Mr Bloxsome has also previously worked on cases including defending British troops against war crime allegations. He also was involved in defending an alleged criminal cartel case involving the Office of Fair Trading's review into the passenger fuel surcharge. Mr Bloxsome is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery (pictured) - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet Mr Bloxsome is thought to have been chosen by the Duke himself. He is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet. Ms Montgomery, of Matrix Chambers, is a specialist with dealing with 'cross border challenges', according to her resume. Among her long list of defence clients are Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator of Chile who was indicted for crimes against humanity by Spain during the 90s. General Pinochet was indicted on an international arrest warrant for human rights violations by Spain, before being arrested in a London hospital where he was undergoing minor surgery in 1998. In 1998 Mrs Montgomery represented the dictator in his case before the House of Lords -then the highest court in the country - in a hard-fought 16-month-long legal battle. She also represented the former Prime Minister of Thailand after he was ousted in a military coup in 2011; and Vijay Mallya, who India seeks to extradite from the UK to face financial crime charges. Advertisement

The US legal heavyweight who took on Microsoft, George Bush and represented Harvey Weinstein: David Boies is representing Virginia Roberts in Prince Andrew civil law suit When it comes to US lawyers, few are bigger than David Boies. The 80-year-old is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew. It is a case that will have the world's attention. But it won't be the first time Mr Boies has been in the media spotlight. One of his long-term clients was Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood film producer, who was found guilty of sex offences in February 2020, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison. But while his professional relationship with Weinstein proved somewhat of a PR disaster for Mr Boies, he maintains a stellar reputation. Famously, he represented the plaintiff in the famous case of Hollingsworth v. Perry. The judgment invalidated California's Proposition 8 - the law banning same-sex marriage. David Boies, 80, is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew Mr Boies also represented Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore in his fight against Republican candidate George Bush. The 2000 case saw a court decide on a controversial recount on the votes in Florida after claims the counting machines had missed votes. The courts eventually decided that Bush had fairly won Florida - giving him enough electoral college votes to take the Presidency. However, perhaps Mr Boies' biggest case was United States v. Microsoft Corp. The case saw the U.S. government accuse Microsoft of illegally maintaining its monopoly in the world of computers. Mr Boies initially represented the US Department of Justice in the case. After initially deciding in favour of the DoJ, the case was taken to appeal and eventually ended in a settlement between Microsoft and the US government. Advertisement

'Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old': The bombshell Giuffre v Duke of York court documents in full

Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit against Prince Andrew, formally accusing him of sexually abusing her while she was being trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Over 15 pages of court documents filed at New York's southern district court, the 38-year-old makes claims that the Duke of York 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

VIRGINIA L. GIUFFRE, Plaintiff

vs.

PRINCE ANDREW, DUKE OF YORK, a/k/a ANDREW ALBERT CHRISTIAN EDWARD, in his personal capacity, Defendant.

COMPLAINT

Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre, by her attorneys Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, for her Complaint against Defendant Prince Andrew, Duke of York, a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward ('Prince Andrew'), avers upon personal knowledge as to her own acts and status and upon information and belief and to all other matters as follows:

NATURE OF THE ACTION

Virginia Giuffre filed the complaint against Prince Andrew at the Southern District Court of New York

1. This suit arises out of Defendant's sexual abuse of Plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.

2. During 2000–2002, beginning when Plaintiff was 16, Plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

3. Epstein's trafficking scheme involved recruiting young girls, often by claiming they would be paid $200 for simply providing a massage to a wealthy billionaire. This same pattern was repeated numerous times with countless children and young women.

4. As United States District Judge Kenneth Marra found, 'From between about 1999 and 2007, Jeffrey Epstein sexually abused more than 30 minor girls... at his mansion in Palm Beach, Florida, and elsewhere in the United States and overseas...

'In addition to his own sexual abuse of the victims, Epstein directed other persons to abuse the girls sexually. Epstein used paid employees to find and bring minor girls to him.

'Epstein worked in concert with others to obtain minors not only for his own sexual gratification, but also for the sexual gratification of others.'

Opinion and Order, Doc. No. 435 at 1–2, Jane Doe 1 and Jane Doe 2 v. United States, Case No. 9:08-cv-80736 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2019).

5. Like other minor children who came before and after her, Plaintiff was initially recruited to provide massages, and thereafter to engage in a variety of sexual acts, for Epstein.

Plaintiff was required to be on call for Epstein for sexual purposes and frequently traveled with him both nationally and internationally. Plaintiff was regularly abused by Epstein and was lent out by Epstein to other powerful men for sexual purposes.

6. One such powerful man to whom Plaintiff was lent out for sexual purposes was the Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.

7. Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein's sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including Plaintiff.

8. According to Prince Andrew, he met Epstein through Maxwell in 1999. Prince Andrew thereafter became a frequent guest in Epstein's various homes around the world, including New York City where he sexually abused Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation when she was a minor.

9. After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

10. Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to Plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

11. This action has been timely filed pursuant to the Child Victims Act, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g. The actions described herein constitute sexual offenses by Defendant under New York Penal Law Article 130, and were committed against Plaintiff when she was a child less than eighteen years of age, for which she suffered physical, psychological, and other injuries as a result.

PARTIES

12. Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre is an individual who is a citizen of the State of Colorado.

13. Defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

14. This Court has diversity jurisdiction over this dispute pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(2). Plaintiff is a citizen of a State and Defendant is a citizen of a foreign state, and the amount in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00 excluding interests and costs.

15. Venue is proper in this Court as a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this District. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2).

16. This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant as Defendant sexually abused Plaintiff in this state, and has thus committed a tortious action within this State pursuant to New York's long-arm statute, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2).

Defendant also visited Jeffrey Epstein in this State on numerous occasions. Defendant could reasonably anticipate that a suit based upon his acts and omissions with respect to Plaintiff could result in him being subject to suit in this State, and this suit arises directly out of the Defendant's acts or omissions with respect to Plaintiff in this state.

FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A. Epstein's Sex Trafficking Enterprise

17. Jeffrey Epstein was widely renowned as a billionaire who used his vast connections to powerful individuals, and seemingly unlimited wealth and resources, to create a web of transcontinental sex trafficking that served himself, his coconspirators, and some of the most powerful people in the world.

18. Ghislaine Maxwell is a British socialite and the daughter of disgraced publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell. Maxwell was the highest-ranking recruiter in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is currently facing criminal charges in the Southern District of New York stemming from her role in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise, and is set to face trial in the fall.

19. Epstein had perfected a scheme for manipulation and abuse of young females. As part of the scheme, Maxwell or another female recruiter would approach a young girl and strike up a conversation in an effort to quickly learn about the girl's background and any vulnerabilities they could expose. Epstein's recruiters found their targets everywhere and anywhere, including schools, spas, trailer parks, and the street.

20. The recruiter would then manipulate the young female into coming back to one of Epstein's residences by offering the young girl something she needed, depending on her situation. In many cases, the recruiter sought out girls who wanted to be professional masseuses and invited them to one of Epstein's homes by offering them what appeared to be legitimate masseuse positions.

21. Once in the residence, Epstein and his co-conspirators would work in concert to impress and intimidate the young female with displays of vast wealth and power. They would brag about their connections to very powerful political and social figures, and display photographs of themselves with those figures around Epstein's homes. They would normalize the sexual abuse by displaying photographs and art displaying nude females, and a massage table and spa related products in an effort to legitimize the area where the abuse was set to occur.

22. Once abused, Epstein and Maxwell continued to manipulate their victims, using their financial power, promises, and threats to ensure that the victim returned as directed and remained compliant with their demands. Epstein and his lawyers would even gather information about the victims to use against them if they ever disobeyed him, and his homes were under constant surveillance.

23. Message pads recovered during trash pulls at Epstein's Palm Beach mansion reflect messages that his staff took to relay to Epstein. They show the constant flow of girls to Epstein, sometimes three per day. Epstein's employees have also described young girls constantly being present at Epstein's different homes.

Epstein's constant access to young girls is also evidenced in his 'Black Book,' a book of phone numbers and contact information listing girls to call for 'massages' in various cities, flight logs documenting his frequent travel with young girls and powerful individuals on his private plane, and troves of lewd photographs of young girls recovered from his homes. In his Black Book, Epstein had at least 12 different contact numbers listed for Prince Andrew.

24. Plaintiff became a victim of sex trafficking and repeated sexual abuse after Maxwell recruited her into Epstein's sex-trafficking operation when Plaintiff was working at the Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida.

25. Between 2000 and 2002, Epstein sexually abused Plaintiff at numerous locations including his mansion in this District, at 9 East 71st Street, New York, New York 10021.

26. Epstein also flew Plaintiff on his plane nationally and internationally numerous times when she was under the age of 18.

Only portions of the flight logs of Epstein's private planes have yet been recovered, and Epstein also flew Plaintiff frequently on commercial airlines to meet him and others.

However, the chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking.

27. In addition to being abused by Epstein himself, Plaintiff was also forced to have sex with Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, at Epstein and Maxwell's direction.

28. As part of their sex trafficking efforts, Epstein and Maxwell intimidated Plaintiff into remaining silent about what had happened to her.

29. After years of abuse, Epstein sent Plaintiff to Thailand in September 2002. One of Plaintiff's assignments from Epstein was to bring a young girl back to Epstein in the United States. Fearing for her life, and not wanting to subject another young girl to the abuse she was forced to endure, Plaintiff fled from Thailand to Australia to escape from Epstein.

'The chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking,' reads the document

B. Defendant's Relationship with Epstein and Maxwell

30. According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew's close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.

31. According to available flight logs, Prince Andrew began flying with Epstein on his private plane as early as 1999, when he flew with Epstein and Maxwell to Epstein's private island, Little St. James. Prince Andrew's name also appears in other available flight log entries from around the same time, showing travel with Epstein and Maxwell to and from other locations, including West Palm Beach, Florida, and Teterboro, New Jersey.

32. In 2000, Epstein and Maxwell attended Prince Andrew's 40th birthday party. That same year, Prince Andrew threw Maxwell a birthday party in Sandringham, United Kingdom, and Epstein was among the guests.

33. In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter's 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.

34. Prince Andrew has himself confirmed that he has been on Epstein's private plane, stayed at Epstein's private island, and stayed at Epstein's homes in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York, New York. See Prince Andrew's links to Jeffrey Epstein, BBC News (Nov. 16, 2019), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-49411215.

35. Members of Epstein's house staff have confirmed witnessing Prince Andrew visit Epstein's numerous homes, both to the media and in sworn testimony.

C. Defendant's Sexual Abuse of Plaintiff

'The photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff,' the document claims

36. Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old.

37. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell's home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.

38. The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff.

39. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in Epstein's New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.

40. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein's private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.

41. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

42. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew acted with intent to compel Plaintiff's submission.

43. Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

44. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew.

45. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew knew Plaintiff's age based on communications from Epstein and Maxwell.

46. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.

47. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew was acting in his individual, personal capacity, and was not performing any duty relating to his former role as a trade envoy, any duty relating to his role as a member of the Royal Family of the United Kingdom, or any other official or diplomatic duty or function.

48. Defendant's sexual assault and battery of Plaintiff have caused her, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.

D. The Arrest, Prosecution, and Death of Epstein, and Prince Andrew's Refusal to Cooperate with the Authorities

49. In 2008, Epstein pled guilty in Florida to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution.

50. In 2010, after Epstein had served his sentence and registered as a sex offender, Prince Andrew was photographed with Epstein in Central Park and stayed at Epstein's New York City mansion.

51. Epstein flippantly referred to his sexual abuse of multiple minors, and the slap on the wrist he had received for it, in a 2011 interview with the New York Post: 'Billionaire pervert Jeffrey Epstein is back in New York City—and making wisecracks about his just-ended jail stint for having sex with an underage girl. 'I am not a sexual predator, I'm an 'offender,' the financier told The Post yesterday. 'It's the difference between a murderer and a person who steals a bagel,' said Epstein.' See Amber Sutherland, Billionaire Jeffrey Epstein: I'm a Sex Offender, Not A Predator, New York Post (Feb. 25, 2011), available at https://bit.ly/2s3ebwk.

52. Around the same time, Prince Andrew began to face criticism over his well- publicized friendship with Epstein.

53. In early 2015, after Plaintiff had publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexually abusing her, Prince Andrew emailed Maxwell stating, 'Let me know when we can talk. Got some specific questions to ask you about Virginia Roberts.'

54. On July 2, 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York ('SDNY') charged Epstein with sex trafficking conspiracy and sex trafficking in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1591.

55. Epstein was arrested on July 8, 2019, pursuant to a Sealed Two Count Indictment.

56. Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center on August 10, 2019.

57. Just one year before his death, Epstein told a New York Times reporter 'that criminalizing sex with teenage girls was a cultural aberration and that at times in history it was perfectly acceptable.' James B. Stewart, The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People, N.Y. Times (Aug. 12, 2019), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/12/business/jeffrey-epstein-interview.html.

58. After Epstein's second arrest and death, numerous of his co-conspirators and the wealthy individuals to whom he trafficked girls—including Prince Andrew—began to face increased public scrutiny for having close ties to a convicted sex offender.

59. In November 2019, in response to this renewed scrutiny, Prince Andrew sat for an interview with BBC Newsnight. Prince Andrew stated that he did not regret his friendship with Epstein and that he had no recollection of meeting Plaintiff, despite photographic evidence to the contrary.

60. Prince Andrew publicly pledged, including in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview, to assist the U.S. authorities with their criminal investigation of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

A statement by His Royal Highness The Duke of York (Nov. 20 2019), available at https://www.royal.uk/statement-his-royal-highness-duke-york ('Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.').

61. Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities. Former SDNY U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman stated that Prince Andrew had provided 'zero co-operation' despite U.S. prosecutors and the FBI contacting Prince Andrew's counsel. Prince Andrew gives 'zero co-operation' over Epstein inquiry, US prosecutor says, BBC News (Jan. 27, 2020), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51271871.

62. Prince Andrew and his counsel have also refused to cooperate with counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking. Counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking, including counsel for Plaintiff, have repeatedly asked for a meeting or telephone call with Prince Andrew and/or his representatives to enable Prince Andrew to provide whatever facts, context, or explanation he might have, and to explore alternative dispute resolution approaches. Prince Andrew and his representatives have rejected all such requests, and responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on Plaintiff and others.

63. On July 19, 2021, counsel for Plaintiff proposed a tolling agreement that would have enabled Plaintiff not to sue Prince Andrew at this time, while avoiding any argument that her failure to do so caused her claims to be time-barred. Again Prince Andrew stonewalled—ignoring Plaintiff's letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now. A copy of the July 19, 2021, letter proposing a tolling agreement is attached as Exhibit A to this Complaint.

64. In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION (Battery)

65. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

66. Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor. As described above, on multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched Plaintiff in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent.

67. Prince Andrew's actions constitute sexual offenses as defined in New York Penal Law Article 130, including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined in Article 130.20, rape in the third degree as defined in Article 130.25, rape in the first degree as defined in Article 130.35, forcible touching as defined in Article 130.52, sexual abuse in the third degree as defined in Article 130.55, and sexual abuse in the first degree as defined in Article 130.65. See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g.

68. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION (Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress)

69. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

70. As a direct result of these allegations as stated, Prince Andrew committed intentional infliction of emotional distress against Plaintiff.

71. Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.

72. Prince Andrew knew or disregarded the substantial likelihood that these actions would cause Plaintiff severe emotional distress.

73. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.





PRAYER FOR RELIEF

WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests judgment against Defendant, awarding compensatory, consequential, exemplary, and punitive damages in an amount to be determined at trial; costs of suit; attorneys' fees; and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper.

JURY DEMAND

Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury on all causes of action asserted within this pleading.

Dated: August 9, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dozens of Afghans who taught English and promoted UK values to thousands across the country fear being ‘abandoned’ to the taliban.

More than 100 former employees of the British Council have seen their requests for sanctuary rejected.

And many more fear they too will be ‘left behind’ to face the revenge of the Taliban after being branded ‘spies’ and the ‘voice of the English’. One rejected teacher told how his home has twice been attacked by gunmen in the last month.

Another – who had worked for the British in rural Afghanistan for 13 years – described how a leader at his local mosque had pointed at him warning that anyone ‘supporting British Council [BC] and teaching its language is an infidel’.

Dozens of Afghans who taught English and promoted UK values to thousands across the country fear being ‘abandoned’ to the Taliban. Pictured: File image of an Union Jack being carried from Camp Bastion in Afghanistan as the last British troops left the base

A 29-year-old female teacher in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif sobbed as she said: ‘I am the local face of Britain, everyone knows me as I promote them in 50 schools with hundreds of pupils so I will be pointed out to the Taliban.

‘Their fighters are close to the city and when they find me, they will kill me, [my] three year-old daughter and husband too – he will be punished first for allowing his wife to leave home and to work as a traitor… to the Taliban. It is a crime for any woman to work.’

She added: ‘I do not understand why Britain thinks it is right to leave us behind when we have been teaching its language, virtues and values.’

The Afghan teachers, trainers and managers say they applied for sanctuary under the Afghan Relocations and Assistance Policy but were rejected because they were contracted and not directly employed by the Government – although they were paid by the BC, the UK’s international organisation for promoting culture and education.

Concerned teachers and former BC staff contacted the Daily Mail appealing for their case to be highlighted as part of our Betrayal of the Brave campaign. But they asked not to be named for security reasons. One British former senior BC official said teachers and trainers felt ‘frustrated’ and ‘abandoned’.

He added: ‘What is harder to fathom is why those positioned to act to resolve the situation are dragging their heels so much, as the situation is becoming more critical by the day.

More than 100 former employees of the British Council have seen their requests for sanctuary rejected. And many more fear they too will be ‘left behind’ to face the revenge of the Taliban after being branded ‘spies’ and the ‘voice of the English’. File image of a British Army soldier in Afghanistan

‘It begs the question, “How many former BC teachers and trainers need to die before the UK Government wakes up to their plight, and to their own responsibility to act?”’

A Government spokesman said: ‘We have significantly expanded and accelerated the relocation scheme and carefully assess each applicant... Those who were dismissed for serious offences, including those that constitute a crime in the UK or threatened the safety and security of British troops, will continue to be excluded.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Disgraced socialite Ghislaine Maxwell is prepared to give evidence to help Prince Andrew fight a sex abuse lawsuit, friends have reportedly said.

On Sunday, Virginia Roberts Giuffre filed a civil lawsuit against Andrew in the United States, alleging that he sexually assaulted her when she 17 and was aware that she was a victim of sex trafficking.

Andrew has always denied any wrongdoing and friends of Maxwell say she will support the prince's assertions, The Telegraph reported. Maxwell has always supported Andrew's claims of innocence.

Roberts, now 38, claims she was forced to have sex with Andrew on three separate occasions and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Friends of Maxwell, who is currently in jail awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges, said she will testify on Andrew's behalf should the case reach a court, according to The Telegraph.

However, for her evidence to be considered credible, she would have to first be cleared of wrongdoing in her own trial.

'Ghislaine will be prepared to give evidence on the Duke's behalf,' the paper reported an unnamed friend as saying.

'By the time the case against the Duke gets to court, Ghislaine will either be convicted and serving up to 85 years in jail [or if] cleared of course she would help Prince Andrew. They have been friends for a very long time. It is highly likely Ghislaine will offer to assist him.'

Disgraced socialite Ghislaine Maxwell (pictured) is prepared to give evidence to help Prince Andrew fight a sex abuse lawsuit, friends have reportedly said

On Sunday, Virginia Roberts Giuffre (centre, aged 17) filed a civil lawsuit against Andrew (left) in the United States, alleging that he sexually assaulted her when she 17 and was aware that she was a victim of sex trafficking. Pictured right: Maxwell

Maxwell is witness to several alleged incidents including one purported to have taken place in 2011 in which Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with Andrew at Maxwell's London home.

Robert's civil suit was filed at the Southern District of New York on Sunday, just days before the Child Victims Act expired.

The state legislation helps victims of historical sexual abuse to seek legal redress.

Legal experts said the civil case could drag on for years. A US lawyer warned that it could be devastating for the prince's reputation and could force him to answer questions about his own sexual history, as well as his relationship with Epstein.

Roberts' legal team could interrogate Andrew over whether he had faced any allegation of sexual misconduct or impropriety in the past, a US lawyer told the Daily Mail.

They would also be entitled to demand access to any communications between him, Epstein and the convicted sex offender's alleged accomplice, Maxwell, who Miss Roberts claimed groomed her to carry out Epstein's desires.

The lawyer, who asked not to be named, said: 'It will be a train wreck for him. This case is a grenade waiting to go off.'

Andrew has 21 days to respond to Roberts' claim and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without the need for a trial, which would be potentially disastrous for his reputation.

It would raise the prospect of the ninth in line to the throne being branded a sex offender, and facing a demand for damages which could run into millions of pounds.

Neither Andrew nor Buckingham Palace have commented publicly on the lawsuit against Andrew.

Miss Robert's lawyer, David Boise, claimed on Tuesday that Andrew's lawyers had 'totally stonewalled.

'He can ignore me. And he can ignore Virginia … but he can't ignore judicial process,' Boise told Channel 4.

In the legal claim, lawyers said Epstein, Maxwell and the prince had all forced Roberts to have sex with Andrew against her will after she was trafficked to London.

They alleged Andrew also sexually abused the teenager at Epstein's mansion in New York and at his private island in the US Virgin Islands, Little Saint James.

The legal document, filed to a court in New York, said Roberts had suffered 'severe and lasting' damage.

The lawsuit went on: 'In this country no person, whether president or prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Lea Michele praises the 'epic' casting of Beanie Feldstein in the Broadway version of Funny Girl, a role the Glee star once hoped to get

Beanie Feldstein and Sarah Paulson star as Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp in the 'Impeachment: American Crime Story' trailer. The series also stars Clive Owen as Bill Clinton and Edie Falco as Hilary Clinton..
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: The British start-up that's given Val Kilmer his voice back: Artificial intelligence helps recreate Top Gun actor's voice using recordings from before his throat cancer

British start-up, Sonantic, has given Val Kilmer his voice back using artificial intelligence from recordings before his surgery for throat cancer. The actor underwent a tracheotomy in 2014, which left his voice...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Joe Biden insisted last month that there's no way his troop withdrawal from Afghanistan would lead to a Saigon-like situation with Americans emergency evacuated out of the U.S. embassy in Kabul by helicopter.

'There's going to be no circumstance where you're going to see people being lifted off the roof of a (sic) embassy of the United States from Afghanistan,' the president said during a press conference on July 8, 2021.

Biden insisted during that press conference that the U.S. would not succumb to the Taliban once troops were withdrawn and is now trying to divert blame for the takeover on Donald Trump.

Those words are coming back to bite the president after the majority of Afghanistan fell to the Taliban in just under a week and the U.S. Embassy in Kabul was forced to evacuate by helicopter once the militant forces breached the city on Sunday.

'Is the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan now inevitable?' a reporter asked the president at the time of the July 8 press conference.

'No, it is not,' Biden responded.

He explained: 'You have the Afghan troops at 300,000 – well equipped, as well as any army in the world – and an Air Force, against something like 75,000 Taliban. It is not inevitable.'

He also said at the same press conference 'that is not true' that his own intelligence community was warning the Afghan government will likely collapse if there was a total and swift withdrawal.

President Joe Biden said on July 8, 2021 that '[t]here's going to be no circumstance where you're going to see people being lifted off the roof of a (sic) embassy of the United States from Afghanistan'

Biden is now eating his words after Americans were evacuated from the U.S. Embassy in Kabul by helicopter just five weeks after his remarks. A twin-rotor U.S. Air Force Chinook was seen taking off from the US Embassy Sunday as the evacuation efforts rapidly pick up

'Afghan government leadership has to come together,' Biden said. 'They clearly have the capacity to sustain the government in place.'

Joe Biden immediately passed the buck to his predecessor, claiming that Trump 'left the Taliban in the strongest military position since 2001'.

'When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor—which he invited the Taliban to discuss at Camp David on the eve of 9/11 of 2019—that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001 and imposed a May 1, 2021 deadline on US forces,' Biden wrote in a statement Saturday.

'Shortly before he left office, he also drew US forces down to a bare minimum of 2,500,' the president continued in blaming former President Trump for the unfolding disaster in Afghanistan. 'Therefore, when I became President, I faced a choice—follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict.'

As the Taliban continues to overtake the majority of the country, forces reached the Capital City of Kabul on Sunday with officials seeking the unconditional surrender of the central government.

'Our leadership had instructed our forces to remain at the gates of Kabul, not to enter the city,' Taliban spokesperson Suhail Shaheen told BBC in an interview.

'We are awaiting a peaceful transfer of power,' he said, adding the group expects that to happen in a matter of days.

Secretary of State Antony Blinken also blamed Trump for forcing the administration's hand on a total withdrawal by May.

'Like it or not, there was an agreement that the forces would come out on May 1,' Blinken told CNN on Sunday morning.

Biden wrote a statement from Camp David on Saturday afternoon where he blamed Donald Trump for 'leaving the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001'

Taliban fighters reached Kabul on Sunday and are awaiting the 'peaceful transfer of power' to the militant Islamic group. They breached the city shortly after

Secretary of State Antony Blinken also blamed Trump during a CNN interview on Sunday where he said: 'Like it or not, there was an agreement that the forces would come out on May 1'

'Had we not begun that process, which is what the president did and the Taliban saw, then we would have been back at war with the Taliban, and we would have been back at war with tens of thousands of troops having to go in because the 2,500 troops we had there and the air power would not have sufficed,' he said.

Blinken added in his interview on State of the Union that 'it's simply not in the national interest' to remain in Afghanistan, claiming other U.S. adversaries would like 'nothing more' than to see another decade of American forces diverted there.

'Come May 2nd, if the president had decided to stay, all gloves would have been off. We would have been back at war,' Blinken said in a second interview Sunday morning with NBC's Meet the Press.

He also said Sunday: 'We had to put in place an entire system to deal with this. Unfortunately none of that work was done when we came in.'

The militant Islamic group was able to seize nearly all of Afghanistan in a little over a week – a stunning feat after the billions spent by the U.S. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) over two decades the build up Afghanistan's security forces.

An American military assessment estimated it would be a month before Kabul would come under insurgent pressure.

Biden vowed he would not pass on the war in the Middle East to whoever is president after him.

'I was the fourth President to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan — two Republicans, two Democrats,' he continued. 'I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.'

Trump immediately fired back at Biden in his own email statement on Saturday claiming that due to the current administration's actions, the Taliban don't fear America's power anymore.

Trump hit back by saying the Afghanistan situation is a 'complete failure through weakness, incompetence and total strategic incoherence' by Biden

'Joe Biden gets it wrong every time on foreign policy, and many other issues,' he wrote.

'Everyone knew he couldn't handle the pressure.'

'He ran out of Afghanistan instead of following the plan our Administration left for him—a plan that protected our people and our property, and ensured the Taliban would never dream of taking our Embassy or providing a base for new attacks against America,' the former president continued.

'The withdrawal would be guided by facts on the ground,' Trump said of the deal he made in 2019 with leaders of the Taliban.

'After I took out ISIS, I established a credible deterrent,' Trump added. 'That deterrent is now gone.'

'The Taliban no longer has fear or respect for America, or America's power,' he said. 'What a disgrace it will be when the Taliban raises their flag over America's Embassy in Kabul.'

'This is complete failure through weakness, incompetence, and total strategic incoherence.'

In Biden's Saturday statement, he provided a list of five things his administration is doing to address the situation in Afghanistan. This includes deploying 5,000 U.S. troops to Afghanistan to assist in the total withdrawal of all allies and U.S. personnel.

'[B]ased on the recommendations of our diplomatic, military, and intelligence teams,' he said, 'I have authorized the deployment of approximately 5,000 US troops to make sure we can have an orderly and safe drawdown of US personnel and other allied personnel and an orderly and safe evacuation of Afghans who helped our troops during our mission and those at special risk from the Taliban advance.'

Around 1,000 service members are already on the ground and 3,000 more were already being sent next week, before officials announced the deployment of an extra 1,000 as the situation escalated over the weekend.

The U.S. Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan will be evacuated in 72 hours under the protection of the military, and some staffers have already arrived at the Kabul international airport.

The Taliban have moved to within seven miles of Kabul, and taken over swathes of territory across the rest of Afghanistan. The warlords now control 19 of Afghanistan's 34 provinces

Biden also announced Saturday he is sending in 5,000 troops to help with the evacuation of U.S. and ally personnel

Secretary of State Antony Blinken held talks with Afghan President Ashraf Ghani Saturday to discuss the 'urgency of ongoing diplomatic and political efforts to reduce the violence,' the State Department said in a statement.

'The Secretary emphasized the United States' commitment to a strong diplomatic and security relationship with the Government of Afghanistan and our continuing support for the people of Afghanistan.'

House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy has slammed Biden for the 'complete mismanagement' of the Afghanistan withdrawal.

Pentagon officials warned it could be just a matter of a couple days before the Taliban seizes control of Kabul, a city with more than four million people.

McCarthy said: 'The White House has no discernible plan other than pleading with the Taliban. The bungled withdrawal, reminiscent of his failed withdrawal from Iraq, is an embarrassment to our nation.'

'President Biden must continue to provide the close air support necessary for the Afghan government to protect themselves from the Taliban and make sure al Qaeda and ISIS do not gain a foothold due to the Biden administration's disastrous policies.'

But Biden hit back in a statement from Camp David on Saturday afternoon, insisting that he could not force the Afghan army to fight.

He said: 'One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country. And an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me.'

Biden and first lady Jill Biden departed for Camp David on Friday and plans to stay there through Wednesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 14-year-old schoolboy and a 19-year-old man have been arrested after two teenage girls were attacked on Weymouth beach.

The boy, from Gloucester, was arrested on suspicion of rape, while the 19-year-old man from Norfolk is under investigation on suspicion of rape and sexual assault.

It comes after the two girls, both aged 16, were accosted by two males in Weymouth town centre before being followed to the beach where they were attacked, Dorset Police have said.

It happened between 10pm and 11pm on Saturday, August 14, near to the public toilets by the King’s Statue - a well-known local landmark.

The force said they received reports that, a short time earlier, the two 16-year-old girls were approached in the town centre by two males and they began to walk together towards the beach.

While they were on the beach, the force say it was reported that one of the 16-year-old girls was raped while one of the male suspects attempted to sexually assault the second girl.

A 14-year-old boy and a 19-year-old man have been arrested on suspicion of sexual offences after two 16-year-old girls were attacked on Weymouth Beach (pictured) on Saturday night

The 14-year-old and 19-year-old suspects have both been released on bail while the investigation continues and police are now appealing for witnesses.

Det Sgt Gareth Jones, of Weymouth CID, said: 'Specialist officers are providing support to both of the victims and we are carrying out a thorough and detailed investigation into the incident.

'I am appealing to anyone who was on the beach around the relevant time and witnessed the incident, or may have any information to assist our enquiries, to please come forward.

'We understand that reports of this nature will undoubtedly cause concern for the wider community.

'Members of the public can approach local officers with any information or concerns.'

Meanwhile eight miles away in Dorchester, Dorset, a woman was reportedly raped in an alleyway.

A cordon was put in place outside South Street Passage after Dorset Police were told the woman in her 30s was raped at around 10.30pm on Friday (August 13).

Police said investigations are now underway, with CCTV being trawled.

The cordon at The Royal Oak pub was lifted after examinations were carried out at the scene.

A spokesman from Wetherspoon, which runs the venue, confirmed the pub was in no way connected to the incident.

Detectives are now appealing for witnesses or anyone with information to come forward.

Detective Inspector Sarah Gillion, of Dorset Police, said 'A full investigation is underway and a number of enquiries are ongoing, including carrying out CCTV trawls of the vicinity.

'Officers are carrying out enquiries with the victim to provide support, ascertain the full details and establish the location of the incident.

'I am appealing to anyone who may have witnessed any suspicious activity in the town centre around the relevant time to please come forward.

'Local officers in the area can be approached by anyone in the community with any concerns.'

Anyone with information should contact Dorset Police at www.dorset.police.uk, via email 101@dorset.pnn.police.uk or by calling 101.

You should quote reference number 55210131452 for the Weymouth incident or 55210130995 for the incident in Dorchester.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Former chancellor George Osborne has been pictured in public with his new son Beau for the first time since his birth last month.

Baby boy Beau was born in London weighing 6lb 9oz on July 14, with his smiling father, Mr Osborne, 50, and fiancée Thea Rogers, 39, pictured with their newborn in Hampshire today.

The happy couple, who worked together at Downing Street, had announced their engagement to one another in April.

Beau can be seen draped in blue clothes and blankets, and sporting an impressive mop of dark hair.

Mr Osborne and Ms Rogers were attending the wedding of TV chef Clodagh McKenna and millionaire Harry Herbert, whose father Henry was Lord Porchester, the 7th Earl of Carnarvon.

The Irish chef, 46, looked radiant in her angelic lace gown at her wedding ceremony, while 62-year-old Harry - who is the Queen's godson - sported a morning suit which he teamed with a double-breasted cream waist coat and tie and a light blue hue.

The newly-weds were joined in holy matrimony at the 5000-acre estate in Highclere Castle, Hampshire, best known as the iconic setting for popular period drama Downton Abbey.

Harry Herbert was born at Highclere Castle where his family lived.

Former chancellor George Osborne (right) and fiancée Thea Rogers were pictured with Beau for the first time in public at Highclere Castle, Hampshire

The couple, who announced their engagement together in April this year, share a laugh at the wedding of Harry Herbert and TV chef Clodagh McKenna at Highclere Castle

Beau, who was born 6lb 9oz, can be seen draped in blue clothes and blankets, and sporting an impressive mop of dark hair

Highclere Castle (pictured) in Hampshire is best known as the location for British period drama Downton Abbey

Friends described the joy shared by former Evening Standard editor George Osborne and his fiancée Deliveroo executive Thea Rogers after the birth of Beau.

George, 49, found love with Thea, 39, two years ago, with friends describing the couple's mood as 'thrilled and excited' after their son's birth.

Thea was his Chief of Staff when he was Chancellor and before that his special adviser.

Soon after they got together he said of Thea: ‘I probably have never been happier in my life.’

The happy couple were snapped together, along with Beau, sharing a laugh with guests at the wedding of Mr Herbert and his new wife and TV chef Clodagh McKenna in Hampshire.

Newly weds: Harry Herbert (left) and wife TV chef Clodagh McKenna were married at Highclere Castle, Hampshire

Harry, 62, is the Queen's godson and was born in Highclere Castle, best known as the location for British period drama Downton Abbey

Harry and Clodagh got engaged in October 2020 after meeting at a Fortnum and Mason lunch through mutual friends in 2017

Irish-born cook Clodagh lives in Hampshire's Broadspear House, a 300-year-old cottage nestled on the grounds of Highclere Park with her husband.

Harry is the Queen's godson and was born in Highclere Castle, best known as the location for British period drama.

Harry's family has owned Highclere Castle since the late 17th century and his father Henry was a longtime close friend and racing manager to Queen Elizabeth II from 1969 until his death in 2001.

Her Majesty reportedly called Henry 'Porchie,' affectionately based on his title, Lord Porchester and he is seen appearing in the first two seasons of The Crown played by Joseph Kloska.

Harry is the CEO of Highclere Thoroughbred Racing and of The Royal Ascot Racing Club.

Guests: Love Island presenter Laura, 36, showcased her unique sense of style in a one-shoulder dress which contrasted panels of pink and black lace fabric

Loved-up: Clodagh announced her engagement to Harry in October after meeting at a Fortnum & Mason lunch through mutual friends in 2017 (pictured together in June)

TV star: Clodagh is regularly seen on This Morning and back in June, Holly Willoughby managed to reveal the bride's secret wedding cake live on air

He is also the grandson of George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon who is best known as the financier who helped uncover the tomb of Tutankhamun in the Valley of Kings, Egypt in 1922.

He and Clodagh got engaged in October 2020 after meeting at a Fortnum and Mason lunch through mutual friends in 2017.

At the time, Harry described the meeting as a 'sliding doors' moment, having been single two years following a 25-year marriage, from which he has three children.

Announcing the engagement on Instagram, Clodagh shared a snap snuggled up with her partner, writing: 'We got engaged! We are over the moon with happiness and thank everybody for the lovely warm wishes.'

Speaking to EVOKE, she previously lauded her fiancé for being ‘one of the kindest people’ she has ever met in her life.

‘He’s so lovely and he makes me be a better person. He’s made me the happiest I’ve ever been in my life. I’m so lucky.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jess Wright has landed her own reality show.

The bride-to-be, 35, has inked a deal with ITVBe and ITV Hub for a 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, which will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34.

Filming is well underway, but the date the show will air is yet to be confirmed with ITV telling MailOnline it will likely be late autumn.

The Wedding! Jess Wright, 35, has landed her own reality show with ITVBe and ITV Hub

The show will follow Jess' journey to the altar as she and William set about staging their dream wedding, a star studded event on the paradise island of Mallorca.

Having already delayed their nuptials once already, and with travel restrictions constantly changing due to Covid-19, there is much for the pair to navigate.

Jess Wright: The Wedding is made by Potato, part of ITV Studios, the producers behind Ferne McCann: First Time Mum, Sam and Billie: The Mummy Diaries and the forthcoming Billie and Greg: The Family Diaries.

From fiancée to wife! The 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34

Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61, as she prepares to walk down the aisle.

In an interview with Hello! Magazine, the amateur singer admitted she and William had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there.

Last hurrah! Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61

'I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She certainly is having the time of her life while in Europe this summer.

In July model-turned-DJ Chantel Jeffries had fun with her friends while along the Amalfi Coast in Italy then she moved on to Mykonos in Greece.

And this week the ex-girlfriend of Justin Bieber was seen getting a tan in a teeny bikini while on the pristine beaches in Ibiza, Spain.

Sun worshipper: She certainly is having the time of her life while in Europe this summer. In July model-turned-DJ Chantel Jeffries had fun in Italy then Greece. And this week she was seen getting a tan in a teeny bikini while on the pristine beaches in Ibiza, Spain

The star was sitting on a lounge chair on the beach as she showed off a colorful string bikini with little flowers here and there.

Her hair was worn down in soft curls and she had minimal makeup on with clear sunglasses and gold jewelry on. Her purse went with her bikini and the book that she was reading, Thinking In Systems, as she flashed blue nails.

Last month she was on the Greek island of Mykonos. The cover girl captioned the post, 'Tyche ❤️‍🔥🌬' and tagged Revolve.

Chantel, who lives in Miami, stretched out by the pool on an orange towel in a two-piece black bathing suit by Camila Coelho Collection.

So matchy: Her purse went with her bikini and the book that she was reading, Thinking In Systems as she flashed blue nails

Color queen: The star was sitting on a lounge chair on the beach as she showed off a colorful string bikini with little flowers here and there. Her hair was worn down in soft curls and she had minimal makeup on with clear sunglasses and gold jewelry on

She wore a large trucker hat on top of her wavy, sandy blonde hair that read 'God's favorite' in white lettering.

In a second photo the beauty posed on a beach with lounge chairs behind her while her eyes gazed out of the camera's frame.

She wore a necklace with a pendant and earrings in multiple ear piercings.

Always connected: The budding star had in her pods in white so she could listen to music

The beach babe also posted a video clip of herself jumping into the ocean for a quick swim. She added a final photo of her wet hair slicked back with the turquoise sea as her backdrop.

Ceejay the DJ, as she refers to herself on Instagram, is a former military kid and used to travel often as her parents moved her and her siblings from Coronado to North Carolina to Virginia and other places along the way.

These days she keeps busy posting lifestyle content and music to her YouTube channel where she enthralls over 1 million subscribers.

A looker: The beauty, who used to date Justin Bieber, posed on a beach with lounge chairs behind her while her eyes gazed out of the camera's frame in Greece

Tan and tatted: The DJ showed off her ink in this photo with her wet hair slicked back and the turquoise sea as her backdrop

Jeffries has been on a European vacation for the past couple weeks, along with a slew of stunning Instagram models including Cindy Wolfy and Armie Hammer's ex Paige Lorenze as part of Revolve Summer.

Chantel has posted snaps from Ravello and Positano and has been eating her way through the idyllic towns.

Prior to flying overseas she had begun to perform in-person shows again, most recently doing several shows in Miami Beach.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katharine McPhee only just became a first-time mother with the birth of her son Rennie in late February.

But as the weekend was coming to a close on Sunday, the singer and actress left her baby at home in order to head out for a grocery run at a Bristol Farms in Beverly Hills.

She showed off her toned post-pregnancy body in a black crop top and blue sweatpants.

Mom's busy day: Katharine McPhee, 37, went on a grocery run to a Bristol Farms in Beverly Hills on Sunday

McPhee, 37, also donned a pair of colorful Crocs as she appeared to be carrying her matching blue hoodie in her left hand.

She used her right hand to hold on the a bag full of grocery items.

Her long brown tresses were pulled back into a tight bun with a part in the middle.

Looking good: The Waitress star showed off her toned post-pregnancy body in a black crop top and blue sweatpants

McPhee and husband David Foster, who first met on the set of American Idol in 2006, got married in June 2019, and eventually welcomed their baby boy on February 22 of this year.

'We picked Rennie because I had actually been in labor for a while, we didn’t have a name picked out,' she explained of their son's name during an appearance on Today With Hoda And Jenna in March.

'We had a couple [of] names, but my husband was on a text chain with his sisters and one of his sisters suggested an old family name.'

The Country Comfort star said that the name had belonged to music mogul's great-grandfather and great uncle, so 'it has a long history in his family.'

'My husband said, "Hi, Ren Foster," so we said, "That’s a good name. That's a strong name."'

First-time mom: The Waitress star became a mother when she and husband David Foster welcomed their son Rennie to the world on February 22

Going strong: McPhee and husband David Foster, 71, first met on the set of American Idol in 2006, and eventually got married in June 2019

The Broadway star and American Idol alum has called her newfound motherhood, 'amazing.'

While Rennie is the first child for McPhee, this is child number six for Foster, but first son for the music composer and executive.

The 71-year-old is already the proud father to five adult daughters: Sara, 40, Erin, 38, and Jordan, 34, whom he shared with second wife Rebecca Dyer.

He also has daughters Allison, 51, and Amy, 48, from previous relationships.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Una Healy has revealed that she is finally 'in a good place' three years after her divorce from Ben Foden.

The Saturdays star, 39, told The Sun: 'I'm juggling being a working mum and a full-time mum. But I'm in a good place now.'

Una married Ben, 35, in June 2012 after four years of dating, but their marriage ended in 2018 amid allegations the rugby ace cheated on her.

'In a good place': Una Healy, 39, has revealed she is finally 'in a good place' after her divorce from rugby player Ben Foden. Pictured in 2017 at the Sparks Winter Ball

Although shooting to fame in a girlband, Una said that she's now focussed on being a mum and her solo career.

She said: 'It was a different chapter when I was with the girls. We were constantly on the road.'

Una spent lockdown with her two children, Aoife, eight, and Tadhg, six, whom she shares with her ex-husband.

The star told the newspaper: 'We're very close. They're really good kids and get on well.'

Independent woman: Although shooting to fame in a girlband, Una said that she's now focussed on being a mum and her solo career

'We're very close': Una spent lockdown with her children, Aoife, eight, and Tadhg, six, whom she shares with her ex-husband

Talking to the publication about her divorce in a separate interview, Una said: 'It'll be three years this summer since we split, so I have had the time to heal from all of that.

'I've had quite a bit of time to recover from it all. It was traumatic, the whole thing, it really was. But I am actually very happy right now.'

Una added that you have to 'get used to your new life' and that she couldn't be at a 'better place' than with her family after relocating back to Ireland.

'New normal': 'The past year for everybody has been getting used to a new normal, but for me, the year before that was getting used to my new normal

Just one year after their split, Ben surprised fans when he married his second wife Jackie Belanoff Smith on board a luxury yacht in Nantucket, Massachusetts, two weeks after they started dating.

The US socialite announced her pregnancy soon after, and the couple welcomed their daughter, Farrah Abra Foden, in May last year.

Una admitted during the interview that she has 'never spoken badly' of Ben and that she never will for the sake of their two children, although she cryptically hinted that he has never gave her 'one big ultimate' apology for their 'traumatic' split.

The singer said that the rugby ace seems 'very happy' with new wife Jackie and despite not seeing their two children 'often' due to being 'very far away' in America, he always spends 'quality time' with them when he does.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two-time Grammy winners Korn announced they were forced to postpone their concert at Pennsylvania's Pavilion at Montage Mountain in Scranton on Saturday due to the coronavirus.

'Unfortunately, there has been a confirmed COVID-19 case within the Korn camp,' the nu metal band - who boasts 15.6M social media followers - tweeted on Saturday.

'The safety of our artists, crew, venue staff, and fans are our top priority, so we must postpone the show tonight. We're deeply sorry for this unfortunate last minute news.

'We'll be back soon': Two-time Grammy winners Korn announced they were forced to postpone their concert at Pennsylvania's Pavilion at Montage Mountain in Scranton on Saturday due to the coronavirus (pictured in 2017)

'But please hold on to your tickets while we work to get your rescheduled date sorted ASAP with Live Nation and the Pavilion at Montage Mountain.'

Adding: 'Thank you for your understanding, and stay safe out there. We'll be back soon.'

However, the Can You Hear Me rockers have not postponed their show scheduled for this Tuesday at New York's Northwell Health at Jones Beach Theater in Wantagh.

The nu metal band tweeted on Saturday: 'Unfortunately, there has been a confirmed COVID-19 case within the Korn camp. The safety of our artists, crew, venue staff, and fans are our top priority, so we must postpone the show tonight'

Still on: However, the Can You Hear Me rockers (pictured last Tuesday) have not postponed their show scheduled for this Tuesday at New York's Northwell Health at Jones Beach Theater in Wantagh

Crew member? Therefore, chances are that the mystery infected person is definitely not frontman Jonathan Davis (pictured last Tuesday)

Therefore, chances are that the mystery infected person is definitely not frontman Jonathan Davis.

Other members of Korn supporting Staind's 28-date summer tour include guitarists James 'Munky' Shaffer and Brian 'Head' Welch as well as drummer Ray Luzier and bassist Ra Díaz (who replaced Reginald 'Fieldy' Arvizu on June 21).

YouTube creator Jim Powers uploaded three videos of the Finally Free stars' concert at Virgina's Jiffy Lube Live in Bristow last Wednesday.

Korn (styled KoЯn) formed in Bakersfield, CA in 1993 and they've sold more than 40M records worldwide.

'Coming undone!' Other members of Korn supporting Staind's 28-date summer tour include guitarists James 'Munky' Shaffer and Brian 'Head' Welch as well as drummer Ray Luzier and bassist Ra Díaz (who replaced Reginald 'Fieldy' Arvizu on June 21)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A rejected man murdered his love rival and then set fire to a car with the victim's body inside to make it look like suicide, a court has heard.

'Obsessive' Mark Chilman, 52, is accused of killing Neil Parkinson, 66, who was discovered after police were called to a lay-by in Ankerdine Road, near the village of Cotheridge, Worcestershire, at 10.30pm on December 12, 2020.

Mr Parkinson, of Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire, was pronounced dead at the scene amid the torched wreckage of his BMW X5 4x4.

Prosecutors say Chilman made 'plans to kill Mr Parkinson, to make it appear he had committed suicide' in order to 'engineer a reconciliation with the woman he could not bear to see rejecting him'.

'Obsessive' Mark Chilman, 52, is accused of killing Neil Parkinson (pictured), 66, who was discovered after police were called to a lay-by in Ankerdine Road, near the village of Cotheridge, Worcestershire, at 10.30pm on December 12, 2020

Chilman had been broken up with in June 2020 by a woman called Juliet Adcock, who went on to have a relationship with Mr Parkinson.

Opening the case at Worcester Crown Court on Monday, Mark Heywood QC, said: 'At around 10.30pm, people who live nearby to that lay-by noticed the glow of a fire coming from it.

'When the fire officers were able to see into the car, they found the body of a man, subsequently identified as Neil Parkinson, was in the driver's seat of that burning car.

'The evidence gathered in the investigation into how Mr Parkinson met his death that night demonstrates he was murdered, we say by this defendant, Mark Chilman, who had arranged the body in the car and set light to it to make it appear as though Mr Parkinson had killed himself.'

He added that, in June 2020, Chilman's long-term girlfriend, Ms Adcock, 'had ended a long and - for her part - often unhappy relationship with Mr Chilman'.

Mr Parkinson, of Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire, was pronounced dead at the scene amid the torched wreckage of his BMW X5 4x4. Pictured: Police at the scene

Mr Heywood went on: 'Rather than accept the reality, Mr Chilman continued to find pretexts to continue to have contact with her but he was also obsessively concerned with what she was doing.'

The jury was told that Chilman first got to know mother-of-three Ms Adcock after helping out at the farm in Bromyard, Herefordshire, where she previously lived, following her divorce.

Ms Adcock later described their relationship, which the court heard had started some time before 2014, as 'muddling along', as they moved to a new, smaller farm near the village of Broadwas, near Worcester.

The Crown's barrister said there 'came a point where their relationship began to flounder' and that, as time went, by 'Ms Adcock found Mark Chilman difficult to live with'.

By June 2020 the relationship was over, and 'Mr Chilman didn't take it well.'

Prosecutors say Chilman made 'plans to kill Mr Parkinson, to make it appear he had committed suicide' in order to 'engineer a reconciliation with the woman he could not bear to see rejecting him'. Pictured: Police at the scene

In a series of events, he let himself into the farm and 'helped himself' to books and cash which did not belong to him, and on another occasion left a noose, discovered by Ms Adcock.

Mr Heywood said: 'He once left a message in lipstick on a mirror, telling her 'I am sorry. Love forever, my darling. Sorry. Love Mark. XX'.'

He was also found 'waiting in a lay-by near to the house' and, when challenged, said he was getting 'better phone reception'.

Chilman also bought a tracking device and hid it on Ms Adcock's car without her knowing.

He also took a sweater from her wardrobe, spraying it with the brand of perfume she wore and 'cuddled it every night before he went to sleep'.

On the day of the incident, Chilman's silver Mitsubishi truck had allegedly been spotted in the lane near the farm, jurors were told.

Later that evening, Mr Parkinson had dinner with Ms Adcock at her farm before heading home, where he looked after his mother, who was suffering from dementia, the court heard.

Ms Adcock would tell investigators he was 'happy' and 'in a good mood' when he left, just before 9.30pm.

The couple were set to book into a spa the following day, but when Ms Adcock sent a text message to Mr Parkinson shortly after he left, he didn't reply.

At 10.17pm, she got a text, purporting to be from Mr Parkinson - but not from his usual phone number - which began: 'Juliet, it's Neil, on one of my other phones... I lead a double life, I use and abuse women.'

Mr Heywood said: 'Her immediate thought was the words were very much the way Mr Chilman spoke, and how he expressed himself.'

Later analysis showed the message came from a phone which Mr Heywood said the prosecution know was purchased by Chilman in October 2020.

The text also referred to two petrol cans, which had disappeared from the farm some days earlier, which were found in the torched BMW.

After the fire, forensics experts, analysing the farm's main gate, also found marks which turned out to be blood matching the DNA profile of Mr Parkinson.

Post-mortem examinations found evidence of a depressed fracture to the base of the victim's skull which, with other findings, 'suggests he was still unconscious when placed in the driving seat and the car set alight', said Mr Heywood.

After being arrested, Chilman told police he had 'wanted to chop off Neil's c***... with a penknife', and had also 'known Mr Parkinson was going to kill himself', but had nothing to do with the killing.

Chilman, of Bromyard, Herefordshire, denies any wrongdoing and the trial continues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Brendan Fraser gets choked up hearing his fans 'love' and 'root' for him during TikTok interview

Brendan Fraser gets emotional as fan Lindley Key says the internet is 'rooting' for him. Brendan shares his nerves ahead of working with Martin Scorcese in the video from Lindley's TikTok 'littlelottiecosplay'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: TikTok doctor says worst injury he's EVER seen is a fractured penis that was so swollen and purple it 'looked like an aubergine' following a 'particularly energetic session of bedroom gymnastics'

A doctor has revealed on TikTok the worst injury he's seen is a man with a fractured penis, caused by having 'energetic' sex. He says the embarrassed man turned up to the hospital with his girlfriend and was listed...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Almost one in three GCSE entries will get top results today as ministers consider an overhaul to stop grade inflation.

A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine.

A record 29 per cent of entries are expected to get at least a 7 – equivalent to the old A – and around 10 per cent will get a 9, which is a high A*.

Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems.

A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine (stock image)

A government source said a new grade 10 was ‘possible’ and had not been ‘ruled out’.

They added: ‘It’s a discussion that’s yet to be formally framed, but there will be conversations about changing the grading this autumn.’

It comes as half a million pupils collect their GCSE results this morning after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to the pandemic.

Teachers have decided the marks, meaning grading will be the most generous in recent history – leading to accusations of the qualifications being devalued.

However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had ‘value’ despite the grade inflatio

Education expert Alan Smithers, of the University of Buckingham said: ‘We have a scale that has lost its meaning as we have people continually being given 9. Adding a 10 isn’t a bad idea as it would be a good new label for outstanding performance.’

However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had ‘value’ despite the grade inflation.

He said: ‘Students and their teachers should feel immensely proud of what they have achieved. I want to be clear – this is a moment to celebrate our young people and their futures.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As Prince Andrew thrusts the monarchy into another catastrophic scandal with Virginia Roberts suing him in a New York court for sex abuse, questions are being asked at the most senior levels of the Royal Family over whether he can retain his Royal Lodge home at Windsor.

There is growing outrage from the first and second in line to the throne, Prince Charles and William, about the devastating impact the Duke of York's personal conduct in regards to his friendship with the paedophile Jeffrey Epstein has had on the institution.

That has resulted in simmering frustration that he remains living a luxurious life in the sprawling 30-room Royal Lodge just three miles away from the Queen at Windsor Castle, a prized property that was home to the Queen Mother from 1952 until her death in 2002.

I've learned Prince William has even expressed an interest in his family taking over the property in the medium-term.

Questions are being asked at the most senior levels of the Royal Family over whether Prince Andrew (pictured at the Royal Chapel of All Saints in Windsor) can retain his Royal Lodge home at Windsor

The fact Andrew's former wife Sarah Ferguson is also now a permanent resident of the Royal Lodge and has been actively using the residence in a recent PR campaign has raised the ire of some courtiers

The Duke of York was granted a 75-year lease on the property on the understanding he would carry out £7.5 million of renovations at his own expense

Some courtiers doubt Andrew's reasonable expectation to stay living at his home since 2004, where he has a 75-year lease, given he is no longer a working member of the Royal Family and his daughters, Princess Beatrice and Eugenie, have both moved out.

The fact Andrew's former wife Sarah Ferguson is also now a permanent resident of the Royal Lodge and has been actively using the residence in a recent PR campaign has raised the ire of some courtiers.

While the Queen, who remains personally close to her favourite son Andrew, is unlikely to ask him to move, there is expected for him to be growing pressure to vacate the premises in the years to come, as Charles and William assert their influence.

Andrew was granted a 75-year lease on the property on the understanding he would carry out £7.5 million of renovations at his own expense. After that point, it was agreed that he would not have to pay rent.

If he was asked to give up the property, it would be likely a new deal would need to be done for him to move to another royal palace

Charles has proven he will be ruthless with his siblings after the recent revelation that he is unlikely to make Prince Edward the Duke of Edinburgh following the Queen's death, going against the publicly expressed wishes of his late father Prince Philip.

My royal source revealed: 'The ongoing personal scandal involving Prince Andrew and Jeffrey Epstein is a source of much heartache for Charles and William who are trying to protect the future of the monarchy.

'There is now an active discussion at the most senior levels of the Royal Family about how Andrew can remain at the Royal Lodge, given the circumstances.

'The Queen will not want to upset Andrew and she loves having him close by as they regularly ride together. But he is no longer a working royal and the princesses have both moved out.

There is growing outrage from the first and second in line to the throne, Prince Charles and William, about the Duke of York's personal conduct in regards to his friendship with the paedophile Jeffrey Epstein

Jeffrey Epstein hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges

'Prince William is thought to have expressed an interest on taking over the Lodge at some point in the future and it's unlikely that Charles would stand in his way.

'It would make more practical sense too, given the size of the Cambridge family and the need for them to be close to London.'

Eyebrows have been raised about Fergie's flagrant use of the property, including in a string of recent media articles.

She recently conducted an interview with Town and Country magazine from Windsor Lodge to promote her new romantic novel.

Journalist Andrew Goldman wrote: 'It's a spring afternoon in England, and Ferguson is perched in a corner of Royal Lodge, the sprawling cottage orné built in 1662 that was once inhabited by King George IV and that she has shared with her ex-husband, Prince Andrew, since 2008.'

Later in the interview she moved to a bedroom of the Lodge to declare of herself: 'I don't want to say it's going to be a reassessment of Fergie or a reinvention. Fergie is so steadfast that she will always be here.'

My royal source explained: 'Andrew and Sarah might try to argue that she is only a guest, but the reality is that she lives at Royal Lodge and has done so for some time.

'The Queen is very affectionate towards the Duchess of York, but Prince Charles thinks the whole set up is absolutely outrageous. It adds to the embarrassment of the situation.'

The Grade II listed Royal Lodge has been a residence since 1662. King George IV used it from 1812.

King George V gifted the property as a country retreat to the then Duke and Duchess of York in 1931. They would continue to use it as a country retreat as King George VI and Queen Elizabeth.

Such a shake-up of royal residences would be the subject of potentially years of sensitive negotiation and the Queen may well shut down the conversation while she remains on the throne.

There is, of course, the awkward question of where Andrew would reside if Prince William were to get his way and take over the Royal Lodge.

The Queen gifted Prince Andrew the Sunninghill Park mansion in Ascot as a wedding gift and he resided there with Fergie for ten years.

But he sold the property to billionaire oil and gas businessman Timur Kulibayev for £15 million in a controversial 2007 deal.

Charles has proven he will be ruthless with his siblings after the recent revelation that he is unlikely to make Prince Edward the Duke of Edinburgh following the Queen's death

There is, of course, the awkward question of where Andrew would reside if Prince William were to get his way and take over the Royal Lodge. Pictured: Prince Andrew at the Duke of Edinburgh's funeral service

Prince Andrew's future has been thrust back into the headlines after Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit in the Federal Court in New York seeking 'substantial' damages, alleging she was forced to have sex with Prince Andrew on three occasions in 2001 when she was 17.

The saga will remain at the top of the international news agenda with his ex-girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell standing trial in New York in November for allegedly recruiting underage girls for Epstein, who hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges. She has pleaded not guilty to all the charges.

Prince Andrew has always strongly denied any sexual contact with Roberts.

But she said in a statement to ABC News on Monday: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.

'The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice.

'I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates.

'But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

Prince Andrew has thus far failed in his promise to assist the FBI or other relevant authorities investigating the Epstein scandal 'if required', meaning that the future of where he ends up living could end up being the least of his worries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'Blood was spurting out, I couldn't breathe': Survivor of Streatham terror attack tells of moment Sudesh Amman plunged knife into him... and paramedic's haunting words: 'He's not going to make it'

CCTV shows the moment undercover police make a snap decision to open fire Streatham terrorist, Sudesh Amman. The clip also shows police body cam footage of the incident.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The chief executive of Scotland's largest regional transport partnership has been suspended amid allegations he drove an illegally cloned car.

Strathclyde Partnership for Transport says it is conducting an investigation into claims Gordon Maclennan had two VW Passats with identical registration plates.

The Sunday Mail newspaper reported that Mr Maclennan kept one vehicle in a staff car park and another at his holiday home in the Isle of Lewis.

Mr Maclennan has denied any wrongdoing, telling the newspaper its claims were 'not true'.

SPT runs the Glasgow Subway as well as subsidised bus services in and around the city.

SPT boss Gordon Maclennan.Scotland's highest-paid public transport boss was suspended

Gordon MacLennan's alleged VW Passat clone car at his second home on the Isle of Lewis

The car in use outside Mr Maclennan's home and the subject of a new investigation

On Sunday afternoon, a spokeswoman for SPT said: 'Mr Maclennan is now suspended while an investigation is carried out.'

The Sunday Mail published a photograph appearing to show Mr Maclennan entering a silver Passat on Lewis.

Another photograph showed a blue Passat with an identical registration plate outside the SPT headquarters in Glasgow.

Gordon MacLennan's VW Passat alleged clone car at the SPT offices on St Vincent Street

Cloning a registration plate is illegal, as cloned cars could escape paying tax, insurance and MoT costs.

They can also be used to avoid fines for speeding and driving offences.

A spokesman for vehicle registration agency the DVLA confirmed it was an offence to have the same plate displayed on two different vehicles.

He said: 'It is a legal requirement that a vehicle registration number can only be displayed on the vehicle that has been registered to do so by the DVLA.

'Displaying the wrong registration number is an offence.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Brook was all smiles when she worked her best angles in a summery Heart FM photoshoot on Monday.

The model, 41, looked gorgeous wearing a thigh-skimming floral playsuit and posed for snaps alongside her co-host Jason King, who is filling in for Amanda Holden and Jamie Theakston alongside Kelly.

Kelly's glossy brunette hair cascaded in curls past her shoulders and the star looked delighted as she tucked into an ice-cream.

Photoshoot: Kelly Brook, 41, was all smiles when she worked her best angles in a summery Heart FM photoshoot on Monday

Summery: The model looked gorgeous wearing a thigh-skimming floral playsuit and was sporting an immaculate bright red manicure

Switching up her look, Kelly then slipped into a collared dress stamped with pink and orange flowers while Jason changed out of his patterned shirt into a plaid number.

The pair appeared to have a blast while posing in front of a neon Heart sign, with Kelly reclining on a beach chair.

The duo also incorporated a red pool float shaped like a heart into the upbeat shoot.

Later in the day, the brunette beauty beamed from ear to ear as she wrapped up her shift on the airwaves and made her way home.

Co-hosts: Kelly posed for snaps alongside her co-host Jason King, who is filling in for Amanda Holden and Jamie Theakston alongside the brunette beauty

Switch up: Switching up her look, Kelly then slipped into a collared dress stamped with pink and orange flowers

Working her best angles: Kelly worked her best angles while peering through a bright red heart-shaped pool float

Having a blast: The pair appeared to have a blast with Kelly reclining on a striped red and white beach chair

Kelly teamed her jumpsuit with white trainers, ensuring maximum comfort for the radio presenter.

Accessorising the outfit, she opted for a black quilted bag with chain detailing, which she slung over her left shoulder, and donned two necklaces.

Kelly's long dark caramel tresses tumbled over her shoulders as they were swept into a side parting with one side of her hair tucked behind her ear.

Wow: Kelly was all smiles as she stepped out after work at Heart radio in London on Monday wearing a thigh skimming floral playsuit

Stunning: The ensemble had a matching belt cinched in at her waist accentuating her curvaceous figure

The natural beauty kept it simple with her make up, with subtle eye shadow and a slick of nude lipstick.

It comes after Kelly revealed in June that it was 'so lonely' backstage on The Masked Dancer as the contestants had to keep their identities secret from each other and couldn't chat.

Speaking about not knowing who anyone was in the show, Kelly said: 'Yes it was so lonely backstage!

'We walk around with these jumpers on that say ''don't speak to us''.

Looking good: She made the cornflour blue and white ensemble a bit more casual by donning white trainers, ensuring maximum comfort for the radio presenter

'You're just backstage at Wembley thinking, is everyone else as terrified as I am?

'Because you don't have that camaraderie, so you can't share any of your experience, so you think you're the only one freaking out.

'But since the show has aired and we've figured out who everyone is, I've been talking to you Howard [Donald] and Bonnie [Langford], and everyone's like ''did you do this, did you feel like this'' and everyone was in the same boat really.'

The trio also discussed whether Kelly managed to correctly guess any of the other contestants, which included Zoe Ball as Llama and Christopher Dean as Beagle.

Kelly told Amanda and Jamie: 'Not really…I couldn't bear not knowing so I went on Twitter and once I saw all the fans guessing, then things started to make sense.

'I knew then that Squirrel must be Bonnie [Langford] because only Bonnie can move like that! To be honest I thought it was Ashley Roberts!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eamonn Holmes has joked that he regrets not keeping his hip bones following his double hip surgery in 2016.

The 61-year-old's hilarious comments were made during Monday's This Morning, when he was interviewing Alison Hawthorn, who makes jewellery using her own breast milk.

Reflecting on the idea of turning parts of the human body into wearable pieces, Eamonn hilariously quipped: 'I always regret when I got my hips replaced that I didn't keep them. You'd have mounted something for me, wouldn't you?'

Regrets: Eamonn Holmes, 61, joked on Monday's This Morning that he regrets not keeping his hip bones following his double hip surgery in 2016

Eamonn's co-host and wife, Ruth Langsford, struggled to stop smiling, while his comment also left Alison, 30, grinning.

Of his hips, Eamonn added: 'You'd have got something sorted out for those.'

During the interview, Alison told Eamonn and Ruth, also 61, that she's 'loving' the process, adding: 'The orders are coming through.'

Alison decided to try and make her first 'keepsake' last year using her own breastmilk while feeding her twin sons, now aged 17 months.

After the pretty trinket - a keyring - turned out well, she began offering her services to others who wanted to transform their own breastmilk into something they can keep forever.

Funny: Eamonn's hilarious comments were made when he was interviewing Alison Hawthorn, who makes jewellery using her own breast milk

Craftswoman: Alison, 30, makes jewellery using her own breast milk and made her first 'keepsake' last year using her own breastmilk while feeding her twin sons

After expanding the business to make jewellery from ashes, pet fur and human hair, she claims she has been inundated with orders.

To make the jewellery, a customer sends at least 10ml of expressed breastmilk, double bagged and in a padded envelope to Alison.

From there, she uses a double boiling method and adds preservation powder, before leaving it to dry for a few days on greaseproof paper.

After this, Alison crushes it into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar and adds it to the resin to create the jewellery.

Eamonn's side-splitting comment comes after he left This Morning viewers bewildered after comparing Dr Zoe Williams hair to an alpaca's during Thursday's show.

Oh dear: Eamonn's side-splitting comment comes after he left This Morning viewers bewildered after comparing Dr Zoe Williams hair to an alpaca's during Thursday's show

What?! Eamonn left Dr Zoe in hysterics as he said, 'Your hair reminds me of an alpaca today! You just want to pet it, don't you? It's very alpaca-ish' before gesturing with a petting motion

The Irish presenter was running through the programme's topics as he introduced the doctor who said via video chat that she would be discussing, 'how your health can be benefited from gardening and even alpacas'.

Quick to jump in, Eamonn remarked: 'Your hair reminds me of an alpaca today! You just want to pet it, don't you? It's very alpaca-ish' before gesturing with a petting motion.

Collapsing with laughter, Dr Zoe, 41, exclaimed, 'Don't touch my hair!' as she pointed her pen at the camera.

While Dr Zoe took the joke in her stride, viewers were left shocked at the comments, taking to Twitter to pen: 'Uh Eamonn what tf was that about? Have u learnt nothing?! U never talk about petting a black woman's hair. And saying it looks like an Alpaca?! #thismorning'.

Come again? While Dr Zoe took the joke in her stride, viewers were left shocked at the comments and took to Twitter to voice their shock

'Did @EamonnHolmes just tell a black woman her hair reminds him of an alpaca and he wants to pet her or am I hallucinating?! Persevering face #ThisMorning'; '@thismorning did @EamonnHolmes just compare the doctors Afro to an alpaca?!?';

'Jesus, Mary and Joseph and the wee donkey Eamonn what did you just say to Dr Zoe? Have you learnt nothing?! never talk about petting a #blackwoman's #hair. Never ever say it looks like an Alpaca?! #thismorning I don't watch 'normal' telly, only on holiday, now I know why.'

Eamonn was quick to clear up that he meant no offence, taking to Twitter himself to pen: 'Hey everyone out there.

'If my attempt at being humorous with my friend @DrZoeWilliams was misjudged I am mortified and humbly apologise to anyone who was offended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gizzi Erskine has revealed that she is a godmother to Professor Green's son Slimane Ray Manderson.

Speaking on Monday's Lorraine, the TV chef and media personality, 41, said it was 'sweet' that the singer, 37, had given her the role in his family.

Professor Green - real name Stephen Manderson - welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima McAdams, 36, in March sharing a sweet picture of mother and daughter.

Family: Gizzi Erskine has revealed that she is a godmother to Professor Green's son Slimane Ray Manderson (Gizzi and Professor Green are pictured in 2020)

Speaking to Christine Lampard Gizzi said: 'Stephen very sweetly made me godmother to his son Slim!'

The pair were discussing how she also has her cats to look after to which she said: 'Those are my kittens which were one of those really happy accidents, I got Mochi - I recused her at the beginning of lockdown.'

Gizzi and Professor Green have been close friends for years, often being pictured at events together. They also threw a post-lockdown garden party together back in May.

Cute: Professor Green - real name Stephen Manderson - welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima McAdams, 36, in March sharing a sweet picture of mother and daughter

In March Professor Green welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima.

In a lengthy caption alongside the shot of his newborn son's head, he detailed their difficult pregnancy, which he branded 'a rollercoaster' and confessed during 'scare after scare' they feared their baby 'would not make it'.

Pro Green was swiftly congratulated by his 865,000 Instagram followers, with many of his celebrity pals sending well-wishes.

Happy: Speaking to Christine Lampard on Monday's Lorraine Gizzi said: 'Stephen very sweetly made me godmother to his son Slim!'

Sharing a lengthy caption alongside the post, he penned: 'I didn't wake up Monday morning expecting to meet you. In my mind we still had a couple of weeks to get everything ready, but you had other ideas...

'I've always said 'the only way to be on time is to be early'; it's nice to see you taking after me already, though you seem to have inherited your Mum's looks...

'Privately we've endured what so many parents-to-be have, your journey to us wasn't a straight line whatsoever, it was a rollercoaster right up to your arrival...

Busy: The pair were discussing how she also has her cats to look after to which she said: 'Those are my kittens which were one of those really happy accidents, I got Mochi - I recused her at the beginning of lockdown'

'I didn't allow myself to express my excitement as much as I'd have liked to, I wanted to freely shout about how excited I was about you joining us, but I was frightened...

'We had scare after scare during the worst of which, I said to your Mama 'if he does make it, he's grounded'...

'Having met you, I'm sorry. It wasn't your fault and you're totally forgiven. You're far too perfect to be mad at. As mum's go, you've lucked out; you have the best example of what a brave, strong, passionate, loving, kind and both considered and considerate woman is...'

The couple announced the pregnancy in January. The star posted a snap to Instagram on New Year's Day, of him in the bath and Karima sat on the floor in patterned pyjamas, looking at her bump.

Father: In March Professor Green welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima sharing this sweet picture of the pair

Pro Green captioned the snap: 'And then, all of a sudden everything is different. It all makes sense.'

Admitting that Karima's pregnancy had got 'impossible to hide', he sweetly added: 'I've been overwhelmed with excitement, admiration and curiosity ever since we found out. I'm excited about meeting you. Holding you. Teaching you. Learning from you.

'Never have I admired anyone as much as I have your mamma. She's nothing short of remarkable, remarkable in fact is an understatement.

'To see the body change in such a way is fascinating, incredible, unbelievable, amazing, ASTOUNDING. Weird. Ridley Scott had to get his inspiration from somewhere...

'So my mate and I are procreating': The couple announced the pregnancy in January with Karima showing off her bump

'I feel a bit useless sometimes, pedestrianised; left to spectate from the sin bin as each phase plays out. It's humbling; never do our strengths as men compare to that of a woman. I'm awestruck. Subservient (albeit reluctantly at times.

'I’m curious about everything to come; about who and how you’ll be, what you’ll look and sound like... and who’ll be the stricter parent.

'A friend told me the best thing you can do for your own anxiety is to have a child. It sort of made sense at the time, it doesn’t anymore; THIS HAS BEEN WILD.

'My understanding of mortality and just how fragile life is have grown exponentially. Wishing you all (and hoping for) a very joyous and healthy 2021. Happy new year.' [sic]

Karima - who started dating the I Need You Tonight singer in summer 2019 - also shared the news, posting a similar photo of the pair in the bathroom, this one with Pro Green leaning out of the bath to kiss the mother-to-be.

Professor Green and actress Karima were first linked in July 2019, after he quietly split from PR executive Milly Gattegno.

They were reportedly introduced through mutual friends and made their public debut at Glastonbury Festival in late June, earlier that summer.

Couple: Professor Green and actress Karima were first linked in July 2019, after he quietly split from PR executive Milly Gattegno

Karima is best known for starring in the spy series Deep State alongside Game Of Thrones actor Joe Dempsie.

The actress, who is half Moroccan and half Irish, was born in Bethnal Green, east London. The star spent her childhood in Morocco before moving to London when she was seven.

She previously dated George Lamb for almost six years, before the couple parted ways in 2014.

Pro Green had also dated Fae Williams, and prior to that was married to reality star Millie Mackintosh.

The couple tied the knot at Babington House in Somerset in September 2013, but announced their split after two and a half years of marriage in February 2016.

The duo finalised their divorce in May 2016, the same week that Millie chose to go public with Hugo Taylor, her former Made In Chelsea co-star boyfriend with whom she had reunited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was the 11th contestant confirmed to be joining the Strictly Come Dancing cast this week.

And Nina Wadia has now revealed she is not worried about the infamous Strictly curse while spilling the bedroom secrets which have kept her 23 year marriage alive.

Speaking on the Brown Girls Do It Too podcast, The EastEnders actress, 52, said she and her husband put on accents in the bedroom to spice things up.

Candid revelations: Nina Wadia, 52, revealed she is not worried about the Strictly curse as she said role play has kept her marriage alive for 23 years

Nadia, who married Canadian composer Raiomond Mirza in 1998, said: 'For me it's accents. He's c**p at doing them, it's just the fact he makes the effort.

'You have to be brave. It's easier than you think because you're not being yourself.'

She continued that having a good sex life is 'hugely important... if you want your marriage to last long'.

'I can't imagine still being with my husband if we'd run out of steam, role play has come in very handy.'

Raunchy! The Goodness Gracious Me actress said she and her husband, Raiomond Mirza, put on accents in the bedroom to spice things up

The Strictly curse has been blamed for several break-ups after stars have fallen for their dance partners on the show.

But Nina is not worried one bit saying on podcast: 'I wouldn't be anywhere in my work, career or life if I hadn't had the husband that I have. We are equal partners in everything we do.'

She added: 'I have the best sex toy in the world – it's called my husband.'

The star also said it is important for Indian women to get rid of the 'shame and guilt' around enjoying sex.

Real talk: The star (pictured in 2018) also said it is important for Indian women to get rid of the 'shame and guilt' around enjoying sex

It was revealed that Nina would be joining this years Strictly during Thursday's episode of Lorraine and she admitted the only way she would stand a chance of winning the show is if she 'blindfolded the judges'.

Speaking to stand-in host Christine Lampard, the mother-of-two admitted: 'I am so scared! I like dancing like no one's watching, so we just need to blindfold the judges and I'm going to win!

'I think I should do this before I'm too old and can't walk anymore. I just want to grab life by the horns and just enjoy it.'

Nina added that she was concerned about getting dolled up with all the typical Strictly glamour as she confessed: 'I always been a little bit of a tomboy so this is going to be a little bit of a struggle with me, the sequins and tanning - which makes me laugh because I'm Indian!'

The news broke! It was revealed that Nina would be joining Strictly during Thursday's episode of Lorraine

Discussing her fellow contestants she revealed she'd already guessed a winner, saying: 'I love Robert Webb and I think he's amazing.

'I'd want to vote for him and when I saw him do his flash dance for Comic Relief I thought no one can top that!'

Nina concluded: 'It's been a bit of a tough ride for a couple of years so I think its time we can go into fantasy land. I don't even mind if people laugh at me I just want people to laugh!'

Nina is best known for playing Zainab Masood in EastEnders, where she won Best Onscreen Partnership and Best Comedy at the British Soap Awards, before leaving the soap in 2013.

The actress also had starring roles in Goodness Gracious Me and the Open All Hours spin-off Still Open All Hours.

A JDRF ambassador, she received an OBE in the 2021 New Year's Honours List for her services to charity and entertainment.

Nerves: Speaking to host Christine Lampard, the mother-of-two admitted: 'I am so scared!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Margot Robbie has spoken of her meteoric rise to fame in a wide-ranging interview with T Australia: The New York Times Style Magazine.

The two-time Oscar-nominated actress, 31, shows off her new fringed hairstyle and gorgeous looks on the cover of the Impact issue.

Margot spoke to the publication about her incredible career and what she misses most about her home country.

'I miss home so much': Margot Robbie has spoken of her meteoric rise to fame in a wide-ranging interview with T Australia: The New York Times Style Magazine

Margot, who hails from Dalby, Queensland, but lives between America and the UK, said she hasn't been home in almost two years.

'There was the pandemic and before that I was on a film or two,' she said.

'I miss home so much.'

Homesick: Margot, who hails from Dalby, Queensland, but lives between America and the UK, said she hasn't been home in almost two years. Pictured in Los Angeles on April 25

Margot said she's not sure where her love of cinema came from, but suggested that watching Fight Club at a young age piqued her interest in 'provocative' films.

She also revealed her career motto is committing '120 per cent' to every project.

'You cannot half-a**e anything,' she said. 'You have to commit 120 per cent - anything less than that ends up looking stupid.'

'You cannot half-a**e anything': Margot also revealed her career motto is committing '120 per cent' to every project. Pictured in Los Angeles on August 2

Margot is one of Australia's biggest Hollywood exports, known for critically acclaimed films such as The Wolf of Wall Street and I, Tonya, which she also produced.

She began her career playing Donna Freedman in the Australian soap Neighbours.

The actress-turned-producer admitted in a recent interview she fears she's already reached the height of her career.

'Honestly, this keeps me up at night, this very question,' she said. 'Maybe it's all downhill from here. Maybe I'm at the top and it can't get any better.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dani Dyer praises her 'amazing supportive' family as she detailed being a single mum to son Santiago after ex beau Sammy Kimmence was jailed last month.

The reality star, 25, opened up on Sunday about how she is coping in an Instagram Q&A on her recent family holiday.

In a candid chat with fans, Dani was asked directly if she was struggling being on her own with seven-month old Santiago.

Candid: The reality star, 25, opened up about how she is coping in an Instagram Q&A on her recent family holiday on Sunday

The first time mum replied that it is 'hard' but she is grateful to have a 'support system' around her.

The follower asked: 'Do you struggle on your own with a baby?'

Dani replied: 'I have such an amazing support system! Which I am so grateful for, they give me so much help when needed, and I think I need to realise I shouldn't be ashamed to ask for help! '

'If I need a few hours off then I wont feel bad to ask anymore...'

Family: Dani Dyer praises her 'amazing supportive' family as she details being a single mum to son Santiago after ex beau Sammy Kimmence was jailed last month

Q&A: In a candid chat with fans, Dani was asked directly if she was struggling being on her own with seven-month old Santiago

'Don't get me wrong it is hard but I am so lucky that I have got an amazing family who love Santi so much xx'

This comes after Dani split from boyfriend Sammy last month when he was slapped with a three year prison sentence.

Sammy, 25, was found guilty of £34k worth of fraud and lied to Dani about his crimes.

He duped Peter Martin, 91, and Peter Haynes, 81, by persuading the vulnerable pensioners to let him invest their money for them and then splashed out on expensive restaurants, hotels and clothes.

Ex: This comes after Dani split from boyfriend Sammy last month when he was slapped with a three year prison sentence

His victims had been clients of Sammy when he worked as Senior Trader at Equine Global Sports Limited, a company which subsequently went into liquidation.

The company received money from customers which it would use to place bets on horse races, on their behalf.

After this company ceased trading, he contacted two of his elderly clients and pretended he would continue investing their money in the same way, but instead used it to fund his lifestyle, paying for restaurants and booking a hotel in Ibiza.

Dani and Sammy first began dating prior to her appearance on Love Island in 2018 and split before rekindling their romance in 2019.

The pair announced they were expecting their first child together in July 2020 and Dani and Sammy welcomed son Santiago in January, earlier this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eight months after suffering a miscarriage, Grammy winner Michelle Branch announced Sunday that she's pregnant with her third child 'due in early 2022.'

The expecting 38-year-old unveiled her baby No. 3 news by posting about baking scones from a recipe in Nigella Lawson's 2001 cookbook How to Be a Domestic Goddess.

Michelle's Instagram post received supportive comments from three-time Grammy winner Jennifer Nettles, Oscar nominee Juliette Lewis, and fitness trainer Gunnar Peterson.

Bun in oven: Eight months after suffering a miscarriage, Grammy winner Michelle Branch (pictured Friday) announced Sunday that she's pregnant with her third child 'due in early 2022'

'You know you're pregnant when...': The expecting 38-year-old unveiled her baby No. 3 news by posting about baking scones from a recipe in Nigella Lawson's 2001 cookbook How to Be a Domestic Goddess

Branch also admitted she was 'nervous' considering she and second husband - The Black Keys drummer Patrick Carney - suffered their 'first miscarriage' on December 26.

The Ohio-born 41-year-old was still technically married to his second wife Emily Ward when he first met Branch at a 2015 Grammy Awards party.

The South Carolina-based married couple of two years will next celebrate the third birthday of their son Rhys James on August 28.

Michelle is also mother to 16-year-old daughter Owen Isabelle from her decade-long marriage to bass player Teddy Landau (19 years her senior), which ended in 2015.

'So happy for you!' Michelle's Instagram post received supportive comments from three-time Grammy winner Jennifer Nettles, Oscar nominee Juliette Lewis, and fitness trainer Gunnar Peterson

Fingers crossed: Branch also admitted she was 'nervous' considering she and second husband - The Black Keys drummer Patrick Carney - suffered their 'first miscarriage' on December 26

Still going strong! The Ohio-born 41-year-old (L, pictured April 17) was still technically married to his second wife Emily Ward when he first met Branch (R) at a 2015 Grammy Awards party

Branch will next perform September 10 during the 20th anniversary livestream of her platinum debut The Spirit Room at www.momenthouse.com.

The homeschooled Arizona native re-recorded The Spirit Room and pressed it on vinyl, but hasn't released a new record since her third studio album Hopeless Romantic in 2017.

The Black Keys will kick off their 'intimate' three-date World Tour of America on September 20 in Athens, GA alongside opener Robert Finley.

The four-time Grammy winners just dropped the music video for their track Poor Boy A Long Way From Home last Thursday.

More to celebrate! The South Carolina-based married couple of two years will next celebrate the third birthday of their son Rhys James (pictured Sunday) on August 28
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pioneering Australian TV and radio personality Ernie Sigley has died at the age of 82, after a five-year battle with Alzheimer's disease.

Sigley, who won the Gold Logie for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television in 1975, had been diagnosed with the neurodegenerative disease in October 2016.

His death was announced by Channel Seven entertainment reporter Peter Ford early Monday morning.

Rest in peace: Pioneering Australian TV and radio personality Ernie Sigley (right) has died at the age of 82, after a five-year battle with Alzheimer's disease. Pictured with Shane Warne and Delvene Delaney in Melbourne on February 12, 2009

Ford tweeted: 'Very sad to hear of Ernie Sigley's death. His unique larrikin style made it look easier than it really is.

'TV, radio, recording success and live concerts - what a great career! But his greatest pride was his family. He was kind to me so I'll be sad but honoured to pay tribute today.'

A TV host, radio presenter, and singer, Sigley's diminutive stature, working-class roots and larrikin laugh often saw him referred to as the 'little Aussie battler'.

Sigley hosted game show Wheel of Fortune from 1981 to 1984, and also fronted a national variety show, The Ernie Sigley Show, in the 1970s.

Ill health: Sigley, who won the Gold Logie for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television in 1975, had been diagnosed with the neurodegenerative disease in October 2016. Pictured on the cover of TV Week magazine in the 1970s

He was an original cast member on the '60s variety program Sunnyside Up.

In addition to his television career, he was a regular radio broadcaster for 57 years.

Sigley started his radio hosting career as 'Ernie Williams' on Radio Luxembourg, before stints at 3DB, News Talk 3UZ and Melbourne's 3AW.

'Little battler': Sigley hosted game show Wheel of Fortune from 1981 to 1984, and also fronted a national variety show, The Ernie Sigley Show, in the '70s. Pictured on the cover of the Brisbane edition of TV Week

He hosted 3AW's afternoon show from 1996 until his retirement in 2008.

Sigley also found success as a singer, a career which began as a choir boy at St Paul's Cathedral in Melbourne.

His first record, Love Is a Golden Ring, was released in 1957.

He was known for collaborating with Denise Drysdale, with whom he would often perform on the club circuit.

Their recording of Hey Paula peaked at number two in the Australian charts in 1974.

Duo: Sigley found success as a singer, and was known for collaborating with Denise Drysdale

A lifelong supporter of the Western Bulldogs AFL team, Sigley was born in Footscray, Melbourne, on September 2, 1938.

He was one of seven children of a boilermaker and a housewife.

He began his career as a teenager in the early '50s as a turntable operator for 3DB, before a stint working at the BBC in London.

Sigley was twice divorced, and lived in Melbourne with his third wife, Glenys O'Brien, with whom he had four adult children.

One of his children is musician Matthew Sigley from '90s indie band The Earthmen.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Irish rock legend rarely walks the red carpet these days.

But Bono delighted fans as he made a surprise appearance as a special guest at the 27th Sarajevo Film Festival in Bosnia on Sunday.

The musician, 61, and his stylish wife Ali Hewson, 60, looked suave in all black for the screening of Wim Wenders’ 2000 film The Million Dollar Hotel.

Happy couple: Bono and his wife Ali Hewson arrived in Bosnia as a surprise special guest for the 27th Sarajevo Film Festival on Sunday

Bono sported a black T-shirt, blazer jacket and trousers with smart black shoes.

The father-of-four ensured to wear his trademark glasses and was seen sporting a small silver earring.

Meanwhile, Ali looked effortlessly chic in a flowing black dress which she paired with leather wedges.

She accessorised with a black handbag and wore large stylish sunglasses.

Chic: The musician, 61, and his wife, 60, looked chic in all black for the screening of Wim Wenders’ 2000 film The Million Dollar Hotel

Special guests: (L-R) The couple and German film director Wim Wenders (R) were greeted by Sarajevo Film Festival's general manager Mirsad Purivatra (C) on the red carpet

Style: The father-of-four ensured to wear his trademark glasses and was seen sporting a small silver earring

The couple and German film director Wim Wenders were also seen being greeted by Sarajevo Film Festival's general manager Mirsad Purivatra on the red carpet before they made their way inside.

Bono co-wrote the story for The Million Dollar Hotel with Nicholas Klein and he also produced the film and the soundtrack.

It debuted at the Berlinale in 2000, before going on to play the sixth edition of Sarajevo later that summer.

Festival director Mirsad Purivatra shared an image of Bono and Wenders catching up during the event to Instagram.

Question time: Bono spoke with reporters before heading in to the screening

Pose: Festival director Mirsad Purivatra shared an image of Bono and Wenders on Instagram

Film: Bono co-wrote the story for Million Dollar Hotel with Nicholas Klein, he also produced the film and the soundtrack

Big night: The director appeared to be in great spirits as he chatted to people outside

Having fun: The stars were full of smiles while mingling on the red carpet

According to Screen Daily, Bono made a speech before the film praising the city saying: 'It’s as if there are two Sarajevos – the real and the imagined.

'The one that you live and work in and we visit; and this mythic Sarajevo, a place of fun and magic.'

It comes two months after the superstar enjoyed a blow-out birthday bash with his nearest and dearest in London.

Joined by his daughters Eve and Jordan, 32, Bono and his family rang in his 61st year at the upmarket Scott's in Mayfair.

Two days later Bono, Ali and Behind Her Eyes star Eve – whose birthday falls on the same day as her famous father's - were spotted continuing the celebrations over lunch at the River Café in Hammersmith, with Bono making time for a chinwag with the eatery's owner, Ruth Rogers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An inquiry into the use of private communications channels by ministers and officials at the Department of Health and Social Care will cover WhatsApp and other phone messaging apps, it has been confirmed.

Concerns over the use of encrypted messaging apps such as WhatsApp and Signal to discuss key policy decisions has previously been raised by campaigning groups.

The Labour party has been pressing for more details about the investigation by the Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) after it emerged Health Minister Lord Bethell had recently replaced his mobile phone and that data on the old one may no longer be retrievable.

In a letter to the Good Law Project - which is engaged in legal action against the DHSC over the award of Covid contracts - Government lawyers said the old phone had been 'broken' six months ago and that data held on it was not contained on the replacement.

The lost information was reported to have included WhatsApp and SMS messages.

The disclosure came after the Information Commissioner Elizabeth Denham announced last month that she was mounting an inquiry into the use of private communications channels at the DHSC.

It followed reports that Lord Bethell and the former health secretary Matt Hancock had routinely used private email addresses to discuss official business.

An inquiry into the use of private communications channels by ministers and officials at the Department of Health and Social Care will cover WhatsApp and other phone messaging apps

Junior health minister Lord Bethell (pictured) said he used the personal email account for work but he insisted he had done nothing wrong

Lord Bethell and Mr Hancock faced a swathe of criticism in the wake of the revelation, as the highly controversial practice means that vital correspondence could be withheld from a public inquiry.

Previously, Foxglove, one of the campaign groups leading a bid for a judicial review, questioned how it would be possible to ‘scrutinise’ the government if crucial decision making was deleted.

Director Cori Crider told the Mail: ‘When most of us send a midnight text on WhatsApp, it’s no-one’s business.

‘When the prime minister WhatsApps the health secretary about the government’s response to a pandemic, it’s history.

‘For hundreds of years, British governments have had rules about how to keep key records safe for the next generation.

‘Government by WhatsApp, with messages that vanish into thin air instead of being put in the prime minister’s red box, threatens the backbone of our democracy. It’s also against the law.’

Concerns over the use of encrypted messaging apps such as WhatsApp and Signal to discuss key policy decisions has previously been raised by campaigning groups

In a letter to Labour deputy leader Angela Rayner, the ICO said its inquiry would also cover 'messenger apps such as WhatsApp and any other private channels that fall outside of the DHSC's corporate systems.

'This includes looking at the retention, security and deletion of matters relevant to the corporate record to ensure that these have been handled appropriately.'

Ms Rayner, who has also raised the issue with the Cabinet Secretary Simon Case, said it was essential every effort was made to recover the missing data so the truth about the award of millions of pounds of Covid contracts could finally be established.

Foxglove questioned how it would be possible to ‘scrutinise’ the government if crucial decision making was deleted from encrypted messaging apps

'A broken phone is a convenient excuse for the Conservatives to avoid scrutiny over yet more sleaze,' she said.

'Discussing millions of pounds of taxpayer-funded contracts on a private device is unacceptable. Why did he not use a Government-issued phone for these messages?

'Every effort needs to be made to retrieve them from the minister's phone so that they can be presented in court and included in the pandemic public inquiry.

'These missing messages are vital evidence and bereaved families deserve nothing less than the whole truth.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Christine Lampard is left in hysterics as Dr Amir Khan's mother calls him while he's live on Lorraine... before a fly shoots up his nose as he drinks Victoria Beckham 'moon water'

Discussing motherhood on ITV's Lorraine, interviewee Dr Amir Khan left presenter in hysterics after his own mum interrupted the live call. Dr Khan then had a drinks based gaff as he drank a glass of water without...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Julian Assange's fiancee made an emotional plea to 'end this nightmare' after the US government was today authorised to expand its appeal against a judge's decision not to extradite the Wikileads founder to America.

The US's legal team told senior British judges that Assange, 50, who was watching from HMP Belmarsh, is not 'so ill' that he would be unable to resist killing himself if he was extradited to America for trial over the leaking of thousands of classified US intelligence documents.

Assange had two children with Stella Moris, who was at the High Court today backed by dozens of supporters, including former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn who told the crowd that the US government should 'wind their necks in'.

Stella and Julian had Gabriel, 3, and Max, one, while he was holed up in the Ecuadorian embassy in London, keeping their relationship and family a secret from the outside world until last September.

A tearful Ms Morris, speaking after the ruling, pleaded for an 'end to this nightmare' and explained the fears she has for her and her family.

She said: 'What has not been discussed today, is why I feared for my safety and the safety of our children and Julian's life.

'The constant threats and intimidation we endured for years, which has been terrorising us and has been terrorising Julian for 10 years.'

Julian Assange (left) appearing by video link at the High Court in London where the US Government won the right to widen its appeal against the decision to extradite him

A tearful Stella Moris, the mother of Assange's two secret children, speaks to the media and supporters at the High Court in London today after the US' appeal against his extradition moved forward

Stella and Julian had Gabriel, 3, and Max, one, while he was holed up in the Ecuadorian embassy in London, keeping their relationship and family a secret from the outside world until last September

Former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn joins Assange supporters outside as the High Court before addressing the crowd

Supporters of Julian Assange protest outside the Royal Courts of Justice as the preliminary hearing on the United States government's appeal began

Ms Morris continued: 'We have a right to live, we have a right to exist and we have a right for this nightmare to come to an end once and for all.'

At the heart of the row is London-based psychiatric expert Professor Michael Kopelman, whose evidence was central to the judge's finding that Assange would be at risk of suicide in an American prison.

But today the US argued that Professor Kopelman's assessment should have been 'excluded or given little weight' because he allegedly knew of Assange's two secret children when he made his first mental health assessment - but withheld the information.

Clair Dobbin QC said today: 'Experts aren't allowed to mislead the court for any reason, let alone apparently... to protect the privacy of Mr Assange's family.

'We say that ought to have been of real concern to the court and it ought to have come to a much more exacting analysis of Professor Kopelman's evidence.'

The US prosecution team insists he 'misled' Judge Vanessa Baraitser who then relied on it in her judgment where in January not to extradite the WikiLeaks founder to face espionage charges.

At the heart of the row is London-based psychiatric expert Professor Michael Kopelman, whose evidence was central to the judge's finding that Assange would be at risk of suicide in an American prison

And this afternoon Lord Justice Holroyde, sitting with Mrs Justice Farbey, granted the US permission to challenge Judge Varaitser's decision. The full appeal will be heard in October.

He said it was 'very unusual' for an appeal court to have to consider evidence of an expert, which has been accepted by a lower court, who has been found to have misled the court.

The judge said it is 'at least arguable' that the judge erred in basing her conclusions on the professor's evidence in those circumstances.

He added: 'Given the importance to the administration of justice of a court being able to reply on the impartiality of an expert witness, it is in my view arguable that more detailed and critical consideration should have been given to why (the professor's) 'understandable human response' gave rise to a misleading report.'

Both sides will now prepare for the full appeal, which will be heard in person on October 27 and 28.

If Assange is extradited, the US has said it would consent to him being transferred to Australia to serve any prison sentence he may be given.

Outside the court, Assange's partner, Stella Moris, described him as an "innocent man accused of practicing journalism."

"For every day that this colossal injustice is allowed to continue, Julian's situation grows increasingly desperate," Moris, who has two young children with Assange, told his supporters and reporters.

"Julian has been denied the love and affection of his family for so long. Julian and the kids will never get this time back. This shouldn't be happening," she added.

Assange, 50, is wanted in America on allegations of a conspiracy to obtain and disclose national defence information following WikiLeaks' publication of hundreds of thousands of leaked documents relating to the Afghanistan and Iraq wars.

However, after a multi-week extradition hearing last year, District Judge Vanessa Baraitser ruled that Assange should not be sent to the US, citing a real risk of suicide.

Outside protesters pressed on with their demonstration in support of Assange. By the afternoon a crowd, who had begun their protest at 9am, was still outside the High Court shouting its support and calling for Assange to be freed.

They held banners which read 'journalism is not a crime' and 'no extradition'. They had also tied yellow ribbons and a torn union flag with the words 'truth on trial' written on it to the railings at the front of the court building.

The US government was previously allowed to appeal against her decision on certain grounds, which Assange's legal team described as 'narrow' and 'technical'.

Assange, 49, faced an 18-count indictment, alleging a plot to hack computers and a conspiracy to obtain and disclose national defence information

Stella Moris, the mother of Julian Assange's secret children, Max and Gabriel (pictured left and right) this weekend said Britain 'would no longer be a haven for free speech' if he was extradited

On Wednesday, the US made a bid at the High Court to expand the basis that can be used for its main appeal against the district judge's decision.

Dozens of Assange supporters, including his partner Stella Moris, gathered outside the Royal Courts of Justice ahead of the hearing, chanting and waving signs.

Former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was also seen outside the central London building, telling supporters that the US government should 'wind their necks in' and allow Assange to go free.

Julian Assange will NOT be held in a supermax jail if he's extradited, US assures UK Wikileaks founder Julian Assange will not be held in supermax prison conditions if he is allowed to be extradited to the United States, American officials have assured British authorities. American officials have made the compromise in the hopes of finally ending the lengthy battle to put Assange, 50, on trial for espionage charges in the United States, the Wall Street Journal reported last month. If Assange is convicted in an American court, U.S. officials have also said the Australian would be allowed to serve jail time in his home country, the outlet reported. The revelations were made in a court ruling provided by the U.K. Crown Prosecution Service obtained by the outlet. Assange has been in London's high-security Belmarsh Prison since he was arrested in April 2019 for skipping bail seven years earlier during a separate legal battle. He had spent seven years holed up inside Ecuador's London embassy, where he fled in 2012 to avoid extradition to Sweden to face allegations of rape and sexual assault. Sweden dropped the sex crimes investigations in November 2019 because so much time had elapsed. U.S. prosecutors have indicted Assange on 17 espionage charges and one charge of computer misuse over WikiLeaks´ publication of thousands of leaked military and diplomatic documents. The charges carry a maximum sentence of 175 years in prison. The prosecutors say Assange unlawfully helped U.S. Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning steal classified diplomatic cables and military files that WikiLeaks later published. Advertisement

Assange appeared at the hearing via video-link from Belmarsh Prison, wearing a dark face covering and a white shirt, with what appeared to be an untied burgundy tie draped around his neck.

In her ruling, Judge Baraitser found that 'the procedures described by the US will not prevent Mr Assange from finding a way to commit suicide' if he was extradited.

Clair Dobbin QC, for the US, argued there is a 'need for anxious scrutiny' of Assange's reported mental health.

The barrister said part of the US government's appeal will focus on the requirement in law that an individual must be 'so ill' that they are unable to resist suicide for a decision to be taken not to prosecute - or in Assange's case, extradite - them.

She told the court: 'It really requires a mental illness of a type that the ability to resist suicide has been lost.

'Part of the appeal will be that Mr Assange did not have a mental illness that came close to being of that nature and degree.'

In the US government's written argument, she continued: 'He has not made the sort of serious attempt on his life or have the history of serious self-harm seen in other cases.

'He has never previously suffered from the sort of mental health condition that deprived him of the ability to make rational choices.'

Ms Dobbin also told the court that the need for scrutiny is 'substantially increased' given the background - including the 'extraordinary lengths' Assange has already gone to in order to avoid extradition.

'He was willing to break the law and no cost was too great, both in terms of the cost of policing his being in the embassy and of course the cost to himself,' she said.

In the US government's written case, Ms Dobbin said that £16 million of taxpayers' money had been spent to 'ensure that, when Mr Assange did leave the embassy, he was brought to justice'.

The US authorities have also claimed that evidence from Assange's psychiatric expert, Professor Michael Kopelman, should have been dismissed or had less weight attributed to it.

Ms Dobbin argued that the expert misled Judge Baraitser during the original extradition proceedings by 'concealing' the fact that Assange had fathered two children during his time in the embassy until March 2020, when he 'chose to deploy that information in support of his bail application'.

In her ruling, Judge Baraitser also said there was a 'real risk' Assange would be locked up at the Administrative Maximum Facility (ADX) in Florence, Colorado, if convicted, which would lead to his mental health deteriorating.

Huge crowds gather in London to support Assange. At previous there have been arrests as crowds became agitated and clashed with police

Supporters of Wikileaks founder Julian Assange gather outside the Royal Courts of Justice during the U.S. government appeal

Supporters encouraged drivers to beep their horns in support of the WikiLeaks founder

However, the US has said it would consent to Assange being transferred to Australia to serve any prison sentence he may be given.

Edward Fitzgerald QC, representing Assange, told the court that Judge Baraitser, having heard all of the evidence in the case, was in the best position to assess it and reach her decision.

He said Professor Kopelman's report, in which he did not reveal the true nature of Assange's relationship with Ms Moris, was given long before any court hearing and against a background of concern for the 'human predicament' in which Ms Moris found herself at the time.

The barrister said this included fears for her safety and that of the couple's two children, after a surveillance organisation had taken DNA from their baby's nappy, then turned its attention to Ms Moris and plotted to kidnap or poison Assange.

Mr Fitzgerald said: 'The district judge was right to find that she had not in fact been misled, and that it was an understandable response to Ms Moris's predicament.

'The court had become aware of the true position in April 2020.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A British entrepreneur who started an electric van-charging business in a pig shed is to become a multi-millionaire when it debuts on Wall Street.

Charlie Jardine founded EO Charging six years ago to provide charging infrastructure to firms that use electric cars, vans, buses and lorries.

After making a string of deals with firms including Amazon, Sainsbury's and Uber, he is now poised to list the firm on the New York Stock Exchange with a value of £488million.

It means that Mr Jardine – who is just 29 – could see his stake in the company valued at £71million.

His parents John, 60, and Mary Jardine, 57, entrepreneurs in their own right, also own shares potentially worth another £75million.

The father, who previously owned and sold businesses involved in composting, and making artificial logs for fires, helped his son found the company and is still managing director.

Mrs Jardine, who previously founded luxury handbag brand Jardine of London, also works at EO Charging.

Charlie Jardine founded EO Charging six years ago to provide charging infrastructure to firms that use electric cars, vans, buses and lorries

The family, from Suffolk, started the electric van charging business in a former pig shed on a farm owned by Charlie's grandfather.

Mr Jardine, who went to independent Uppingham School and Leeds University, said: 'I had previously worked at another electric charging company but I'd always wanted to start my own business.

'My grandfather lent us the pig shed and we converted that into a factory, so we came from humble beginnings.

'And what we are doing has not just been my journey, it has been a family journey. We are all very proud of what we have achieved so far.'

The family, from Suffolk, started the electric van charging business in a former pig shed on a farm owned by Charlie's grandfather [Stock image]

After spending 12 months building its first charging station, the company secured an early breakthrough with a deal to install electric van chargers in the depot of London-based Gnewt Cargo, backed by £1million of funding from the Mayor of London's office. A string of deals followed, with firms ranging from Tesco and Sainsbury's to bus provider Go-Ahead and energy firm Octopus.

But the company's most notable success is a deal with Amazon to provide charging infrastructure for its vans across Europe, as well as software and maintenance services. EO Charging, based in Stowmarket, Suffolk, has installed some 50,000 charging stations so far – most of them in the UK – but plans to ramp this up in the coming years.

This expansion will also see its staff headcount rise from about 130 at present to about 400 by the end of next year. Being listed on the stock market will mean about £108million can be pumped into the business.

The firm will first merge with First Reserve Sustainable Growth Corp, a so-called 'blank cheque' company that is already listed in New York. This means EO can float on the public markets far more quickly than if it went through the usual process of applying for regulatory approval and wooing investors.

Mr Jardine said the market for electric vehicle infrastructure globally is expected to be worth about £65billion by 2026.

There is a rapidly growing appetite among firms that use fleets of vehicles to switch to electric due to green regulations, cheaper vehicles and customer pressure.

'Costs are coming down, there is growing government support and I think consumers are now more aware of the green agenda,' Mr Jardine said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the moment you step out of your home, the fear is palpable. On the crowded streets of Kabul people gather in huddles, just one question on their lips: ‘When will they get here?’

The answer could be all too soon: as I write, Taliban forces — the ‘they’ to which everyone refers — are just 50 miles from my home city, heading determinedly towards the capital they are resolved will be under their control within days.

And they are right to be confident. One Afghan region after another — including half of the country’s 34 provincial capitals — has fallen to this violent and bloody regime and its brutal ‘laws’ with terrifying speed.

An Afghan judge hits a woman with a whip in front of a crowd in Ghor province, Afghanistan August 31, 2015

Afghan member of parliament, Shukria Barakzai, lies in her hospital bed after having survived an attack by a suicide assassin in Kabul, Afghanistan, 22 November 2014

Every day we wake to yet more grim news. Yesterday morning we learned the Taliban had captured the strategically important trade hub of Kandahar 100 miles from Kabul; by the afternoon, they had taken Pol-e-Alam, a mere 50 miles from the capital.

By the time you read this who knows what else may have come to pass?

Hundreds of civilians have already been slaughtered, while stories of horror are legion — some so appalling as to barely be believed.

The gouging of a woman’s eyes in front of her terrified family; girls as young as 12 wrenched from the arms of their weeping mothers to become sex slaves for Taliban ‘warriors’; men punished or even killed for ‘offences’ as simple as listening to the ‘wrong’ music, or for daring to be ‘educated’.

Such incidents are not new, of course, but petrifyingly familiar in the history of my country, where the suffering of its people has long been burned into the scorched earth.

Now another bloody chapter is unfolding across this ancient and troubled land.

In Kabul, the city where I have spent so much of my life, the streets are heaving not only with anxious locals, but with tens of thousands of refugees who have poured in from the regions in a desperate attempt to save themselves from the Taliban’s advance.

Many have arrived with little more than the clothes on their backs and are now camped out in parks, in empty warehouses and on the outskirts of the city. They have no water, no food and no sanitation.

This is a city gripped by fear and uncertainty — as well as a bewilderment at the way history is repeating itself in the most devastating of ways.

In a matter of weeks, 20 years of hard-won rights following the Taliban’s defeat by Coalition Forces in 2001 in the wake of 9/11, has been wiped out.

It is almost unbearable for me, a reminder of the fragility of the improvements gained and reinstatement of our rights — those of women, in particular.

Back in the early 1990s, women were largely treated as equals in Afghan society. In the cities — which had been opened up to the modern world — women were educated, pursued careers as well as family life and we made our contribution to society.

As a young woman, I attended Kabul University to study physics and I had my sights set on a career as a writer. Back then, politics seemed to belong to others.

Mounting violence between the moderate Afghan government and the guerrilla warfare of the Mujahideen — the Islamic fighters who had resisted the Soviet occupation and triumphed in the decade-long war — put paid to both that notion and my studies.

Afghan women and men walk past female election candidate Shukria Barakzai's campaign billboard in Kabul

Internally displaced Afghan women, who fled from the northern province due to battle between Taliban and Afghan security forces, gather to receive free food being distributed by Shiite men at Shahr-e-Naw Park in Kabul on August 13, 2021

I watched with horror as the Taliban, whose founders were drawn from the Mujahideen, took over swathes of the country, bringing oppression and chaos in their wake with their fundamentalist interpretation of Islamic scripture.

Far worse was to come. In September 1996, the Taliban swept to power in Afghanistan.

Everyone faced draconian restrictions, but it was women who paid the heaviest price: brutalised and marginalised, one by one our rights — to education, to a job, to a social presence — were all but eliminated.

We were not allowed to work outside the home, had to conceal ourselves in a burqa whenever we dared to leave the house and be accompanied by a male relative.

In many ways, we were little more than chattels.

Many of the educated middle-classes fled Afghanistan to pursue a life in exile, but I chose not to join them.

I stayed and was determined to do my bit, running secret schools and trying to promote hope for the future where only fear and sorrow lay. I had to fight in the only way I knew against the injustices all around me.

I was beaten in the streets and arrested three times, but I survived, placing my faith in the international community which, I felt sure, would support us.

It took five years but, in 2001, air strikes by joint U.S. and UK military forces swiftly followed by fierce fighting on the ground forced the Taliban into retreat.

What followed was two decades of tireless struggle and sacrifice to reclaim a significant portion of our rights — rights for which I fought first as MP for Kabul, helping to draft Afghanistan’s post-Taliban constitution, and by founding Aina-e-Zan, a weekly newspaper which championed the voices of women.

That struggle paid off. A new generation of Afghan women returned to schools, universities and the workplace, growing up in a culture of freedom and at liberty to dream and choose the life they wish.

Those dreams are evaporating. Today, schools and universities are closing one by one as the Taliban move their fight from rural to urban areas with dizzying pace, from Kandahar in the south to Faryab and Badakhshan in the north.

Right now, two thirds of Afghanistan is under Taliban control — a control that is even more merciless and violent than in the past, its insurgent ranks fuelled by a host of other international terrorist networks, from Isis extremists and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, to the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan and Chechen and Uighur guerrillas.

Armed with Humvees, rockets and a host of powerful machine guns, today’s fighters are better equipped than their predecessors and have better technology at their fingertips.

They feel the momentum is with them — a momentum that has been building with frightening rapidity since the dawn of this year — and it is easy to understand why.

Even before the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops was confirmed by President Joe Biden in April, the signs were ominous.

I felt chilled to the bone when, in mid-January, I woke to the news that two female judges working for the Afghan Supreme Court had been shot dead in Kabul, ambushed by unidentified gunmen as they walked to work on a Sunday morning.

Bombings followed, including a girls’ school, a horrifying sign of things to come, for since then the stories emerging from across the land are ever bloodier and more stomach-churning.

In the provinces of Kandahar and Ghazni, in southern Afghanistan, newly empowered Taliban recruits are taking the opportunity to enact revenge for ancient grievances.

In Malistan, Ghazni, one group cut out a woman’s eyes in front of her husband and children, before slaughtering her for a ‘crime’ that was never revealed.

In northern Afghanistan, Jihadist commanders are ordering imams to bring them lists of unmarried women and girls aged 12 to 45. They are viewed as qhanimat — spoils of war to be divided up among the victors.

In some villages, Taliban recruits are going door-to-door looking for young girls to marry against their will, forcing them into a life of sexual servitude. So determined are they that no virgin will escape their clutches that they check drawers, wardrobes and even suitcases in homes where desperate mothers deny they have young daughters to ensure they are telling the truth.

Women are not required to wear full face covering under the Afghani government, as they were under the Taliban, though many still do

It is the stuff of nightmares — and nor do men escape this pitiless inhumanity. In Urozgan province, the only man with a master’s degree, a gentle engineer, was shot simply because he was the most educated person in his city.

In Herat province, another man was assassinated by the Taliban in his car for the ‘crime’ of being a government employee — and therefore an ‘enemy’.

This week, a man was forced to walk barefoot in the baking sun until he lost consciousness, after he was caught listening to pop music rather than recitations of Islamic scripture.

Little wonder people have fled to Kabul, descending in ever larger numbers on the capital each day with their meagre clutch of possessions. Abandoning their cars on the outskirts of the city, entire multi-generational families have erected makeshift camps.

Many sleep on the streets or in local parks, seeking whatever shade they can from the unforgiving summer heat. Earlier this week, one woman gave birth outdoors with nothing more than her headscarf to protect her modesty.

Last night, I visited one camp, taking bags of clothes from my home, and wept as I heard their stories of displacement.

These people have nothing: no food, no water and no sanitation, so disease beckons.

The Afghan government is doing its best to marshal relief efforts, but the reality is Kabul is not equipped to deal with thousands of displaced civilians — even without the spectre of the Taliban forces almost visible on the horizon.

So a siege mentality pervades. While the U.S. and UK send in troops to help evacuate their citizens, the rest of us can only await our fate. There is nowhere for us to go.

We are all scared, and I have particular reason to be. As an outspoken campaigner for women’s rights, I know that I am a target who has featured near the top of the Taliban’s assassination wish list for many years.

There have been several attempts on my life in recent years, even during the ‘peace’ that followed the Coalition victory over the Taliban.

In 2003, when I was helping to draft the constitution, I narrowly missed being caught in a nitrate bomb explosion, timed to go off as I left our parliament.

I had changed my schedule at the last minute that day, so it exploded hours after I had left, but it was frightening proof of their deadly intent.

I have been on my guard ever since, varying my routine and keeping only a tiny trusted few abreast of my plans.

Stranded people cross the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan, in Chaman, Pakistan, Friday, Aug. 13, 2021

But you cannot live life in a vacuum, and, on a beautiful sunny morning in November 2014, my car was the target of a suicide bomber as I made my way in convoy to parliament.

The last thing I remember is talking on my mobile with friends, making plans for dinner that night — and being aware of a red car approaching from the side.

I later learned that that car rammed into the side of the armoured vehicle I was in, before the driver detonated explosives which would reduce my car to a near-burnt-out shell.

But, at the time, when I opened my eyes, I didn’t even know whether I was dead or alive. The first thing I was conscious of was my driver weeping. It was a miracle that either of us survived, the car a mangled heap of metal.

I spent three months in hospital and suffered injuries all over my body, the effects of which linger to this day, affecting my balance. But I was lucky. Three civilians standing nearby when the bomb was detonated lost their lives that day, while many others were wounded.

I know I remain a target, an outspoken troublemaker whom the Taliban would love to make an example of. Fear runs through every single vein in my body. In truth, I don’t know how long I will survive when — and it feels like when not if — the Taliban get here.

But I also know I cannot leave. I am a single mother to five children — twin boys aged ten, and daughters aged 23, 19 and 17. I have a responsibility for the country they inherit. If people like me leave, then who will fight back?

Nor am I the only person at risk: every single Afghan who opposes the Taliban and their vile creed is endangered.

We are paying the price of Western hypocrisy and abandonment. Last year, countries rolled out the red carpet for the Taliban at the so-called ‘peace talks’ in the Qatari capital Doha.

In this picture taken on August 13, 2021, a Taliban fighter holds a rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) along the roadside in Herat, Afghanistan's third biggest city, after government forces pulled out the day before following weeks of being under siege

But any hint of negotiation was a charade on their part, an empty PR gesture to pacify the West and create the conditions for the Coalition’s complete withdrawal — and it worked. On the ground, a lack of leadership and politicking has left Afghans facing the bleakest of circumstances.

I hope the world is watching, and I hope that it feels ashamed. Biden’s decision to pull out of the country was utterly irresponsible — not only for Afghans, but for the Western allies it will come back to haunt. Shame on them for playing with our lives and human rights

Even so, I refuse to let go of hope. It is the quality that my own mother always clung to in the desire for a better future for her daughter, and which I now share with my own children.

It means that even as the armoured cars roll towards Kabul, I am trying to place my faith in the resilience of this land and its brave and benighted people.

No matter how dark the clouds are, I am looking at the end of the night and sunrise beyond.

n Shukria Barakzai is a women’s rights activist and a former Kabul MP who has also served as Afghanistan’s ambassador to Norway.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: 'I'm a white man I won't be told what to do by a p***': Two men, 26 and 30, are jailed over vile racist social media video targeting Priti Patel

This is the shocking video where a man makes racially mocks the Home Secretary, Priti Patel, while she spoke during a coronavirus press briefing. Two men have been jailed in connection with the video at Mansfield...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Police probe 'sexual assault' on woman at Appleby Horse Fair during weekend of violence as clean up begins after travellers torched caravans, dumped horse manure and left fields strewn with rubbish

This clip shows travellers brawling at Appleby Horse Fair. Police have sent armed officers to tackle 'serious violence' at the scene after receiving a tip off that rival groups were planning to settle feuds amongst...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Prince Harry will visit the UK 'with a camera crew in tow' later this year to film his new Netflix documentary about the Invictus Games, a royal expert has claimed.

The Duke of Sussex, 36, who is currently living in his $14 million mansion in Santa Barbara, announced earlier this year he is making a series for the streaming service which will follow competitors around the world training for the Games at The Hague called Heart of Invictus.

And sources have now revealed Prince Harry is due to return to the UK for the documentary in November to visit an army base before meeting the Queen, 95, telling the Express: 'Our understanding is that the Duke of Sussex will be accompanied by a small film crew in order to allow the public to see the hard work involved in planning these games.'

Speaking of the filming with Christine Lampard on today's Lorraine, royal expert Russell Myers said: 'Imagine him popping up outside Buckingham Palace with a camera crew? Will we see Harry back with a camera crew in tow outside the palace? You never know. Nothing is off limits with Harry.'

Prince Harry could arrive at Buckingham Palace 'with a camera crew in tow' for his new Netflix documentary about the Invictus Games, a royal expert has claimed

It has been reported Prince Harry would fly from California to the UK to film the upcoming documentary.

Sources said he would take a film crew employed by Archewell Productions to visit participants at Stanford Hall, the Army's rehabilitation centre for wounded soldiers.

He will then pay a visit to his grandmother, the Queen, before flying back to his home in California.

Appearing on Lorraine today, Russell said: 'He's obviously signed a big money deal with Netflix.

The Duke of Sussex, 36, who is currently living in his $14 million mansion in Santa Barbara, announced earlier this year he is making a series for the streaming service which will follow competitors around the world training for the Games at The Hague called Heart of Invictus

'One of these documentary ideas that he came up with was having a camera crew create a documentary about the Invictus Games, the fantastic sports event which he created in 2013 which have gone on to be a huge success.'

'It's a fantastic initiative for injured servicemen and women of getting out with the power of sports and a global phenomenon.

'So, will we see Harry back with a camera crew in tow outside the palace? You never know. Nothing is off limits with Harry.'

The documentary Heart of Invictus is part of a £100m deal struck with streaming giant Netflix last year.

Speaking on today's Lorraine, expert Russell Myers joked 'nothing was off limits' when it came to Prince Harry

It will be directed by a British documentary Orlando von Einsiedel, whose team won an Academy Award for their short film The White Helmets and a BAFTA for Virunga, another documentary, set in the Congo's Virunga national park.

A source said: 'The Duke of Sussex will want to make sure we are ready as the last games were cancelled because of Covid.

'We are hoping that the situation in April next year allows the games to go ahead as planned, in Holland. '

The Duke who will appear on camera and be an executive producer, has been living in Montecito, California, with his wife Meghan since last summer after they both quit as senior royals.

Netflix said the couple would be producing 'content that informs but also gives hope,' from documentaries and scripted series, to features and children's programming.

While it was reported Prince Harry could pay his grandmother the Queen a visit in between filming for the documentary, it is not known whether he'll do the same for his brother William, pictured with him and Prince Charles in 2014

Talking about the new show today, Harry said: 'Since the very first Invictus Games back in 2014, we knew that each competitor would contribute in their own exceptional way to a mosaic of resilience, determination, and resolve.

'This series will give communities around the world a window into the moving and uplifting stories of these competitors on their path to the Netherlands next year.

'As Archewell Productions' first series with Netflix, in partnership with the Invictus Games Foundation, I couldn't be more excited for the journey ahead or prouder of the Invictus community for continuously inspiring global healing, human potential and continued service.'

Heart of Invictus, will be directed by Orlando von Einsiedel and produced by Joanna Natasegara, who previously worked on Oscar-winning short The White Helmets together.

Harry will appear in the show and will serve as executive producer on the series.

Sources said the Duke will pay a visit to the Queen in November before flying back to his home in California (pictured with the Duchess in 2018)

Harry previously explained the Netflix and Spotify deals in the Oprah interview by saying: 'My family literally cut me off financially, and I had to afford security for us.'

Dominic Reid, chief executive of the Invictus Games Foundation, said: 'We're very excited about the opportunity to shine the global spotlight of Netflix on the men and women that we work with, in order to ensure that even more people can be inspired by their determination and fortitude in working towards their recovery.

'This partnership will also bring in significant funding to the charity. We are extremely grateful to our Founding Patron for his continued efforts to support the military community, and for making this partnership happen.'

The Invictus Games is a bi-annual sporting event created by Prince Harry for injured military personnel.

Founded in 2014, the sporting event sees wounded, injured or sick armed services personnel and veterans compete in nine sports.

These include wheelchair basketball, sitting volleyball, and indoor rowing.

Prince Harry is patron of the games, named after Invictus, Latin for 'undefeated'.

Unfortunately the 2020 event, which was postponed due to Covid, has been delayed yet again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A close banker friend of Prince Andrew has been named as being at the heart of an alleged global plot to ruin the oil-rich state of Qatar.

Tory donor David Rowland will not voluntarily allow access to email accounts that it is claimed could shed light on his bank’s alleged role in a conspiracy by some of the UK’s closest international allies to undermine the Gulf state by manipulating financial markets, a judge has said.

Qatar is suing the former Conservative treasurer’s Luxembourg bank, Banque Havilland, which was formally opened by the Duke of York. The bank strongly denies involvement in any plot.

Financier David Rowland (R) arrives at the High Court with his son, also a financier, Jonathan Rowland

Qatar has accused Mr Rowland, 76, of launching a cover-up over his alleged role, said to have been carried out alongside bodies in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

At the time, Qatar had been cut off by its powerful neighbours over its alleged support for Islamist terror groups.

Lawyers for Qatar claimed it appeared Mr Rowland had attempted to hide evidence and block investigations.

He is not a defendant in the proceedings, so has not had the opportunity to respond in court. The judge did not make a ruling on these accusations.

The financier, pictured, has given more than £6million to the Conservative Party and worked closely with Andrew. The prince unveiled a statue of Mr Rowland at his estate in the tax haven of Guernsey.

A High Court judge has now raised concerns about the conduct of Mr Rowland’s bank after Qatar claimed it had not provided documents and information relevant to the case.

In a ruling, Judge David Edwards QC called for more information about why Mr Rowland’s email account at Banque Havilland was deactivated as the scandal was about to emerge in 2017.

He also raised concerns about how a recorded phone conversation between Mr Rowland and his son Edmund, a director at the bank, was initially withheld from the court, saying: ‘I accept, of course, that mistakes happen, but it was plainly required to be disclosed.’

Qatar is claiming damages of several billion dollars from the bank, which the businessman controls through a trust, and one of its former employees.

It wants access to Mr Rowland’s personal email accounts, where his official bank correspondence was sent but which fall outside the bank’s legal remit to search.

Circled left, David Rowland, right, Prince Andrew, Duke of York at the Banque Havilland Annual Report 2009

In his ruling, the judge said the accounts were a ‘potentially important’ source of information.

But, accepting that the bank did not have control of the accounts, he did not make any order that they should be accessed at this stage.

Mr Rowland, the son of a scrap metal dealer from south London who left school at 16 and went on to make his fortune in property, has said his personal accounts do not contain any relevant information.

A spokesman for Banque Havilland said: ‘Banque Havilland firmly denies any allegations of improper conduct.

‘It was not part of any conspiracy, rejects the claims in their entirety and notes that the claimant has still provided no meaningful evidence...

‘The bank categorically denies any allegation regarding the hiding of evidence.’

Mr Rowland did not respond to a request for comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dani Harmer is pregnant with her second child.

The Tracy Beaker star, 32, took to Instagram on Monday morning to announce the happy news that she's pregnant with baby number two.

Posting a sweet snap of herself, partner Simon Brough and their daughter Avarie-Belle, five, the pregnant actress confirmed she is due to give birth in February.

Congrats! Tracy Beaker star Dani Harmer, 32, has announced that she is pregnant with her second child. The actress took to Instagram on Monday morning to announce the happy news

In the snap, her daughter could be seen holding up a roll of ultrasound snaps while standing between her mum and dad.

Dani wrote: 'Han Solo had Chewie. Frodo had Sam. Shrek had Donkey.

'Now be prepared for the adventures of Avarie-Belle and as of yet unnamed bump, coming February 2022.'

Simon shared the same photo and caption, but added: '(hopefully not to a cinema near you).'

Then and now: Dani began playing the iconic role of Tracy Beaker in 2002 when she was just 12-years-old

Family: Dani and Simon Brough are already doting parents to daughter Avarie-Belle, five

Exciting! Simon added an extra line to the pregnancy announcement

Dani's celebrity pals were quick to congratulate the star in the comments section beneath the sweet photograph.

Dani recently reprised her role as the former tearaway teen Tracy Beaker in a reboot of the much-loved series based on Jacqueline Wilson's 2018 book.

In February, Dani appeared on The One Show, where she explained how playing Tracy Beaker once more is 'really nice' especially because her character has 'lost her selfishness' as a teen and is now a dedicated mother to daughter Jess, played by Emma Maggie Davies,.

She admitted: 'Being a mother myself, it completely changes you. So it's been really nice to play Tracy and see how she's lost that selfishness that she once has and she's all just about Jess.

Famous friends: Dani's celebrity pals were quick to congratulate the star in the comments section beneath the sweet photograph

Poor Tracy Beaker: Fans of the show will remember how Tracy, who lived in a care home, longed for her mother to come and take her home (pictured in throwback show still from 2002)

'But at the same time, she hasn't lost herself. She's still this fierce, strong female that she's always been.'

Dani began playing the iconic role of Tracy Beaker in 2002 when she was just 12-years-old.

And the former Strictly star reminisced about growing up famous, and noted how at one point, she didn't want to be known as Tracy Beaker after being constantly called by her alter-ego's name.

She said 'When I was younger, I used to get called Tracy a lot more than I got called Dani. At one point I was like "oh, can I just not be Tracy, just for a minute!".
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He performed for the first time on Sunday following leg surgery to repair a bone fragment lodged in his knee.

But Olly Murs unfortunately suffered another injury on stage at Newbury Racecourse after an overzealous fan hurled a sunscreen bottle at his face.

The hitmaker, 37, rubbed his eyes and struggled to see as he admitted they were 'stringing' following the incident.

Ouch! Olly Murs, who is currently recovering from leg surgery, unfortunately suffered another injury on stage at Newbury Racecourse on Sunday after a fan hurled a sunscreen bottle at his face

Olly was seen wearing a leg brace for the performance and said that he was trying to 'take it easy' before being pelted with the item.

However, he put on a brave face and concluded: 'The gig was amazing. To be honest with you, it felt better than I thought. I was trying to be a bit cautious on stage.'

Olly nevertheless admitted he didn't appreciate the sunscreen being thrown at him as he said on Instagram Live after the show: 'The suncream was not a good idea half way through the gig.

'Thanks to the person who threw it at me, my eyes are still stinging from that.'

Unimpressed: The hitmaker, 37, rubbed his eyes and struggled to see as he admitted they were 'stinging' following the incident

Olly underwent surgery on his leg just 13 days ago after a fragment of bone managed to lodge itself into the back of his knee.

Last Tuesday, he took to Instagram to share his story of the freak accident, telling fans: 'It's been a mad 72 hours'.

Olly also admitted that he initially 'thought the worst' after worrying he had 'done his knee again'. He shared a photo of two small bones that had been removed from his knee.

Wearing his hospital gown, the star thanked his fans for their support and insisted he will still perform his scheduled shows, although his performances may not be as energetic.

Shock: Olly was seen wearing a leg brace for the performance and said that he was trying to 'take it easy' before being pelted with the item

Recovery: Olly underwent surgery on his leg just 13 days ago after a fragment of bone managed to lodge itself into the back of his knee

Olly said: 'Hey everyone, what's happening. You're probably thinking, "what is going on? Why is Olly in a hospital bed?" Well, I've just had surgery on my left leg, and as you can see, I've got my game on already to ice it.

'Basically, for some of you who came to my Newmarket gig on Friday, thank you firstly for your kind messages and support and checking I was OK.

'It's been a mad 72 hours since the gig getting to this point. Basically, after my second song, a fragment of bone which was in my knee managed to lodge itself to the back of my knee after I jumped and basically shut my leg down.'

'During the gig, I was just limping the whole time, I couldn't believe it. So basically I'm in, I've had the surgery, I wanted to get this done because I've got the Newby gig on the 14th and the Singleton Park on the 15th.

'So I wanted to make sure I got this done for you guys. It will be a different gig, I probably won't be running around like I normally do, there might be a stool for me to sit down on, but I can't cancel these gigs for you guys.

'It was such an amazing vibe on Friday at Newmarket so I'll give it absolutely everything next week for you all.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liam Hemsworth thrilled shoppers last week when he paid a visit to a Woolworths store in Kiama, where he's shooting his latest blockbuster movie Poker Face.

And now it has been revealed that the Hollywood hunk visited the store after it had been listed as a Covid-19 exposure site.

The 31-year-old picked up some groceries on Friday after a confirmed case visited the store on July 30, The Daily Telegraph reports.

Liam Hemsworth visited Kiama Woolies after it was listed as a covid-19 exposure site. The 31-year-old picked up some groceries on Friday after a confirmed case visited the store on July 30, The Daily Telegraph reports

Woolworths confirmed the news in a statement on the stores' official website, saying that the site underwent a 'deep clean overnight on August 12'.

'As a food retailer, we already have very high standards of cleaning and hygiene in place, and in addition to these high cleaning standards the store had a detailed deep clean overnight on 12 August,' a statement read.

'The wellbeing of our customers, team and communities is our highest priority, and in line with public health advice, we are taking all necessary steps to ensure ongoing safety in our stores.'

'Very polite, really lovely': Supermarket worker Jamee Louise Burazin, 23, recalled her encounter with The Hunger Games star in the store after she asked him for a fan photo

Supermarket worker Jamee Louise Burazin, 23, recalled her encounter with The Hunger Games star in the store after she asked him for a fan photo.

'He's got to be one of my favourite actors of all time so when I saw him in Woolies, I was almost like jelly,' she told The Daily Telegraph.

She said the staffers weren't sure at first if it was indeed Liam as he was dressed so causally and had a face mask on.

She said when she asked him for a photo, he was 'very polite, really nice'.

'He made more than my day, he made my year. At work it gets a bit tough every now and again, especially with Covid and when that happened it was almost like work stopped for a bit and we were actually having a good time,' she said.

'He made more than my day, he made my year. At work it gets a bit tough every now and again, especially with Covid and when that happened it was almost like work stopped for a bit and we were actually having a good time,' she said

Last week, Jamee shared her photo with Liam to the store's official Facebook page.

'Great photo with a great bloke,' Jamee wrote in the caption.

Liam, who resides in Byron Bay like the rest of the Hemsworth clan, has been cast in Russell Crowe's thriller Poker Face, alongside Elsa Pataky.

According to The Daily Telegraph, 'both the youngest Hemsworth and Pataky have quietly been added to the cast of the flick with Crowe'.

Earlier this week, Russell was seen shooting the film on the NSW South Coast at a sprawling beachside property in Kiama.

It was reported at the end of last month that Russell had been upgraded to director of the film.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A former children's TV presenter was today jailed for nine years after he admitted killing two people in an horrific eight car smash.

Paul Ballard, 39, was high on cocaine and cannabis when he ploughed into 64-year-old Eileen Haskell's car in his VW Golf on Squirrels Heath Road in Romford on 20 February last year.

Ballard, who is a convicted rapist, was driving between '88mph and 104mph' in a 30mph zone before he hit the back of Ms Haskell's Ford Kuga.

The second victim, school teacher Richard Trezise, 48, was waiting at a bus stop with members of his family when he was struck by a vehicle and killed in the pile-up.

Eight cars were involved in the collision and at least seven people were treated in hospital.

Former child actor and TV presenter Ballard had starred on GMTV's programme Diggit from 1998 to 2002 with Fearne Cotton, Craig Doyle, and Reggie Yates.

Paul Ballard, back row second from right, is pictured next to Reggie Yates (centre) and Fearne Cotton (bottom right) before the trio starred on GMTV's children's programme Diggit from 1998 to 2002

Ms Haskell was pronounced dead at the scene and following a post-mortem examination the cause of death found to be multiple injuries.

Cocaine addict Ballard was driving with his 12-year-old son in the front passenger seat and claimed he suffered a seizure before the crash, the Old Bailey heard.

Ballard, of Woodland Way, Theydon Bois, Essex, admitted two counts of causing death by dangerous driving.

He denied two counts of causing death by driving whilst uninsured, which will not be pursued.

Ballard was also recently convicted of raping a woman in a hotel following a trial at Chelmsford Crown Court and is awaiting sentence for that offence.

During the sex attack the 39-year-old told the victim: 'Your life is ending... You're dying tonight.'

The former child actor presented children's programme Diggit on GMTV from 1998 to 2002 with Fearne Cotton, Craig Doyle, and Reggie Yates.

Edward Franklin, prosecuting, told the court: 'The defendant approached two lines of stationary vehicles at a red light.

'460 metres or so from the junction the speed appears to be similar to that of other vehicles, but the car then accelerated reaching around 75mph at 200 metres from the junction before hitting a maximum speed of between 88-104mph.

'The speed limit on the road was 30mph.

'It was about 1.15pm when the car crashed into the rear of a Ford Kuga driven by Ms Haskell.

'The Kuga was lifted up and thrown into a car, a silver Ford Fiesta, and that vehicle collided with a transit van before turning onto its side.

'The Kuga went into a bus shelter, striking Mr Trezise in the chest,' said Mr Franklin.

Pictured: The horrifying aftermath of the eight car pile-up in Romford, Essex last February that claimed the lives of Eileen Haskell, 64, and Richard Trezise, 48

'Richard Trezise was 48 years of age at the time of his death, and he had arrived at the bus stop shortly before the collision with his wife, Sharon, and son, Robert.

'Sharon and Robert witnessed him fall to the floor after he'd been hit.'

Mr Trezise was pronounced dead at 2pm and a post-mortem examination concluded that the cause of death was multiple severe injuries to the chest.

Half an hour later, at 2.30pm, Ms Haskell was pronounced dead at the scene and following a post-mortem examination the cause of death found to be multiple injuries, particularly to the brain stem.

The other drivers involved in the smash escaped with only minor injuries.

Eyewitnesses reported seeing Ballard 'fitting', describing him as 'shaking and not responsive'.

On 24 September last year Ballard admitted to police that he was addicted to cocaine and had taken some that day.

Mr Franklin said: 'He said first of all that he passed out during a seizure while driving and did not remember anything of the accident.

'He said that he had regular seizures that on a few occasions had caused him to hit his head.

'He told the officer that he didn't experience any warning prior to the seizures but said they came on randomly.

'He said he'd been abusing cocaine on most days over the preceding few years.'

In 2017, Ballard received residential treatment for cocaine dependency.

Blood samples revealed that Ballard's blood contained 3.5mg of THC, the principal psychoactive constituent of cannabis, and 32mg of cocaine, over three times the legal limit.

He appeared in court today wearing a dark grey suit and glasses, and spoke only to confirm his identity.

Eileen Haskell, 64, (above) was driving when she was killed in the collision last February

In her victim statement, Mr Trezise's wife Sharon Trezise said: 'He wasn't just my husband, he was my best friend, my rock.

'He would make me laugh, he was always worried I worked too hard.

'We were so happy and still very much in love with one another.

'Losing him the way I did is something I will never recover from.'

Mrs Haskell's daughter Sienna Haskell said her father had recently been diagnosed with skin cancer and was due to undergo invasive surgery the day after her mother's death.

She said: 'My mum was ripped from us a year ago and before I could even process my grief I had to watch my father die too.'

'The worst part is knowing that all of this could have been avoided.'

Ms Haskell's eldest daughter Holly Haskell attended the hearing via video-link from Australia. She has been unable to leave the country during the pandemic so has not been able to see her family since her mother's death.

She wept as her sister's victim statement was read to the court.

Ballard's father and other relatives were in the public gallery for the hearing along with other members of the victims' family.

The Common Serjeant of London, Judge Richard Marks, QC, passed sentence this afternoon.

The judge said Mr Trezise was a 'much loved father and husband, as well as a hugely respected teacher.

'His wife and son witnessed these events, they saw him fall to the floor after he'd been hit.

'Both Mr Trezise and Mrs Haskell were pronounced dead at the scene.

'Miraculously your son only had minor injuries.

'The fact that other individuals were not killed, or were not seriously injured, is entirely fortuitous.

'A toxicological examination of your blood, taken at about 8pm on the day of the incident, showed that you had THC and cocaine in your blood to a significant degree, although it is right to say that there is no evidence that this caused the fit nor is there any evidence that you were in any material way affected by these drugs.

'The victim impact statements were profoundly moving and heartbreaking in the extreme.

'It goes without saying that no sentence I am imposing on you will seem adequate to any of them or be capable of compensating either family for their absolutely devastating loss.'

'You drove with your 12 year old son next to you, thereby putting him substantially at risk.'

Ballard was jailed for nine years and he will be disqualified for seven years once he is released from prison.

He must also take an extended driving test before he can take the wheel.

The judge also extended his condolences to family members of the victims.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A graphic showing exactly how long you need to wash your hands for to remove any trace of germs is wowing hundreds around the country, some of whom are not practising good hygiene.

The experiment, shared by the parenting organisation CPR Kids, used the Glitterbug Hand Hygiene Training Kit to show what unwashed hands, a five-second wash and a proper 30-second scrub really look like.

'Are you washing your hands correctly?' CPR Kids posted on Facebook.

'Regardless of COVID case numbers in your area or your lockdown status, effective handwashing is crucial in "stopping the spread".'

A graphic showing exactly how long you need to wash your hands for to remove any trace of germs is wowing hundreds around the country (pictured after no wash, a five-second wash and 30-second wash)

The graphic showed how a five-second wash does little to actually clean your hands, and you still need to be careful with jewellery after washing for 30 seconds (pictured)

The organisation went on to explain just why a good hand-washing practice is so important.

'A five-second hand wash leaves germs behind. Look at the difference a 30-second hand wash makes!

'Note how even a 30-second good scrub can still result in germs left on jewellery and fingernails - focus on washing and drying these areas properly too when you wash your hands,' their experts added.

CPR Kids accompanied their post with photos of what no washing, a five-second wash and a 30-second wash look like.

They highlighted just how important it is to focus on areas like near your jewellery and in between your fingers.

When washing your hands, you should ideally be able to sing 'Happy Birthday' twice in the time it takes to thoroughly clean your hands (stock image)

The five-step process for perfect hand-washing Wet your hands with clean, running water (warm or cold), turn off the tap, and apply soap. Lather your hands by rubbing them together with the soap. Lather the backs of your hands, between your fingers, and under your nails. Scrub your hands for at least 20 seconds. Need a timer? Hum the 'Happy Birthday' song from beginning to end twice. Rinse your hands well under clean, running water. Dry your hands using a clean towel or air dry them. Source: CDC Advertisement

To wash your hands properly, the organisation and Better Health recommend that you first of all wet your hands with clean, running water and turn off the tap.

Apply soap and lather it well for 20 seconds, or even longer if you have dirt ingrained.

Following this, rub your hands together rapidly 'across all surfaces of your hands and wrists', and don't forget the areas that often get missed, like the backs of your hands, wrists, between your fingers and underneath your fingernails.

CPR recommend you 'remove rings and watches before you wash your hands, or ensure you move them to wash underneath, as mircroorganisms can exist underneath them'.

Finish by rinsing well underneath running water to make sure all traces of soap are removed, before drying them on a clean towel or paper towel.

'Dry under any rings as they can be a source of future contamination if they remain moist,' CPR explained.

'Try singing the "Happy Birthday" song twice to make sure you're washing long enough if you're not sure.'

Hundreds of people who saw the graphic thanked the organisation for sharing the graphic, and tagged friends who they thought might find it interesting.

'I haven't worn jewellery on my hands in months for this very reason... and there is always a nail brush on our bathroom counters next to the soap,' one commenter posted.

'Thank you for sharing this, it's great!' another added.

The CDC's hand washing guide follows the WHO's guidelines - which include 11 detailed steps, including the exact technique you should use to make sure every part of your hands are clean (WHO's guidelines pictured)

If you are in a situation where you can't wash your hands with soap and water, experts said hand sanitiser that contains 60 per cent alcohol will work in a pinch.

Sanitisers can quickly reduce the number of germs on hands in many situations.

However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is quick to point out that hand sanitisers do not get rid of all types of germs, and they may not be as effective when your hands are dirty or greasy.

'They might not remove harmful chemicals from hands like pesticides and heavy metals,' the website reads.

The CDC's hand washing guide follows the WHO's guidelines - which include 11 detailed steps, including the exact technique you should use to make sure every part of your hands are clean.

Proper hand washing involves rubbing the palms together, rubbing the backs of the hands, interlocking fingers both backwards and forwards, scrubbing the thumbs, and then washing the fingertips.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British aid money will be used to help tackle plastic waste in developing countries, ministers said yesterday.

The £500million Blue Planet Fund will protect the marine environment and reduce poverty.

Some £16million of this fund will be spent on protecting the oceans from pollution and plastic waste. This will in turn fight climate change as it will protect marine species which are responsible for absorbing carbon from the sea.

The Blue Planet Fund is named after the BBC series narrated by Sir David Attenborough.

The £500million Blue Planet Fund will protect the marine environment and reduce poverty [Stock image]

The ocean is a carbon sink which every year absorbs almost a third of global CO2 emissions thanks to marine species such as coral reefs [Stock image]

The money will also help increase marine protection and save coral reefs, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said.

Some £5.7million will be spent on a project in partnership with developing countries to tackle marine pollution and create protected areas.

Hydrogen boilers 'worse for planet' Hydrogen-fuelled home boilers would be worse for the environment than existing models that burn natural gas and which the Government wants to phase out, scientists have claimed. So-called blue hydrogen is expected to form a key part of the Government's plans to fight climate change and ministers have said gas boilers could be banned as soon as 2035. But the study, from Cornell University in the US, suggests its production – when methane, a key component of natural gas, is split – is 20 per cent more harmful to the environment than burning gas or coal for heat. The researchers said more greenhouse gases – methane and carbon dioxide – would escape during extraction. Many environmentalists back green hydrogen instead, which is created by using electricity to split water. Advertisement

The programme will also help countries respond to disasters such as the X-Press Pearl in Sri Lanka – a devastating ship fire which released plastic and toxic chemicals into the sea.

And will reduce poverty by protecting the ocean for those who rely on it. Some £5million will be used to support countries in the Caribbean, Indian and Pacific Ocean to help them prevent the extinction of coral reefs.

The ocean is a carbon sink which every year absorbs almost a third of global CO2 emissions thanks to marine species such as coral reefs.

The funding was announced in the run-up to the Cop26 global environmental summit in Glasgow this autumn.

Environment Secretary George Eustice said: 'The UK is a global leader in marine protection and will continue to advocate for ambitious climate and ocean action at Cop26.

'Our shared ocean is a vital resource and provides habitat to precious marine life, as well as supporting the livelihoods of one in every ten people worldwide.

'The Blue Planet Fund will support many developing countries on the front line of climate change.'

However, Labour claimed the Government is not 'serious' about tackling the climate crisis because the money is not new.

Preet Kaur Gill, Labour's international development spokesman, said: 'The money announced is from an existing commitment and is only the first tranche from a fund committed to almost two years ago.'

The Daily Mail has been at the forefront of attempts to reduce the amount of waste in the environment with our Turn the Tide on Plastic campaign.

The foreign aid budget was cut this year to £10.9billion, reduced from £14.5billion a year before.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The UK's ambassador to Afghanistan put plans to leave the country on hold - and remained at Kabul airport to help process the applications of those seeking to leave.

British troops, supported by Special Forces, are currently attempting to evacuate up to 500 embassy staff from the city. Despite the scramble to evacuate, the ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow was said to be remaining in the city last night.

Boris Johnson said he was at the airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave. The Prime Minister has insisted Britain could 'look back at 20 years of effort and achievement In Afghanistan', as he argued he wanted to 'make sure that we don't throw those gains away'.

But when asked if Sir Laurie was among the hundreds already thought to have been rescued, a spokesperson for the Foreign and Commonwealth Development Office (FCDO) told MailOnline: 'We have reduced our diplomatic presence in response to the situation on the ground.

'However our Ambassador remains in Kabul and UK Government staff continue to work to provide assistance to British nationals and to our Afghan staff.

'We are doing all we can to enable remaining British nationals, who want to leave Afghanistan, to do so.'

Earlier reports had suggested Sir Laurie would be evacuated from Kabul on Sunday evening due to the Taliban's rapid advancement into the capital.

It comes as Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, with support from RAF teams from around the world, to airlift British officials out of the city.

Britain's ambassador to Afghanistan Sir Laurie Bristow (right) remains in Kabul today, despite an SAS-backed operation to evacuate embassy staff amid a Taliban takeover of the city. Pictured left: The British embassy in Kabul

Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, to begin airlifting more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Pictured: Members of Joint Forces Headquarters get prepared to deploy to Afghanistan

The Taliban is now closing in on the capital of Kabul from all sides, now controlling territories in the north, south, east and west

Gunshots were heard outside the capital city, while Taliban militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman today

However the Taliban's advance has since hastened rapidly, with militants now in the capital.

Meanwhile, as many as 2,000 interpreters and their families - who fear being branded as 'traitors' by the extremist Taliban - are in line to be rescued.

There are also 3,000 entitled personnel - British and dual passport holders - who may also need evacuation by the UK Government. These include aid workers and security officials stationed over in Afghanistan.

However, only 450 have so applied to leave. The FCDO says it has been urging British nationals to leave the country since April.

On top of this, around 2,000 people with links to Britain could also be eligible to leave Afghanistan for the UK.

It is understood that British officials believed they had until the end of the month to evacuate around 7,000 negligible people from Afghanistan - while US intelligence forces suggested Kabul could stand against the Taliban for three months.

But gunshots were heard outside the capital city, while Taliban militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman.

Long lines were seen outside the Iranian embassy in Kabul on Sunday as Afghan men waited for hours to get visas

There were also long lines outside banks in the capital as people gathered to try to withdraw money as the Taliban closed in

Pictured: Dozens of people queue outside Kabul Bank in the Afghan capital on Sunday. People waited for hours to try and withdraw money

As the Taliban closed in on Kabul on Sunday, many Afghans fled. Pictured: People arriving from Afghanistan make their way at the Friendship Gate crossing point at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border town of Chaman

Afghan passengers walk toward the airport in Kabul after the Taliban made huge gains across the country in the wake of the US military departure

Pictured: The Pakistani and Taliban flag are seen flying above a crossing point between Afghanistan and Pakistan on Sunday as Afghans tried to flee into the neighbouring country

Afghan refugees are fleeing the country and heading to the US and Canada as they face threats from the Taliban

It comes as, in a scene mirroring that of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war, a US Air Force helicopter was seen taking off from the US embassy.

The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital.

Smoke was also seen rising from near to the US embassy earlier today as security staff work to burn any important documents, including CIA information, or material that could be used 'in propaganda efforts'. The US flag is soon expected to be lowered, signalling the official closure of the embassy.

It comes as the US steps up its evacuation of Kabul with Taliban fighters quickly moving in 'from all sides'. Shots were heard on the outskirts of the capital earlier today, much earlier than first anticipated, before fighters poured into the city.

US Intelligence officials had expected Kabul to hold out for three months, while UK ministers were hoping they had until the end of the month.

Leaders of the extremist group have today demanded the Afghan government surrender the city to them in a bid to avoid bloodshed - adding the chilling warning 'we've not declared a ceasefire'.

As many as 10,000 US citizens are being evacuated from the city. Around 3,000 US troops are being sent to aid the mission.

Taliban officials demanded foreigners who don't leave to register their presence with Taliban administrators in the coming days.

While western countries such as the US and UK have opted to evacuate staff, Russia confirmed that it did not intend to evacuate its embassy staff in Kabul.

A twin-rotor US Air Force Chinook was seen taking off from the US Embassy earlier today, as the evacuation efforts rapidly pick up pace

The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital (pictured)

The US Embassy in Kabul has been ordered to destroy sensitive materials and evacuate as Taliban fighters move in on the capital

Anti-missile decoy flares are deployed as U.S. Black Hawk military helicopters and a dirigible balloon fly over the city of Kabul, Afghanistan

Security Engineers will stay behind as they continue to burn, shred and pulverize 20 years worth of intelligence stored on electronics and in documents. Pictured: Smoke rises next to the US Embassy in Kabul today

The US Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan has been the intelligence hub of the US's war on terror

As the Taliban advance continues, following the decision by the US to pull its troops out, gunfire was heard near the presidential palace in Kabul.

The militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman hours after taking control of Jalalabad, the last major Afghan city to fall to the insurgents.

The terror group said in a statement they did not intend to take the capital 'by force' after entering the outskirts of the city.

An Afghan official earlier confirmed Jalalabad fell under Taliban control without a fight early Sunday morning when the governor surrendered, saying it was 'the only way to save civilian lives.'

Its fall has also given the Taliban control of a road leading to the Pakistan city of Peshawar, one of the main highways into landlocked Afghanistan.

Jalalabad is close to the Pakistani border and just 80 miles from Kabul - the Afghanistan capital home to more than four million people and currently the only remaining major city still under government control.

Besides Kabul, just seven other provincial capitals out of the country's 34 are yet to fall to the Taliban.

Concerns are mounting over how long Kabul can stave off the Taliban insurgents as they have captured the northern stronghold of Mazar-i-Sharif, the second-largest city Kandahar and third-largest city Herat all within the last 48 hours.

The Taliban are now closing in on the capital from all sides, controlling territories to the North, South, East and West and advancing to just seven miles south of the city.

Hoda Ahmadi, a lawmaker from Logar province, told The Associated Press that the Taliban have reached the Char Asyab district on the outskirts of the capital, which was gripped by blackouts, communications outages and street fighting overnight Saturday as the country descends into chaos.

A US defense official has warned it could be only a matter of days before the insurgent fighters take control of Kabul.

A Taliban fighter sits inside an Afghan National Army (ANA) vehicle along the roadside in Laghman province on Sunday

Taliban fighters drive the vehicle through the streets of Laghman province Sunday - the same day Jalalabad fell

Residents and fighters swarm an Afghan National Army vehicle on a roadside in Laghman province as the insurgents take control of major cities

Last days of the US Embassy in Kabul: Nerve centre of the war on terror is being gutted of all sensitive material as staff and CIA assets The US Embassy in Kabul - the nerve center of the war on terror - is being gutted of all its sensitive material and evacuated in 72 hours, as the Taliban coils around Afghanistan's capital. The Embassy's demise will create an intelligence void that could plunge the US into pre-9/11 blindness, unless it can find another nearby country that will allow it rebuild its spy center. For the past 20 years, the US Embassy in Kabul has gathered vast amounts of information that shaped counterterrorism military actions - such as precision drone strikes - and prevented another 9/11-type attack. The location allowed CIA agents to meet with sources and monitor the Taliban, Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations in the region. 'When the time comes for the US military to withdraw, the US government's ability to collect and act on threats will diminish. That's simply a fact,' CIA Director Bill Burns told Senators in April. Everyone in the Embassy - except Bureau of Diplomatic Security Service agents and top decisionmakers, including the ambassador - will be out of the country before the end of Tuesday. Security Engineers will also stay behind as they continue to burn, shred and pulverize 20 years worth of intelligence stored on electronics and in documents. Embassy or agency logos, American flags 'or items which could be misused in propaganda efforts' are also considered to be sensitive materials and will be destroyed. The military is prepared to lower the American flag flying above the Embassy - at the State Department's order - signaling the Embassy's official closure. Advertisement

Today the Taliban said they aim to take the city, but say they have no plans to take Kabul 'by force'.

Leaders of the extremist group say they don't want a 'single Afghan to be injured or killed' during the hostile takeover - but warned 'we've not signed a ceasefire yet'.

Just last week, US intelligence estimates expected the city to be able to hold out for at least three months.

A senior US official told the New York Times the Taliban have warned the US it must cease airstrikes or else its extremist fighters will move in on US buildings.

Joe Biden has vowed that any action that puts Americans at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong US military response.'

Meanwhile, in the UK, Boris Johnson is facing calls for a last-ditch intervention to prevent the complete collapse of Afghanistan.

The lead elements of the British force sent to evacuate the remaining UK nationals were understood to be in the capital amid fears it could fall within days or even hours.

But amid a hurried scramble for safety, helicopters were seen landing at the US embassy to ferry away remaining personnel.

In the UK, there was deep anger among many MPs at the way - 20 years after the first international forces entered Afghanistan - the country was being abandoned to its fate.

The chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee Tom Tugendhat said it was 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez, while Defence Committee chairman Tobias Ellwood said it was a humiliation for the West.

Despite the decision of the Biden administration to withdraw the remaining US troops which triggered the collapse, Mr Ellwood said it was still not too late to turn the situation around.

He called for the despatch of the Royal Navy carrier strike group to the region and urged the Prime Minister to convene an emergency conference of 'like-minded nations' to see what could be done.

'I plead with the Prime Minister to think again. We have an ever-shrinking window of opportunity to recognise where this country is going as a failed state,' he told Times Radio.

'We can turn this around but it requires political will and courage. This is our moment to step forward.

'We could prevent this, otherwise history will judge us very, very harshly in not stepping in when we could do and allowing the state to fail.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Tyson Fury's wife Paris shares a sweet video of their newborn daughter Athena as the tot leaves intensive care

Paris Fury took to Instagram to show her beautiful newborn daughter Athena, that she shares with boxing champion Tyson Fury, as she is currently being kept at the Alderhey Children's NHS Foundation Trust in...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matt Baker fought back tears on his new TV show, Our Farm on the Dales.

The former One Show host, 43, was left overwhelmed when he was able to fix a vehicle that was special to his dad Michael on Saturday evenings show.

Hearing the engine roar, the TV presenter said: 'I tell you what, that takes me back. Even that engine. That has hit me in the heart that has.'

Emotional: Matt Baker fought back tears on his new TV show Our Farm on the Dales on Saturday

Matt left his life in London behind and moved back to his family farm in the Yorkshire Dales last year after his mum Janice suffered an accident while working on her farm.

He decided to take over the running of the farm alongside his family and the Channel 4 show Our Farm on the Dales has documented his journey.

In the latest episode Matt was determined to repair the vintage car, which has sat unused for two decades.

Vintage: The former One Show host was left gobsmacked when he was able to fix a vehicle that was special to his dad

Matt said: 'For 20 years, my dad's old car's been rusting away as an eyesore at the side of the farm.

'It's been weighing heavy on his mind. It's caused me a lot of sleepless nights, because it's just a shame to see it go. And I couldn't do anything about it.'

Matt took the car to a local restoration garage to see if it could be fixed.

Family man: Matt left his life in London behind and moved back to his family farm in the Yorkshire Dales last year with his parents (pictured)

He said: 'It would mean the world if it could be saved, but I'm not holding out much hope.'

The garage door opened to reveal the car, with the mechanic inside at the wheel, he turned the ignition key and the engine roared to life.

Matt was elated and shouted 'There she is!'

Worth a try! In the latest episode Matt was determined to fix his dad Michael's old car, which has sat unused for two decades

'I tell you what, that takes me back. Even that engine. That has hit me in the heart that has.'

'It's just amazing, I expected to come in here and have a poke around underneath - I never in a million years expected you to reverse it off the ramp.'

The star got emotional adding: 'It's incredible. I think what we need to do is show it back to my dad and say 'look dad, this is the story, what do you reckon?

'He's going to be amazed. What's making me feel more emotional is knowing what this is going to mean to my dad.

Matt said: 'For 20 years, my dad's old car's been rusting away as an eyesore at the side of the farm

'I think he'll be delighted to hear she's doing everything in her power to get back onto the road.'

Previously Matt's mum broke down in tears while filming after she revealed that she suffered from a fall while tending to the farm's herd of sheep, which saw them knock her to the ground.

Matt then admitted he felt he needed to be back home more, so he can be there to help out his family.

Hearing the engine roar the TV presenter said: 'I tell you what, that takes me back. Even that engine. That has hit me in the heart that has'

After Janice's accident, the family were left concerned that they'd have to give up the farm entirely.

Matt told the series: 'The Hampshire Downs [which are a breed of sheep] that we have bred here for years are big sheep. They are on the large end of the scale as far as sheep are concerned.

'I think, now at the stage that you're in and what has happened that - and this will be hard to hear as you've put so much effort into the flock that we've got - I just don't think that they are the way forward, for you now.'

The star got emotional adding: 'It's incredible. I think what we need to do is show it back to my dad and say 'look dad, this is the story, what do you reckon?'

Janice replied, through tears: 'It's quite a strange feeling really, sitting here doing this in the sunshine. It's the first time I've actually had to make a decision because of what's happened.

'It's the right decision. I know it's the right decision and you reach a time in your life when you think "I really can't do this anymore".

'In that respect it's sad, but in a good way, a fork in the road might mean good things will come from it in a different way.'

Matt admitted that it's hard for him to realise his parents aren't as young as they used to be.

He said: 'It's a really big deal for my mum. And it's tough, you know. You get to a point in your life when you have to look after your parents and you have to do your best to make sure everything's alright.

'And that was always weirdly your parents' role when you were growing up. Suddenly there's that role-reversal.

'We're going to spend a lot more time up here because work and things have changed for me and one of the reasons I stopped what I was doing was because I wanted to spend more time with my family and be here a lot more.

'The timing of it couldn't be any better. It's strange the way the world words.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Four-time Emmy nominee Carrie Ann Inaba will 'not be returning' to moderate and co-host CBS' The Talk after announcing her leave of absence on April 26 'to focus on my well-being.'

Page Six reported Monday that producers 'want a man' to join current co-hosts Sheryl Underwood, Jerry O'Connell, Amanda Kloots, and Elaine Welteroth.

They seem especially enamored with retired NFL star Akbar Gbaja-Biamila - tweeting a #TBT last Thursday captioned: 'To a co-host with the mostest! We love you!'

Gone for good? Four-time Emmy nominee Carrie Ann Inaba will 'not be returning' to moderate and co-host CBS' The Talk after announcing her leave of absence on April 26 'to focus on my well-being'

Testosterone balance? Page Six reported Monday that producers 'want a man' to join current co-hosts (from L-R, pictured July 13) Sheryl Underwood, Jerry O'Connell, Amanda Kloots, and Elaine Welteroth

Other possible contenders they've recently tried out include Jane the Virgin alum Justin Baldoni, comedian Bill Bellamy, former E! News co-anchor Terrence J, and CBS This Morning correspondent David Begnaud.

There's also retired NFL star Victor Cruz, Sugar Ray frontman Mark McGrath, preacher DeVon Franklin, Shark Tank investor Daymond John, retired NBA star Jalen Rose, American Idol mentor Bobby Bones, and former SNL star Jay Pharoah.

Producers were evidently 'not pleased' when the Hawaiian 53-year-old announced July 15 that she'd return as a judge on the 30th season of ABC's Dancing with the Stars this September.

The acrimonious exit of longtime co-host Sharon Osbourne in March over behind-the-scenes racist allegations also reportedly 'did not sit well' with Carrie.

They seem especially enamored with retired NFL star Akbar Gbaja-Biamila - tweeting a #TBT last Thursday captioned: 'To a co-host with the mostest! We love you!'

Auditioning: Other possible contenders they've recently tried out include Jane the Virgin alum Justin Baldoni (2-L, pictured July 21), comedian Bill Bellamy (2-R), former E! News co-anchor Terrence J, and CBS This Morning correspondent David Begnaud

Who will it be? There's also retired NFL star Victor Cruz (L, pictured July 20), Sugar Ray frontman Mark McGrath (2-L), preacher DeVon Franklin, Shark Tank investor Daymond John, retired NBA star Jalen Rose, American Idol mentor Bobby Bones, and former SNL star Jay Pharoah

'I'll be there! Will you?' Producers were evidently 'not pleased' when the Hawaiian 53-year-old announced July 15 that she'd return as a judge on the 30th season of ABC's Dancing with the Stars this September

'It's 50/50. Everyone wants [Inaba] back. No decisions have been made': The acrimonious exit of longtime co-host Sharon Osbourne (L, pictured March 10) in March over behind-the-scenes racist allegations also reportedly 'did not sit well' with Carrie

'It's 50/50. Everyone wants [Inaba] back. No decisions have been made,' one insider cautioned Page Six.

Since 2020, there have been a lot of exits including creator Sara Gilbert, Marie Osmond, Aisha Tyler, Carnie Wilson, Julie Chen Moonves, and Eve.

The Talk's 11th season - which experienced a ratings low - concludes August 25, and CBS officially renewed the daytime panel show for a 12th season on June 14.

Mass exodus: Since 2020, there have been a lot of exits including creator Sara Gilbert, Marie Osmond, Aisha Tyler, Carnie Wilson, Julie Chen Moonves, and Eve (pictured November 2)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaz Kamwi

Name: Kaz Kamwi

Age: 26

Location: Essex

Occupation: Fashion Blogger

Who is their type on paper? 'I like meeting new people, I'm ready to be in a relationship. Why not be in a place where people are looking for the same things as me?'

Chloe Burrows

Name: Chloe Burrows

Age: 25

Location: Bicester

Occupation: Financial Services Marketing Executive

Who is their type on paper? 'I like a good build. I go to the gym. I want someone who is funny. Really funny and caring and will do nice little things for you.'

Faye Winter

Name: Faye Winter

Age: 26

Location: Devon

Occupation: Letting Manager

What is her type on paper? 'Someone that will put me in my place. Someone that makes me laugh. But also someone that takes my banter. I’m like a five-year-old in a playground, if I like you, I will make a mockery of you and laugh and joke. That is my really terrible flirting skills. I need someone who can take that.'

Rachel Finni

Name: Rachel Finni

Age: 29

Location: London

Occupation: Luxury travel specialist

Why did you sign up for Love Island? I've scraped the bottom of the dirtiest barrels, that’s how I describe my dating life. So I thought "why not? Let’s apply. If it happens, it happens".'

Lucinda Strafford

Name: Lucinda Strafford

Age: 21

Location: Brighton

Occupation: Online fashion boutique owner

Which boy do you have your eye on? I really fancy Brad. And then possibly Liam. But obviously I’m open to getting to know any of the other boys.

AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Name: AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Age: 28

Location: Hertfordshire

Occupation: Hair extension technician

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I’ve had the worst luck with men. I feel like this is the one thing I haven’t tried. I thought why not? Let’s give it a go.'

Georgia Townend

Name: Georgia Townend

Age: 28

Location: Essex

Occupation: Marketing executive

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I've been single for a really long time. Five years. I haven’t done the maths but it’s at least that. I feel like I’ve exhausted all the other options on how to meet people.'

Mary Bedford

Name: Mary Bedford

Age: 22

Location: Wakefield

Occupation: Model

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I have the worst luck, ever, with boys. Genuinely the worst ever. I always get dragged into the same circle of boys. So I was like, I need to go in another direction.'

Kaila Troy

Name: Kaila Troy

Age: 28

Location: Dublin

Occupation: DJ

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'Real life dating has not been doing me any favours at all. I’ve had it.'

Matthew Macnabb

Name: Matthew Macnabb

Age: 26

Location: Belfast

Occupation: Strategic Marketing Consultant

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I feel like I’m pretty chilled and very adventurous. I’m very laid-back in the sense I like to laugh and I don’t care too much about what people think.'

Amy Day

Name: Amy Day

Age: 25

From: Surrey

Occupation: Performer

Why have you signed up for Love Island: I’m clearly not very good at dating myself. I’m looking forward to the experience and the potential of finding someone I might not have met.

Lillie Hayes

Name: Lillie Haynes

Age: 22

From: South Shields

Occupation: Trainee accountant

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’ve definitely got my eye on Jake. He’s 100% the type of boy I would go for at home. It’s too good of a match not to just go for. Liam is definitely a dark horse for me, he’s like James Bond when you look at him, absolutely gorgeous. So he could be a very close second.

Jack Barlow

Name: Jack Barlow

Age: 26

From: East Sussex

Occupation: Racing driver/coach

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’m very much a connection type of person so I’ll be able to tell more in person. From what I’ve seen and going off their energy, Chloe has been top of my list. It’s been nice to see her be herself and not care what anyone thinks. I think she’ll be a lot of fun.

Jack Barlow

Name: Aaron Simpson

Age: 24

From: Kent

Occupation: Footballer

What is it like dating as a footballer? Does it make things easier or does it stand in the way? A lot of people have an assumption of me as being a typical player, but I got all of that out of my system when I was younger and now I’m a lot more laid-back when it comes to dating. A lot of people would assume that I go on lots of dates but I’m actually quite picky when it comes to who I date. Sometimes it can be hard to know if someone is genuine or not. My mum is really protective over me. The approval is always needed from mumsy, for sure.

Brett Staniland

Name: Brett Staniland

Age: 27

From: Derbyshire

Occupation: PhD student and model

Why have you signed up to Love Island? I've never had a serious relationship and the last 18 months has been really stagnant in terms of meeting new people and dating. Lots of my friends have settled down, had kids. I'm kind of the one that's left back from all of that. Now is the right time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been holidaying with her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, 33, in Spain.

Yet Bella Hadid's romantic getaway came to an end on Monday as she was spotted leaving Ibiza on a private jet.

The couple have been inseparable during recent weeks with some passionate displays of affection during their time together.

Jet setting: She has been holidaying with her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, 33, in Spain. Yet Bella Hadid 's romantic getaway came to an end on Monday as she was spotted leaving Ibiza

The runway star, 24, was sporting a navy Adidas jumper and floral leggings which she paired with white trainers.

Sartorially in sync with his girlfriend, Marc also opted for comfort in a navy T-shirt and matching black face mask.

The pair wore protective face masks entering the airport due to the ongoing threat of COVID-19.

Casual: Sartorially in sync with his girlfriend, Marc also opted for comfort in a navy T-shirt and matching black face mask

On Sunday, the supermodel gave fans an insight into her romantic getaway as she shared a bikini-clad snap while enjoying pizza and board games.

The runway star was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh as she draped her toned leg over a blue patterned cushion.

Bella, who was laying next to a backgammon board, captioned her post: 'Undefeated.'

Fun in the sun: On Sunday, the supermodel gave fans an insight into her romantic getaway as she shared a bikini-clad snap while enjoying pizza and board games

The Vogue cover star is a backgammon enthusiast and was spotted picking a new board during a trip to Paris last month.

Bella stunned in a pink and maroon triangle top showcasing her taut midriff.

The brunette beauty's long waves spilled over her shoulder as she reclined next to a glass of white wine and a pepperoni pizza.

Prior to becoming romantically involved with art director Marc, Bella was in a long-term relationship with The Weeknd, which ended for good in 2019.

Bella and Marc went Instagram official with their relationship this past July with a now-deleted post made to the model's Instagram page.

However, a source recently spoke to Page Six and noted that the two had been seeing each other ever since last summer, with the insider noting that the two 'hid it well.'

Wow! Bella stunned in a pink and maroon triangle top showcasing her taut midriff as she shared snaps from her romantic trip

The source also elaborated on the pair's methods that they used to keep their relationship a secret in its early stages.

'If they went out, he would come out first, get the car, and then she would get into the car. They would drive to a location, and he'd drop her off but not get out and go park the car,' they specified.

They went on to note that the pair 'were very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time.'

The source expressed that the two kept things toned down in public and opted for dates that included her friends.

According to the individual, Bella and Marc never shared 'any PDA...and most of the time they were with other people, which of course made it difficult to prove that they were dating.'

However, the source noted that many people began speculating that the model was seeing her now-boyfriend when his car began being regularly seen at her residence.

They said: 'This new guy [at the time] was driving her around in his Porsche, and then the Porsche was [at her place] overnight multiple times...So it was like, "She's got to be hooking up with this dude."'

The insider concluded by speaking about their Instagram picture, which was later deleted, and noted that the two waited a year before going public with their romance.

'They basically came out on their anniversary — or somewhere around it,' the source noted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Victoria Beckham shared a hilarious picture of some 'urine' flavoured sour candy sweets she was tucking into on Sunday.

The fashion designer, 47, quipped that the tangy fluid was 'just what I'm looking for,' as she captured the snack to Instagram.

The 'urine' was served in a small container, imitating a traditional urine sample, and it featured the words, 'Urine for a treat, sour liquid candy "samples"' inked on the front. It also listed the ingredients in blue print.

Something for David? Victoria Beckham shared a hilarious picture of some 'urine' flavoured sour candy sweets she was tucking into on Sunday on Instagram

While Victoria's face wasn't featured in the photo, her stunning pink manicure and gold ring were both visible.

Last week, the former Spice Girl and husband David Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday.

The former footballer took to his Instagram Stories and shared a recent heartwarming snap alongside Cruz, 16, where they wrapped their arms around each other.

The proud father, 46, wrote: 'Cruzie so proud well done big boy'.

Staying hydrated: The fashion designer, 47, quipped that the tangy fluid was 'just what I'm looking for,' as she captured the snack to Instagram

Victoria shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Record numbers of top grades were awarded to pupils doing their GCSE's this year, with 30 per cent of entries in England gaining grades 7 and above - equivalent to A and A*.

David and Victoria are also parents to sons Brooklyn, 22, Romeo, 18, and daughter Harper, 10.

It comes after the family recently enjoyed an evening out at Lucali restaurant in the New York City borough of Brooklyn.

Heartwarming: Victoria and her husband David Beckham congratulated their son Cruz, 16, as he received his GCSE results on Thursday

Proud: The mother-of-four shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Fashion designer Victoria took to Instagram to share a sweet shot of her famous family during the evening with son Romeo notably missing.

'Special night tonight in NYC. I love you so much @davidbeckham @brooklynbeckham @cruzbeckham #HarperSeven We miss you @romeobeckham x Kisses from Brooklyn X VB,' she penned.

David rocked a casual black T-shirt, while Brooklyn and Cruz co-ordinated a white T-shirt and baseball cap look.

On Tuesday, David was hard at work at his football club Inter Miami and brought Harper along with him.

'Special night in NYC': David (centre bottom), 46, and Victoria ordered 'the best' pizza in the city with kids Harper, 10, Cruz (right) and Brooklyn (centre top), 22 last Saturday night

Tasty: 'Very happy with my pie,' David captioned a photo of his bleach-blonde self relishing his pizza

Taking to Instagram, he revealed that he was enjoying a kickabout on one of the club's pitches with his daughter and shared sweet footage of their game.

Filming Harper kick a ball to him, David could be heard commentating: 'Beckham, to Beckham, yeah!' before kicking the ball into the net.

He then passed the ball back to Harper, saying: 'Yes, pass it back. Nice. Get set - Beckham, to Beckham, woohoo!' as she also scored a goal.

David captioned the post: 'Daddy daughter day at work @intermiamicf BECKHAM to BECKHAM GOOOOAAAAALLL.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Greg Wise has joined the Strictly line-up in memory of his late sister, Clare, who died in 2016, in a bid to end the stigma surrounding talking about death.

The Sense and Sensibility star, 55, has spoken out about how there is scarce material out there to help others going through the same heartbreak as their family did.

Greg, who is the husband of Dame Emma Thompson, has said: 'It's essential. It's important. I'm trying to get people to talk about death as much as they talk about the run up to birth'

His mission: Greg Wise, 55, joined the Strictly line-up in memory of his late sister, Clare, who died in 2016, in a bid to end the stigma surrounding talking about death

Clare died aged 51 after she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013, when she started a blog documenting her journey. She was then told that the disease was incurable after it spread into her bones.

Greg also wrote about his own experience with his wife's battle in a series of journals, which were later published as a book.

In the journals he spoke about how Clare was unique and the family thought it was fitting for her to have a glittery coffin.

In a statement on appearing on this year's show he said: 'My beautiful sister was a huge disco queen. She left our world almost exactly five years ago in a glitter ball coffin. This is for her.'

End the stigma: The actor has spoken out about how little material is out there to help others: 'I'm trying to get people to talk about death as much as they talk about the run up to birth'

Being a Strictly fan, Greg said that his elder sister would have been ecstatic about the news of him going on Strictly, even though he claims he cannot dance.

Greg said: 'My gorgeous diva sis would have been insane with excitement that her little bro was doing this. I will channel her, as her bro can't dance - but I'm thrilled to be dipping my toes, knees, hips and arms into this wonderful world'

Back in 2016, Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister's London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer.

On the night she died Greg wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking on Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility.

Big fan: Being a Strictly fanatic, Greg said that his elder sister would have been ecstatic about the news of him going on the show; Clare and Greg pictured in 2014

Greg also wrote box-office hit film Last Christmas with his wife, Emma, and the book Not That Kind of Love with his late sister Clare.

Emma and Greg share two children together, 33-year-old Tindy and Gaia, who is 21 years old.

He revealed that wife Emma was 'stupidly excited' he would be appearing on the show.

Speaking on This Morning, he said: 'It's going to be so important having her there. She's done three films back-to-back this year, so she's exhausted now anyway.'

He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor and strutting his stuff.

Sweet: He revealed that wife Emma was also 'stupidly excited' he would be appearing on the show. 'It's going to be so important having her there'

When it was suggested there would be a lot of attention on him during his Strictly stint, he said: 'Yeah, which is one of the things I'm slightly more nervous about than the actual dance steps.

'But it's about being out there and exposing yourself as someone who can't dance, and learning.'

Moments earlier on the show, Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay was revealed as the ninth contestant.

The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Also joining the star-studded line up is presenter AJ Odudu, along will comedian Robert Webb, Olympian Adam Peaty, Dragon's Den star Sara Davies, and actress Nina Wadia.

Eastenders' Rose Ayling Ellis will be taking to the dancefloor with Corrie's Katie McGlynn, BBC Breakfast host Dan Walker, England rugby union star Ugo Monye, and TV presenter Rhys Stephenson.

Other famous faces include Loose Women panellist Judi Love, and McFly's Tom Fletcher.

Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Gordon Ramsay's daughter Tilly, 19, was the NINTH contestant announced - as her dad warned her not to date any of the dancers!

Who will take home the glitterball? The full stars-studded line up has now been revealed for this year's show
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They star alongside each other in Truth Be Told.

And on Monday's Lorraine, Octavia Spencer, 51, and Kate Hudson, 42, enthused about their friendship and working together on the Apple+ crime series.

Octavia - who also produces the show - plays Poppy, an old friend of Kate's character Micah, and both women raved about each other's talents.

Happy ladies: On Monday's Lorraine, Octavia Spencer, 51, and Kate Hudson, 42, enthused about their friendship and working together on the Apple+ crime series Truth Be Told



Speaking to Ross King, Octavia gushed: 'Octavia the producer thinks of Kate, the actor, as one of the greatest actors out there and it's an honour that she said yes, because she made our season that much more fun - for Octavia the actor - but also for our viewing audience because she brings such a richness, such a depth to Micah.

'Octavia the actor is excited to be working on a show that's extremely fun and a genre that I actually do watch every night.'

Kate added: 'Octavia loves true crime, I can attest to this. Octavia not only knows every true crime series - or has seen it - but also she knows things that are happening in real life.

'She gets really into how crazy some of these stories are. So if there's anybody to be producing a true crime show, it's Octavia.'

Women supporting women: Both women raved about each other's talents

Speaking of Octavia as a producer, Kate joked: 'She demanded so much of me, we had some really tough times on set!

Kate continued: '[Ross] you've interviewed a lot of people and I'm sure they always say it comes from the top. When you have great energy on set and you have a really great leader, that's where it all trickles down from.

'Octavia is that leader, she is just absolutely loveable, warm, generous, smart, attentive, makes everybody work at their best.'

Speaking about the extra pressures of producing during a pandemic, Octavia explained: 'Our escape as a society, as a world for this pandemic, is your creative outlets - books and your viewing pleasure, so I think it's incumbent upon us to put out material that allows for a little escapism.

Talented: Octavia - who also produces the show - plays Poppy in Truth Be Told

'I'm excited that doing a true crime show like Truth Be Told, we have active viewership. You're sitting on the edge of your seat and for me, I'm a fan of the genre and so I would literally watch it in one day if I could.'

Commenting on the show's plot, Kate said: 'You have these moments that go beyond just the who dunnit, it's also how we're all related to each other so it's got a really juicy… I think it's going to keep a lot of people engaged.'

Of their own friendship, Octavia revealed: 'We had met in passing at some sort of awards event and we're fans of each other. And just to play opposite someone who is always ready to play and mix it up.

In character: In The Apple+ series, Kate plays Micah, an old friend of Poppy's

'There were times when Kate would always keep me guessing - something in rehearsal and she would bring something different to each take we filmed, which made it really exciting.'

Kate agreed: 'We could disarm each other and at the same time I think, Octavia and I could make each other cry in five seconds. We really did energetically feed off each other.'

Octavia added: 'Having a scene partner and a season partner in Kate was just really, really fun.'

And on revealing any secrets about Octavia, Kate said: 'I will never tell!' To which Octavia sang: 'That's what friends are for.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She plays Erin in the Sky comedy series.

And, Michelle Keegan looked comfortable in a pink velour tracksuit and denim jacket as she carried furniture while filming Brassic scenes in Manchester, on Tuesday.

The soap star, 34, got stuck in lifting the heavy items and loading them into a van, while clad in the eye-catching casual wear.

Helping hand: Michelle Keegan, 34, carried furniture while filming Brassic scenes in Manchester, on Tuesday

Michelle somehow managed to look chic in her baby pink tracksuit, which boasted a hood and cuffed ankles.

She strolled along in a pair of chunky black trainers as she lent a hand loading up the van with a chaise lounge.

Michelle's brunette tresses were styled into long, messy curls with two braids adding a pretty twist.

Her co-star Joe Gilgun, 37, who plays Vinnie in Brassic, sported yellow tracksuit bottoms and a matching hoodie for the shoot, as well as off-white trainers.

Keeping it casual: The star looked comfortable in a pink velour tracksuit and denim jacket

Effortless: Michelle somehow managed to look chic in her baby pink tracksuit, which boasted a hood and cuffed ankles

Pretty: Michelle's brunette tresses were styled into long, messy curls with two braids adding a pretty twist

Woah there! Michelle guided the way as she carried a chaise lounge

The third series of Brassic is set to hit screens later this year after series two ended on a cliffhanger as Vinnie confessed his true feelings for single mum Erin (Michelle Keegan) just as he was being carted off by the police.

As he was being lead away, Erin, who has dated his best pal Dylan, whispered something inaudible in his ear.

Declaring his feelings, Vinnie said: 'I know it's wrong, but you're the first thing in the morning, and you're the last thing at night.'

He then added he didn't know 'how to tell' how much she means to him.

Brassic follows the story of Lancashire native Vinnie, who has bipolar disorder and his best friend Dylan (Damien Molony) from whom he has been inseparable since childhood.

Fun on set: Michelle joked around with her co-star Ryan Sampson, 35,

Vibrant: Her co-star Joe Gilgun, 37, who plays Vinnie in Brassic, sported yellow tracksuit bottoms and a matching hoodie for the shoot, as well as off-white trainers

To me, to you: Between them, Ryan and Michelle carefully moved the chaise lounge

A tainted past, the boys have dealt, scammed, bribed and conned their way through adolescence.

Now, on the brink of adulthood, their dealing and stealing is catching up with them, with the repercussions of their crimes heading their way.

Michelle plays alongside them as a single mum seeking a better life for herself and son Tyler (Jude Riordan).

While navigating complicated relationships with the show's leads Dylan and Vinnie, she still strives for a good childhood for her son.

The new series of Brassic is expected to air on Sky One in October following the rise of the previous seasons.

All that stuff: Michelle helped to unload furniture and eye-catching decor

Leading lady: Michelle plays single mum Erin in the Sky comedy series

Playing her part: Michelle looked anxious while in character for the scenes

Last year, Michelle admitted that she felt 'frustrated' by constant questions about when she and husband Mark Wright will have a baby.

The actress, who has been married to the TOWIE star turned TV presenter, for six years, hit out at sexist double standards - admitting queries about when she is going to have a baby do 'bother' her now.

In an interview with Cosmopolitan magazine, she said: 'A few years ago it didn't bother me and I answered the question.

'But now I think, ''I don't need to answer that because nobody knows what goes on behind closed doors''.

Exciting: The third series of Brassic is set to hit screens later this year

'I remember when I finished Our Girl people were like, ''Is it because you're going off to have a baby?''

'I know for a fact if Mark finished a job, nobody would ask him if he was going to have a baby. It's not fair. It does make me feel frustrated.'

Michelle and husband Mark have been together since late 2012 when they met while they were both on holiday in Dubai.

The former TOWIE star popped the question nine months later and the pair married in a lavish ceremony at Hengrave Hall in Suffolk in May 2015.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dune's director, Denis Villeneuve, recently spoke about his plans for a potential sequel to the forthcoming feature.

The filmmaker, 53, recently spoke to Il Venerdi Di Republicca and gave the media outlet a bit of information regarding his future plans for a follow-up film, should one be produced.

The upcoming flick is based on Frank Herbert's 1965 novel of the same name and will premiere at the 78th Venice International Film Festival, which will occur next month.

Looking to the future: Dune's director, Denis Villeneuve expressed that he has plans for a follow-up to the soon-to-be-released feature; he is seen in 2013

During the sit-down, Villeneuve remarked that he was excited to begin work on a sequel to Dune and commented on the chemistry between its lead actors.

'I can't wait to shoot the second part of Dune to get [Timothee Chalamet and Zendaya] back together,' he said.

The Call Me By Your Name star will portray Paul Atreides in the film, and the Euphoria lead is set to play his romantic interest, Chani.

The Blade Runner 2049 director also pointed out that he planned to place a new character at the forefront of the film in the planned feature.

Excited: During an interview, the filmmaker expressed that he 'can't wait to shoot the second part of Dune to get [Timothee Chalamet and Zendaya] back together'

Taking the lead: The filmmaker also revealed that Zendaya's character, Chani, will serve as the main character in a potential follow-up flick

Specifically, he noted that 'in the next chapter Zendaya will be the protagonist of the story.'

Development on the soon-to-be-released version of Dune initially began in 2016 when Legendary Entertainment acquired the rights to the book.

Alejandro Jodorowsky was previously set to direct an adaptation of the novel that would have starred figures such as Orson Welles and Salvador Dali, although plans fell through in the mid-1970s.

David Lynch went on to helm a feature based on the book that starred Kyle MacLachlan that was released in 1984 and was met with a negative critical reception.

In the past: Development on the current version of Dune was initially started in 2016 when Legendary Pictures acquired the rights to the book

Not the first: David Lynch previously helmed an adaptation of the book, which was released to negative reviews in 1984

A miniseries was later produced and broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel, now known as Syfy, in 2000, which was received well by both critics and fans of the novel.

Villeneuve officially signed on to direct Dune in 2017, and he also serves as one of its producers.

The forthcoming film will feature an ensemble cast including performers such as Oscar Isaac, Rebecca Ferguson and Jason Momoa, among numerous others.

Principal photography initially began in March of 2019 and continued throughout the year until it officially concluded that July.

Serious talent: Dune features an ensemble cast that includes performers such as Rebecca Ferguson, Oscar Isaac and Jason Momoa

Further filming for the forthcoming feature was conducted the following year in Budapest.

Dune was originally supposed to have its premiere in November of 2020, but it was eventually delayed on numerous occasions owing to the ongoing state of the global pandemic.

It was ultimately given a wide debut date of October 22nd, where it currently stands.

Taking their time: Dune was originally supposed to be released in November of 2020, although it was later delayed several times

Villeneuve has expressed concern about Warner Bros' decision to dual-release the feature in theaters and on the HBO Max streaming service, as the film's producers fear that Dune will not be profitable enough to warrant a follow-up.

A preview of the flick's first ten minutes revealed that the movie was being released as Dune: Part One, lending further speculation that a second motion picture is being planned.

A spinoff series entitled Dune: The Sisterhood is currently being developed and will serve as a prequel to the film.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A British endurance athlete plans to undertake 'the coldest swim on Earth' to highlight the speed at which the icecaps are melting.

Lewis Pugh will head across the six-mile (10km) mouth of the Ilulissat Icefjord in Greenland.

The challenge – expected to take two weeks – will be in near-freezing waters with a wind chill that can force temperatures below zero.

Mr Pugh has previously swum in the Arctic, Antarctic and Himalayas to highlight climate change.

But the 51-year-old – due to set off on August 25 – said: 'This swim will be the most challenging of my career.

'The polar regions are feeling the effects of the climate crisis more dramatically than anywhere else on Earth.'

Lewis Pugh is planning to swim across the six-mile (10km) mouth of the Ilulissat Icefjord in Greenland

Lewis' feat in near-freezing waters is predicted to take two weeks

Mr Pugh will highlight the rapid melting in regions such as the Arctic as a result of climate change, before heading to crucial international Cop26 talks in Glasgow in November to urge governments to take urgent action on the crisis.

He is also calling for 30 per cent of the world's oceans to be protected as part of efforts to curb climate change - with healthy seas more able to store carbon and help protect the land against the impacts of rising temperatures.

The swim comes after the UN issued a stark report on how humanity is driving global warming, causing increasingly dangerous extreme weather, melting ice caps and glaciers and rising sea levels that threaten coastal cities such as London and New York.

Mr Pugh said: 'What happens in the Arctic will determine the future of our planet and everything that lives on it… If temperatures continue to increase, the polar ice caps will melt and sea levels will rise.

The endurance athlete has previously swum in the Arctic, Antarctic and Himalayas as part of eco campaign

'Unless we take urgent action to decrease global temperatures by seriously lowering our global carbon dioxide emissions, low-lying islands and coastal cities will, quite literally, drown.'

He added: 'The devastation of the natural world will affect every single person, every future generation and every creature, great and small, on this planet.'

The Ilulissat Glacier, which is a Unesco World Heritage Site, moves at an average of 30 metres per day and produces 10 per cent of Greenland's icebergs, some of which are over 1km (0.6 miles) tall and including - according to legend - the one that sank the Titanic.

Mr Pugh's previous efforts in 'Speedo diplomacy', undertaking extreme swims in just trunks, goggles and cap as part of campaigns to drive action to help the environment, have helped protect vast tracts of ocean.

He is currently training in Iceland, before moving his training to Greenland ahead of his swim.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@'If I speak, I am condemned,' laments Hugh Jackman's fugitive character Jean Valjean in the movie version of Les Miserables. 'If I stay silent, I am damned!'

I suspect that's exactly how Prince Andrew's feeling this morning after the bombshell news that his sex abuse accuser Virginia Roberts is suing him for battery, sexual assault and emotional distress.

Roberts now 38, claims in the lawsuit filed in federal US court that she was forced to have sex with the Duke of York three times - in London, New York and the Caribbean - on the orders of his late billionaire paedophile friend Jeffrey Epstein.

The claim is categorized as 'child abuse' because Roberts, then 17, was considered a minor at the time under state law.

And it's ferociously damning in its detail: 'Prince Andrew's actions…constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community'.

It also accuses Andrew of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' and then refusing to cooperate with the FBI.

Virginia Roberts now 38, claims in the lawsuit filed in federal US court that she was forced to have sex with the Duke of York three times - in London, New York and the Caribbean - on the orders of his late billionaire paedophile friend Jeffrey Epstein. The claim is categorized as 'child abuse' because Roberts, then 17, was considered a minor at the time under state law. Pictured: Roberts as a 17-year-old with Prince Andrew and Ghislaine Maxwell in London

During each of the three alleged encounters, the lawsuit says Roberts was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke. Roberts allegedly 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority'

Roberts (right), who now goes by her married name of Virginia Giuffre, issued a separate statement to ABC News in which she said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me. The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice'

During each of the three alleged encounters, the lawsuit says Roberts was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke. Roberts allegedly 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.'

The lawsuit claims Andrew's actions 'constitute sexual offenses as defined in (New York law) including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined (as) rape in the third degree, rape in the first degree'.

It also asserts the Duke's conduct amounted to 'forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, and sexual abuse in the first degree' that caused Roberts 'significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.'

The lawsuit concludes: 'As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy'.

Wow. Remember, this is the middle son of the reigning Queen of the United Kingdom that she is talking about.

Roberts, who now goes by her married name of Virginia Giuffre, issued a separate statement to ABC News in which she said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me. The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice. I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates. But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

This is not the first time Roberts has made these claims against Andrew, but it's the first time she has sued him directly.

And by doing so, she has massively escalated the heat on a man who has repeatedly insisted her claims are untrue but who has also repeatedly declined to be interviewed under oath by the FBI about them.

Now that Epstein's dead, it's possible that nobody does other than him, Virginia Roberts and Epstein's close friend and alleged 'Madam', Ghislaine Maxwell

This lawsuit, if it isn't settled before, will likely go to court at the same time Ghislaine Maxwell's own trial starts in November. Maxwell will be under oath, and who knows what she may say to save her own skin?

Make no mistake, this lawsuit represents a very serious development in an ongoing crisis of sensational proportions for Prince Andrew and the Royal Family.

But it's not an entirely surprising one given that when trailers first aired for Andrew's train-wreck 2019 BBC interview in which he denied even meeting Roberts, she retweeted this comment by British journalist Peter Barron: 'Astonishing decision by the royal family to go ahead with this Prince Andrew confessional interview in the hope it would draw a line under the scandal. It will have the opposite effect.'

That prediction was right.

In fact, all the interview achieved was to throw a gargantuan barrel of fuel over a scandal that had been simmering ever since Epstein was accused of paedophile conduct and then exploded when he took his own life in prison to escape justice.

And any hopes that Andrew may have had that the furore might quietly die down just vanished in a puff of incendiary legal smoke.

Perhaps the most powerful part of the lawsuit, and one that will surely resonate most with the public both in America and Britain, read: 'In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago, Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account'.

It is.

And with every day that goes by without Andrew submitting himself to any form of legal accountability, the finger of suspicion against him grows larger.

Let me clear: I have no idea if he's telling the truth or not about any of these claims.

Now that Epstein's dead, it's possible that nobody does other than him, Virginia Roberts and Epstein's close friend and alleged 'Madam', Ghislaine Maxwell.

Prince Andrew's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson said in an interview at the weekend that she is '100 per cent' certain her ex-husband was being honest about his denials of any impropriety. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' I admire her loyalty but there is no chance of Prince Andrew winning anything but a lifetime of public opprobrium until or if he keeps his promise to be interviewed under oath about what he did or didn't do with Virginia Roberts and what he did or didn't know about Epstein's appalling sex crimes

But let me also be clear: given the shocking claims in this lawsuit, Andrew must now agree to be interviewed by the FBI or we will all be entitled to draw our own conclusions from his refusal.

His ex-wife Sarah Ferguson said in an interview at the weekend that she is '100 per cent' certain her ex-husband was being honest about his denials of any impropriety.

She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.'

I admire her loyalty but there is no chance of Prince Andrew winning anything but a lifetime of public opprobrium until or if he keeps his promise to be interviewed under oath about what he did or didn't do with Virginia Roberts and what he did or didn't know about Epstein's appalling sex crimes.

Make no mistake, these are the most serious allegations any member of the Royal Family has faced in my lifetime.

And the more Andrew refuses to co-operate, the worse the situation gets for him and the more damage he does to the reputation of the Monarchy.

This lawsuit, if it isn't settled before, will likely go to court at the same time Ghislaine Maxwell's own trial starts in November.

Maxwell will be under oath, and who knows what she may say to save her own skin? It's enough to make even Andrew, who claims he doesn't perspire, sweat like a human waterfall.

As the shamed Prince hides away in his home at Windsor Castle today, perhaps pondering whether to speak up and be condemned, or stay silent and be damned, he should also ask himself what Jean Valjean repeatedly asks himself in the Les Miserables song where he reflect on that dilemma: 'Who Am I?'

Stop being a gutless coward, Andrew - and face the music.

Or the court of public opinion will convict you, and never forgive you.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Anna Friel has been allowed to give her leaky £1m Georgian home near Windsor Castle a makeover and stop it rotting away from rainwater.

But after she previously fell foul of planning authorities for ‘crude and basic’ work on the house, her neighbours have urged officials to keep a close eye on the works to make sure they comply with the rules.

The Marcella star was found to have acted ‘unreasonably’ in 2017 when she flouted planning consent when adding an extension on her elegant Grade II listed terraced townhouse.

The single-storey extension breached strict conservation guidelines by being built higher than the approved plans with exposed bricks facing a neighbouring property and missing parapets.

Anna Friel (pictured) has been allowed to give her leaky £1m Georgian home near Windsor Castle a makeover and stop it rotting away from rainwater

Friel, 45, was ordered to demolish the extension by the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead but appealed to the Planning Inspectorate.

An inspector ruled that materials used in the single storey extension were out of keeping with the Grade II listed property, which lies in a designated conservation area, but allowed it to stay, as long as the defects were fixed.

Now the former Brookside star wants to carry out an external refurbishment and minor alterations to the historic three-storey home, which boasts an ornate cast iron balcony, and dates back to 1800.

Proposed works include refurbishment and redecoration of existing windows, a timber entrance door, metal work, a front elevation trellis and a front entrance gate.

She also wants to repair the rear elevation render and replace rotten timber substrate caused by water getting into the property.

Now the former Brookside star wants to carry out an external refurbishment and minor alterations to the historic three-storey home, which boasts an ornate cast iron balcony, and dates back to 1800

There will be repairs to an existing lead rolled flat roof to the rear extension, and re-bedding and redecoration of existing coping stones to the front steps.

Front garden flagstones will also be re-laid with ceramic tiles to the lower ground floor front lightwell.

In a heritage statement, her planning agent said: ‘It is known that these buildings (alongside other similar development in Windsor) were often occupied by people serving the Crown or drawn to Windsor by the court.

‘The proposals entail much-needed works to repair and refurbish the listed building to ensure that it can continue to function as a single family dwelling and to halt deterioration currently being caused by water ingress through the rear extension.

‘The works will not erode the heritage values of these assets and instead will amount to an aesthetic improvement to the site and will see for the building’s long-term conservation by removing risk.’

Friel bought the four-bedroom house eight years ago and in 2014 was granted planning permission for a single storey extension to include an en-suite shower room.

Proposed works include refurbishment and redecoration of existing windows, a timber entrance door, metal work, a front elevation trellis and a front entrance gate

She was also given consent to lower the ground floor level for extensive refurbishments, new windows and doors.

But she was then ordered to demolish the extension after complaints to the council about the building work.

She was given two months to tear it down but the deadline passed and she lodged an appeal with the Planning Inspectorate.

In his report, Inspector Anthony Wharton said: 'In my view this particular detailing has resulted in a crude and basic form of construction, well away from the standard of detailing and finish that one would expect on a Grade II listed building.

'I consider that the materials and detailing of this part of the works as carried out is harmful to the integrity and character of the building, to its setting and to the other special architectural and historic features evident on the rear elevation.’

She also wants to repair the rear elevation render and replace rotten timber substrate caused by water getting into the property

But Mr Wharton conceded that ordering Friel to knock down the extension and start again was 'excessive' and gave her six months to carry out remedial works,

Officials at Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead Council gave the go-ahead for her latest plans after there were no objections from neighbours.

Planning officer Zishan Pervez ruled: ‘Although each individual property on the terrace has been subject to alterations since their original construction, the principal elevation of [the terrace] is almost completely unaltered.

‘At the rear of the property is The Long Walk. This is a distinctive landscape feature that forms part of the significant landscape setting to Windsor Castle as well as the surrounding townscape of which this feature is a significant part.

‘The proposed works would not cause harm to the heritage assets and conservation area.’

In a letter of support, a neighbour wrote: ‘It is hoped that experienced contractors are employed to carry out this specialist work and that it will be supervised by the architect.

‘It is also requested that the conservation department closely monitors progress in accordance with the approved documents as well as compliance with any conditions of the listed building consent.’

Rochdale-born Friel, mother of 16-year-old Gracie, named after Gracie Fields, was previously in relationships with fellow actors David Thewlis and Rhys Ifans, but recently split from her boyfriend of two years Mark Jarowski.

When her artist friend Kevin Thomas contacted her about painting her portrait, depicting the lockdown experience and objects that helped people through it - she sent him a photo of herself topless and clutching a watering can to cover her modesty.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Details of the man at the centre of an international espionage scandal are beginning to emerge, with neighbours' descriptions suggesting he's no James Bond.

David Smith, a security guard at the British Embassy in Berlin, is accused of passing on classified terrorism documents to a Russian spy, it emerged last night.

In echoes of Cold War espionage, Smith received a bundle of cash in return for providing highly sensitive reports to a Kremlin agent, it is alleged.

Smith, 57, was charged in Germany yesterday for handing over information obtained from the British embassy in Berlin.

The purported spy worked as a security guard inside the building and would have had access to the counter-terrorism tactics which would be deployed in the event of an attack.

Such details would be invaluable to enemy agents looking for weaknesses at an embassy in a city where Russian espionage is rife.

Smith was monitored by MI5, Scotland Yard and German intelligence for months before he was arrested at his apartment in Potsdam, a city near to Berlin, on Tuesday afternoon.

Smith's neighbours told Germany's Bild newspaper that he was a bald, stocky man of about 5ft 7 who left home early and returned late each day. He drives a Ford Fiesta, which was also searched by police.

They said that he had lived with a woman in the Potsdam apartment for some years, but they had not seen her recently.

There are fears Smith may have been susceptible to being blackmailed by agents working for Putin due to his alleged 'extreme right-wing views', The Sun reported.

A British embassy official is accused of passing on classified terrorism documents to a Russian spy, it emerged last night. Pictured: A still from Steven Spielberg's 2015 Cold War thriller Bridge of Spies

Prosecutors and intelligence services have evidence that David Smith was passing secrets to the Kremlin from November last year – but suspect this could have been happening for months before this date. Pictured: Russian President Vladimir Putin (left) during a meeting

Following his arrest, Smith was charged with 'activity as an agent for a foreign secret service' yesterday and appeared before a judge at the Federal Court of Justice in the south-western city of Karlsruhe. He was remanded in custody last night.

In a statement, the federal prosecutor's office said: 'On at least one occasion he conveyed documents that he had obtained in the course of his professional activities to a representative of a Russian intelligence service. In return for this information the suspect received a currently unknown quantity of cash.'

Prosecutors and intelligence services have evidence that Smith was passing secrets to the Kremlin from November last year – but suspect this could have been happening for months before this date.

Smith's alleged spying took place during a period of heightened tension between Russia and the West, which was inflamed by the poisoning of Vladimir Putin critic Alexei Navalny last August.

Navalny was treated in a hospital in Berlin after he was poisoned with Novichok – the same nerve agent used during the Salisbury poisonings in 2018.

Last night British security sources played down the possibility of finding any direct link between Smith's alleged activities and the poisoning of Navalny.

But the spying case is seen as part of a growing attempt by Russian spies to infiltrate Western intelligence operations in recent months.

Stung by the criticism over their treatment of Navalny – as well as the ongoing row over Ukraine – the Kremlin is known to have diverted intelligence resources to undermining Nato members.

Smith was monitored by MI5, Scotland Yard and German intelligence for months before he was arrested at his apartment in Potsdam, a city near to Berlin, on Tuesday afternoon. Pictured: Smith's apartment block

Thomas Haldenwang head of Germany's domestic intelligence service, said Russian espionage is now as active as it had been during the Cold War.

He added: 'Methods are becoming rougher and the means more brutal.' Questions will undoubtedly be raised about the vetting procedures at the British embassy in Berlin, which is still seen by Moscow as a prime intelligence target.

Smith, who was referred to as 'David S' by German officials, was understood to have been hired directly by the embassy – rather than through the Foreign Office in London.

The suspect was understood to have a permanent role inside the building – which sits just 500 yards from the Russian embassy in Berlin.

So why haven't we filled the post of security minister?, asks Labour By David Barrett, Home Affairs Correspondent Labour has said the case in Berlin raises 'questions' about the Prime Minister's failure to appoint a new security minister. The post has been vacant for more than a month after James Brokenshire stepped down to focus on his cancer recovery. Labour's security spokesman Conor McGinn said it 'beggars belief' that the role has yet to be filled five weeks on. But his criticisms were dismissed as 'laughable' by a Home Office source. Mr McGinn said: 'Britain's national security is under threat 24 hours a day, seven days a week, but the UK has not had a security minister in position for over a month. 'Following today's events, it raises questions about who in Government is overseeing the most serious task of keeping the British public safe and secure. It beggars belief that the Prime Minister has failed to appoint a replacement for James Brokenshire. 'He's either forgotten or doesn't think it's important. This is just the latest security lapse from a Prime Minister and Government that can't be trusted with national security.' A Home Office source said: 'The Home Secretary is responsible for matters of security. 'For the party that tried to make Jeremy Corbyn prime minister to suggest we are lax on security matters is laughable.' Mr Brokenshire was first diagnosed with early-stage lung cancer in December 2017 when he was Northern Ireland Secretary. The politician – who has never smoked – said he went public with his diagnosis in a bid to end the stigma of lung cancer sufferers. As security minister in January this year he took a leave of absence to prepare for further cancer treatment, but resigned the post on July 7, telling Boris Johnson his recovery was taking 'longer than anticipated'. Advertisement

His role would have allowed him to obtain the shift patterns of senior diplomats and logs showing him who was inside the embassy at any given time.

As a security guard, he had information about the physical security of the building and measures taken to protect staff.

He would have been able to get hold of detailed plans of the building's layout and its emergency exits.

Smith may also have been able to provide profiles of senior diplomats and their families, and possibly even names of MI6 officers stationed in the city.

Even seemingly mundane information can help a foreign intelligence service build a picture of an adversary and provide a way in to sensitive data.

After being monitored for months by security services, a warrant for Smith's arrest was secretly issued on Wednesday last week. Following his arrest, agents have started searching his home in a post-war apartment block near Sanssouci, the old Prussian royal palace.

His office inside the embassy is also being examined.

The Potsdam area where Smith lives is home to politicians and millionaires, as well as former Stasi generals.

The Germans have evidence of what the documents Smith allegedly sold, but the extent of it will not be clear until forensic searches are complete.

He does not have diplomatic immunity and because of this he is expected to face trial in Germany.

Yesterday, Smith appeared at the Federal Court of Justice in Karlsruhe, Germany.

It came as officials in Britain suggested Smith would be 'better off staying in Germany' than being extradited to the UK due to the outdated terms of the Official Secrets Act.

A source told The Times: 'It is extremely difficult to get prosecutions over the line in the UK. He might be better off staying in Germany.

'They have strong powers there to keep suspects remanded in custody much longer.'

Last year then head of MI5 Sir Andrew Parker also said the 1911 Official Secrets Act was 'dusty and largely ineffective' amid calls for the act to be reformed, and Dame Cressida Dick said the Official Secrets Act should be 'firmed up'.

According to the act, secret material must be a 'sketch, plan, model, note or secret official password and code word' rather than a document. This means Smith may not meet the criteria for prosecution if extradited to the UK.

At yesterday's pre-trial hearing, which was conducted in private, a judge ordered Smith into 'pre-trial detention'.

This is used in Germany when a suspect is accused of committing a serious criminal offence. It can last up to a maximum of six months before it is automatically reviewed by judges. A source told the Daily Mail last night: 'It is really hard to say how much time the investigation will take because we need to get enough evidence for a trial.

'But given the nature of the case, there is a real need to move quickly.'

Speaking about the allegations in Berlin yesterday, Germany's foreign minister Heiko Maas said: 'We take the information that the detained person's intelligence activity was carried out on behalf of a Russian intelligence agency extremely seriously.

'Spying on a close ally on German soil is absolutely unacceptable and we are in full solidarity with our British friends.'

The spying case is seen as part of a growing attempt by Russian spies to infiltrate Western intelligence operations in recent months. Pictured: Jill Gallard, Ambassador of the United Kingdom to Germany

Labour MP Chris Bryant, the chairman of the all-party parliamentary Russia group, told the Daily Telegraph the British Government 'must review the security of all contractors at UK embassies as a matter of urgency'.

The British embassy 'spy' could have done a 'lot of damage', says intelligence expert It has been revealed that the British man arrested in Germany on suspicion of spying for Russia and handing over documents for cash while working at the British Embassy in Berlin was a security guard. The 57-year-old suspect, identified as David Smith, was arrested on Tuesday in Potsdam, west of Berlin, based on cooperative investigations by German and British authorities. As a security guard at the British embassy, Smith would have more access than other members of staff, Dr Victor Madeira, author of Britannia and the Bear: the Anglo-Russian intelligence wars, told MailOnline. For instance, Smith could have access to security patrol schedules, how to arm and disarm alarm systems as well as emergency contact numbers for all staff, Dr Madeira said. 'He could potentially even have access to classified areas, depending on his own security clearance,' Dr Madeira, a Contributing Author at The Cambridge Security Initiative, told MailOnline. German online magazine Focus Online reported that he provided the Russians with documents containing information on counterterrorism. Dr Madeira, speaking about those reports, said: 'The reports that Smith passed on counter-terrorism documents suggests that Moscow could be trying see how much the UK is helping Germany tackle Russian assassinations on their soil. 'Russia could also be trying to find out what the UK and Germany may be discussing about counter-terrorism more generally, like the impact on Europe of the unrest in Afghanistan.' He explained: 'The information doesn't have to be specific to Russian activities in Germany to be of great interest to Moscow - information can be weaponised for influence operations of every kind.' Before his arrest, Smith worked as a local staff member, otherwise known as a 'local hire' at the embassy, which is a scheme available for UK citizens who want to work in Germany. It means that he was not a diplomat and therefore he does not have diplomatic immunity. Foreign embassies in most countries rely in part on these 'local hires' to fill a variety of roles. The positions are often advertised on generic job search websites in the host country - and the identity of the employer is kept vague until applicants pass an initial screening process. Local hire positions in embassies are usually in fields such as media affairs, maintenance or visa processing which do not usually give access to classified information - or if they were, it would be limited. But Smith could have been able to provide valuable information to Russia, such as WiFi passwords and staff lists including their addresses and mobile phones, Dr Madeira said. He could also have been able to form profiles of diplomats and MI6 officers stationed in Berlin. Dr Madeira said 'one of the biggest problems we have in the West is that we confuse seniority with access'. He said: 'Just because someone is 'just' a driver, 'just' a messenger, is utterly irrelevant. Just because someone is a local hire and therefore not formally a foreign service officer or a diplomat, that doesn't mean that the person couldn't have done a lot of damage. 'Anything - especially with cyber being so critical nowadays - from WiFi passwords, any sort of administrative lists like staff lists, addresses, mobile phones could be accessible. That would make it easier for the Russian intelligence services to track those mobile phones. 'They would be able to identify who is a genuine diplomat and who is not.' Dr Madeira warned: 'There's a real range of damage that a person like this could do. Let's not confuse seniority, title or status with access. It's incredible what someone who is teed up to look for certain things can pick up. 'It's a well-established, tried and tested method. Pretty much everyone does it. Every country will try and recruit someone working in a hostile embassy.' Advertisement

He described the arrest as potentially 'one of the most serious security breaches at a UK embassy for many years'.

In a statement, the UK Home Office said: 'An individual who was contracted to work for the Government was arrested yesterday by the German authorities. It would not be appropriate to comment further as there is an ongoing police investigation.'

Meanwhile, Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, said the allegations potentially amounted to a 'serious breach of UK national security'.

He added: 'All measures must now be taken – urgently – to establish exactly what information has been passed to Russian intelligence and the impact this has on the UK, as well as that of our allies.'

And Conservative Chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, Tom Tugendhat, told the BBC: 'We're not talking about some Kim Philby-type story; we're talking about somebody relatively low down who has ... possibly betrayed their country – we don't know.'

Germany has arrested a number of people in recent years accused of spying for Russia, but the capture of a suspect from a close ally is highly unusual.

In June, a Russian man who worked at a German university was arrested on suspicion of espionage for allegedly passing information to Russian intelligence, German prosecutors said.

The suspect, identified only as Ilnur N., was arrested and his home and workplace were searched.

Federal prosecutors said he worked as a research assistant for a science and technology professorship at a German university. They didn't identify the university or specify where in the country he was arrested.

The man is accused of meeting at least three times with a member of a Russian intelligence service, which prosecutors didn't identify, between October of last year and June. In two of those meetings, he is alleged to have handed over information on the university in exchange for an unspecified amount of cash.

And German prosecutors in February filed espionage charges against a German man suspected of having passed the floor plans of parliament to Russian secret services in 2017.

Moscow is at loggerheads with a number of Western capitals after a Russian troop build-up on Ukraine's borders and a series of espionage scandals that have resulted in diplomatic expulsions.

In June, Italy said it had created a national cybersecurity agency following warnings by Prime Minister Mario Draghi that Europe needs to protect itself from Russian 'interference'.

The move came after an Italian navy captain was caught red-handed by police selling confidential military documents from his computer to a Russian embassy official.

The leaders of nine eastern European nations in May condemned what they termed Russian 'aggressive acts', citing operations in Ukraine and 'sabotage' allegedly targeted at the Czech Republic.

Several central and eastern European countries expelled Russian diplomats in solidarity with Prague, but Russia has branded accusations of its involvement as 'absurd' and responded with tit-for-tat expulsions.

British spy chiefs say both China and Russia have sought to steal commercially sensitive data and intellectual property as well as to interfere in politics, while Russian agents are also accused of carrying out an attack on former Russian spy Sergei Skripal on British soil in 2018.

Beijing and Moscow say the West is gripped with a paranoia about plots. Both Russia and China deny they meddle abroad, seek to steal technology, carry out cyberattacks or sow discord.

The Berlin case has echoes of the shadowy world of espionage practised during the Cold War, when double agent Kim Philby and others in a ring of British spies known as the 'Cambridge Five' passed information to the Soviet Union.

Relations between London and Moscow have been at a low point since the attempted poisoning of former spy Sergei Skripal in British Salisbury in 2018.

The Kremlin has denied any involvement in either case.

Chancellor Angela Merkel's government has moreover worked to maintain a sanctions regime over Moscow's annexation of the Crimean peninsula.

And Germany has repeatedly accused Russia of cyberattacks and cyberespionage on its soil.

Despite the frictions, Berlin has pressed ahead with plans to finish the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, set to double natural gas supplies from Russia to Germany.

The Scripals were poisoned after two Russian agents smeared the deadly nerve agent on the door handle of Mr Skripal's home. Pictured: Russian agents Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov in Salisbury

Yulia Skripal (left) and her double agent father Sergei Skripal, 68, (right) were poisoned with novichok on March 4 2019

Our leaders MUST not forget the Cold War is never over

By Professor Anthony Glees

Along Unter den Linden – the grand boulevard that runs up to Berlin's Brandenburg Gate – Britain's gleaming new embassy lies just 250 yards from its Russian equivalent, a Stalinist-era monstrosity.

Berlin during the 1960s and 1970s was always regarded as the playground of international espionage – and Unter den Linden played its part in many a spy drama.

So there is something all too reminiscent of the novels of John le Carré and Len Deighton about the revelation that David Smith, a British security guard attached to our embassy in the German capital, has been arrested on suspicion of selling secrets to Russian handlers.

It may seem like a bizarre throwback to the Cold War, but this extraordinary story illustrates how the threat to the West from Vladimir Putin's Russia remains real.

Mr Smith, 57, is said to have passed documents to Russian intelligence 'at least once' in exchange for an 'unknown amount' of money.

He was yesterday charged with 'activity as an agent for a foreign secret service' and remanded in custody.

The German foreign ministry says that Berlin is taking the case 'very seriously', adding that spying by 'a close alliance partner on German soil is unacceptable'. In diplomatic terms, such language is unusually strong.

Whatever the nature of the secrets Mr Smith allegedly sold, should it be true, I fear the damage from this scandal would turn out to be grave.

It would be a terrible humiliation for a leading member of the Five Eyes Anglosphere intelligence network to have sprung a leak inside its most important European embassy.

Britain's key intelligence allies – America, Canada, Australia and New Zealand – would be furious.

Along Unter den Linden – the grand boulevard that runs up to Berlin's Brandenburg Gate – Britain's gleaming new embassy (pictured) lies just 250 yards from its Russian equivalent, a Stalinist-era monstrosity

Our current ambassador, Jill Gallard (pictured), has been in post only nine months, so she will not carry any direct blame for Mr Smith's appointment. But I do feel that it would be better to have a more heavyweight German specialist as our representative in Berlin

To make matters worse, Germany is easily Britain's most important European ally. The British Government has only just finished putting away the red carpet that was rolled out for outgoing chancellor Angela Merkel last month, following her meetings with the Queen and Boris Johnson.

A couple of details about the case raise flags. Assuming he really is 57 years old, Mr Smith would have come of age steeped in the imagery and propaganda of the Cold War.

His apartment – since raided by German police – is in Potsdam: once in the Communist sector of Berlin.

Spy case sparks concerns over private sector embassy involvement The British embassy in Berlin was the first to be built under a Private Finance Initiative (PFI) partnership, which meant the building would be owned and run by private companies. In the wake of the espionage allegations, concerns have been raised over potential security implications of such a partnership. The Telegraph reported that there are as many people employed by contractors as there are diplomats in the Berlin embassy under the PFI deal. Just how much access these non-diplomatic staff members might have to sensitive material is now being questioned. The case has echoes of the scandal which forced former UK Health Secretary Matt Hancock to resign. Hancock's affair with an aide was revealed after a private contractor leaked security footage to the press. In February, German prosecutors filed espionage charges against a German man suspected of having passed the floor plans of parliament to Russian secret services in 2017. The man was an electrical engineer carrying out routine inspections on the building when he came into contact with the floor plans. Advertisement

His engagement by the embassy seems on the face of it unusual. Our embassies all recruit staff locally, often to help organise social events or process routine visa applications. Their local knowledge and language skills are helpful to the diplomats.

But it is unusual to hire expatriate Britons locally, not least because they may have acquired different loyalties through their own lives and relationships.

Reports are ambiguous in suggesting how long Mr Smith is suspected of being 'active', but last night, Germany's most senior prosecutor said he was 'strongly suspected' of having worked for the Russians since at least last November.

Now the onus is on the investigators, whoever they are, to urgently establish where Mr Smith has travelled in recent years – and where he was employed before joining the British embassy.

WiFi codes and email address templates will have had to be changed immediately as damage limitation measures.

Trust with our German partners will have to be swiftly restored.

Our current ambassador, Jill Gallard, has been in post only nine months, so she will not carry any direct blame for Mr Smith's appointment.

But I do feel that it would be better to have a more heavyweight German specialist as our representative in Berlin, rather than a former Foreign Office head of human resources who takes time to tweet about climate change and women's success at the Olympics.

Over the many years that I have taught students about the world and international relations, I have always insisted we should not regard the Cold War as an historic episode.

From the monstrous Salisbury poisonings and the attempted assassination of Russian opposition activist Alexei Navalny – not to mention unquestioning support of the repellent Belarusian dictator Alexander Lukashenko – Vladimir Putin has become ever more brazen in his conduct.

The Communist party – faithfully supported by the Russian president when he was a KGB agent – might have died when the Berlin Wall was torn down, and the Soviet Union imploded.

But totalitarianism lives on in the Russian mind.

Should any good come of these allegations, we may hope that it alerts our complacent leaders to the true threat we face from Russia – and trust that our security services will never rest in protecting us from it.

Professor Anthony Glees is a security and intelligence expert at the University of Buckingham.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A proud father has been killed in a head-on collision a day after driving 200 miles to celebrate his daughter's graduation from university.

Shane Scott, 45, died when his grey Ford Fiesta collided with an oncoming car half a mile from his parents' home in Minster, Kent.

He had been staying with his parents after travelling from his home in Lincoln the night before to take his daughter out for a meal.

Flowers have been laid at the junction of Banner Way close to where the accident happened at 9.30pm on Friday night.

One note, from his daughter Chelsie, said: 'It still seems so unreal that you're gone. I'm so glad I got to spend your last day with you. I will treasure our memories forever. I love you always. Lots of love, your "babygirl" Chelsie.'

Shane Scott, 45, died when his grey Ford Fiesta collided with an oncoming car half a mile from his parents' home near Banner Way, Minster, Kent

Speaking about the heart-breaking loss, his father Arthur said: 'It was such a shock, especially being so close to us.

'He was with us and then popped out, and that's when it happened. We were in bed just after midnight and had a knock at the door when police asked to come in and we knew it wasn't good news.

'I just knew it was going to be the worst thing you can think of.'

Mr Scott's mother Vivienne added: 'He was a bubbly person and loved everyone.

'He always wanted to help someone whether it be something big or just popping down to Tesco for some milk. He was always happy to help others.'

Mr Scott grew up on the Isle of Sheppey and was a former Minster comprehensive pupil, before he went to college and completed his qualifications to become a carpenter.

He has two sisters and two brothers and leaves four children - two girls and two boys - aged between three and 20.

The family have been inundated with messages and tributes about their popular son.

Mr Scott spent the previous day with his daughter Chelsie (pictured) to celebrate her graduation from university

His father added: 'He was such a lovable guy. He would do anything for anyone. He was so popular and had so many friends.'

Police are still investigating the crash and have asked anyone with information to come forward.

The driver and passenger of the other car, a white Jaguar XE, were taken to hospital.

Kent Police said: 'Just before 9.40pm it is believed a grey Ford Fiesta was travelling along Minster Road when it collided head-on with a white Jaguar XE.

'Officers would like to hear from anyone who may have witnessed the collision or may have any dashcam footage of the vehicles prior to the collision.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@China's state media allegedly invented a Swiss biologist and quoted him claiming the US had pressured the World Health Organisation into investigating the theory Covid-19 was leaked from a lab in Wuhan.

The People's Daily, China Daily, and CGTN television channel all quoted so-called biologist Wilson Edwards but removed the content yesterday after the Swiss Embassy said it had no record of him as a citizen.

Beijing has repeatedly pushed claims the US pressured the WHO to investigate the possibility Covid-19 was leaked from a lab in Wuhan, where the virus was first found in December 2019.

China has insisted a leak would have been 'extremely unlikely' citing the conclusion reached by a joint WHO-Chinese mission to Wuhan in January.

Edwards was quoted by state media terming the WHO investigation a 'political tool' and saying the 'international scientific community' was 'disappointed' in the US.

China's state media allegedly invented Swiss biologist Wilson Edwards and quoted him claiming the US had pressured the World Health Organisation into investigation theories Covid-19 was leaked from a lab in Wuhan

The People's Daily, China Daily, and CGTN television channel all quoted Wilson Edwards but removed the content yesterday

Beijing has repeatedly insisted that a leak from Wuhan Institute of Virology (researchers at the Institute pictured in 2017) would have been 'extremely unlikely', citing the conclusion reached by January's joint WHO-Chinese mission to Wuhan

The People's Daily reported Edwards told them: 'Unfortunately, Washington's re-entry has brought geopolitical competition to the science-spearheaded world body'

China Daily reported Edwards' Facebook post, quoting him as saying 'as a biologist, I've witnessed in consternation over the past months how the origin-tracing of Covid-19 was politicized'.

The article added Edwards branded the WHO's probe was 'largely politically motivated', without elaborating.

While state-run television channel CGTN reported Edwards said he was worried about the 'WHO's independence' and claimed the group of investigators probing the origin of Covid-19 would become a 'political tool'.

CGTN said Edwards claimed he and fellow researchers were under 'enormous pressure' and 'intimidation' from the US and some media outlets after voicing support for the joint WHO-Chinese investigation which in January concluded a lab leak was extremely unlikely.

The state-run television outlet also reported Edwards quoted an unnamed WHO sources as saying 'the US is so obsessed with attacking China on the origin-tracing issue that it is reluctant to open its eyes to the data and findings'.

State-run television channel CGTN reported Edwards said he was worried about the 'WHO's independence' and claimed the group of investigators probing the origin of Covid-19 would become a 'political tool'

China has insisted a leak from the Wuhan Institute of Virology would have been 'extremely unlikely' citing the conclusion reached by a joint WHO-Chinese mission to Wuhan in January

Edwards had Facebook and Twitter accounts - both of which have since been deleted - which peddled claims the US pressured the WHO.

His Facebook page was created on July 24, boasted three friends, and had only one post which said President Joe Biden would 'spare no efforts' to rebuild US influence over the WHO.

The page indicated Edwards was from the Swiss capital Bern and included a picture of Oxford University's Radcliffe Camera, but provided no further details about the so-called biologist.

Both pages were deleted after the Swiss Embassy's statement yesterday which said they were 'looking for Wilson Edwards'.

'If you exist, we would like to meet you!', the embassy wrote on Twitter.

The Embassy said it could not find any academic articles authored by Edwards, pointed out his Facebook page was created only days before he was quoted in Chinese state media, and said there was no registry of a citizen with the name.

'It is more likely that this is fake news, and we call on the Chinese press and netizens to take down the posts,' it added.

Both of Wilson Edwards' social media pages were deleted after the Swiss Embassy's statement yesterday which said there was no registry of a Swiss citizen with the name

Beijing last month refused to cooperate with the WHO investigation, accusing the health body of showing 'disrespect' and 'arrogance towards science' after it said it would audit Wuhan labs as part of the probe.

The WHO said a second stage of the probe should include audits of Chinese research centres amid increasing speculation about the lab leak theory and pressure from the US.

The proposal outlined by the health body chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus included 'audits of relevant laboratories and research institutions operating in the area of the initial human cases identified in December 2019' - referring to Wuhan.

But China's vice health minister Zeng Yixin told reporters he was 'extremely surprised' by the plan, which he said showed 'disrespect for common sense and arrogance towards science'.

He claimed no workers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology ever became ill with the virus and said they did not carry out gain-of-function tests at the lab.

He hit back at what he called 'rumours' about the lab, insisting Covid-19 was not a 'manmade virus' and rejecting the WHO's origin tracing study.

Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus's proposals include 'audits of relevant laboratories and research institutions operating in the area of the initial human cases identified in December 2019'

The institute in Wuhan has come under increasing pressure amid the pandemic after claims emerged that the virus may have been manufactured in China

China's vice health minister Zeng Yixin (pictured) told reporters last month that he was 'extremely surprised' by the plan

First derided by many as a right-wing conspiracy theory and vehemently rejected by Beijing, the idea that Covid may have emerged from a lab leak has been gaining traction.

Donald Trump peddled the theory early after the pandemic started but he was criticised by many in the mainstream media who believed it originated naturally in the Wuhan wet market.

In recent months, the theory has gained momentum after US intelligence reports claimed three workers at the lab were hospitalised with a flu-like illness in November 2019, just as the first cases were identified.

At the same time, Chinese officials and state media have pushed an alternate theory that the virus could have escaped from the US military research lab at Fort Detrick, Maryland.

Nationalist tabloid Global Times said it had collected five million signatures from Chinese web users on a petition to investigate the US lab.

Top officials have also amplified theories that the virus may have been imported with frozen food.

The UN health agency has been under intensifying pressure for a new, more in-depth investigation of how the disease that has killed more than four million people around the world first emerged.

The WHO was only able to send a team of independent, international experts to Wuhan in January, more than a year after Covid-19 first surfaced there, to help Chinese counterparts probe the pandemic's origins.

The investigators concluded it was 'possible' the virus was leaked from a lab, but said it was 'extremely unlikely' and did not warrant further study.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TV chef Jamie Oliver has been granted permission to build a double garage to house his classic cars in the grounds of his Elizabethan country pad in Essex.

The celebrity cook plans to demolish the existing timber garage at his Grade 1 listed £6 million mansion, Spains Hall, and replace it with the new brick design, which would have space for two vehicles.

Jamie is known for his love of classic cars and owns a Ford Capri, 1950s Land Rover Defender and a Discovery, whilst wife Jools has a classic 1967 Mustang.

Braintree District Council has now given Jamie the go-ahead to knock down the current triple bay garage, which is built against a flint and brick wall which separates the front garden of the farmhouse from the main mansion.

The new garage will be built into the wall and constructed from reclaimed red bricks, with oak doors and a double-pitched roof.

Jamie Oliver's agent, Stephanie Gray of First Plan, stated in the application: 'The existing garage is in a very poor state of repair and is not fit for purpose, detracting from the overall setting of Spains Hall.

Car fan Jamie is a big supporter of Land Rover as well as his own classic car collection

Circled is the area where Jamie had been given permission to build a new garage for his cars

Jamie's fire painted Ford Mustang is one of the cars in his classic collection of motors

Jamie poses with a car for another television programme, which is not one of his own motors

'The scale of the proposed replacement garage has been driven by function and has been designed to reflect the ancillary nature of the proposed use.

'The proposed garage is rectangle in form and is of a slightly smaller footprint than the existing garage. The proposed garage projects less from the flint wall than the existing garage and uses the wall as part of the garage envelope rather than being a totally freestanding building.'

The application added: 'The materials used for the construction of the building draw from the palate of materials that exists in this area.

'The removal of the existing deteriorating timber garage and the replacement of a sympathetically designed brick garage will ensure the ancillary building is fit for purpose, supporting the use of Spains Hall.'

Jamie bought his Ford Capri for £6,000 in 2011, spent £20,000 on it and believes it is now worth more than £45,000.

He is a self-proclaimed Land Rover fan and in 2017 he teamed up with the manufacturer to turn a seven-seater Discovery sports vehicle into a kitchen, which featured in his Food Tube channel series.

The new garage will be made from bricks and will shelter his cars from all of the elements

His first car was a Ford Fiesta 950 that he bought after working at his parents' pub, the Cricketers, in Clavering, Essex.

In the past he has also owned a Maserati, Porsche Cayenne and a Volkswagen camper van.

He bought wife Jools a 1967 Mustang for her birthday and later had it painted glossy black and put flames on the side as a Christmas present.

The TV chef bought the mansion on the 70-acre estate at the start of 2019 and had building work done on the house before he moved in, including the restoration of many original features.

The house had only been used by three families and hadn't been sold for 250 years when Jamie bought it.

The manor house currently boasts 12 bedrooms, 10 bathrooms, a large games room, great hall, dining room, two drawing rooms and a wine storage area.

Original features include a well on the ground floor, a priest hole on the first floor and a two-storey red-brick Tudor gazebo in the gardens, which is named The Prayer house.

The property also comes with an outdoor swimming pool, tennis courts and fishing lakes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amazon's highly anticipated $1billion Lord of the Rings series will relocate filming to the UK in the latest loss for New Zealand after Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced strict border controls were here to stay.

New Zealand's premier yesterday warned that border restrictions will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out.

Ardern said she hoped to cautiously reopen to the rest of the world next year while maintaining the country's virus-free status.

But Amazon, who are due to start shooting for the second season of the hotly-anticipated Lord of the Rings television series, decided to move their filming base from New Zealand to the UK as a result.

The $1billion production, which had already received rebates from the government, will start filming in the United Kingdom from next year - marking the first time the production won't be created using New Zealand's stunning landscapes.

Albert Cheng, co-head of TV for Amazon Studios, confirmed the relocation and said the company would not 'actively pursue' the five per cent financial uplift with New Zealand's government.

Amazon's hotly-anticipated $1bn Lord of the Rings television series will relocate filming to the UK from 2022 after Jacinda Arden's announcement

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said that strict border controls will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out

While the first set of television episodes followed in the footsteps of Peter Jackson's epic trilogy by shooting in New Zealand, season two will be made in the United Kingdom.

Vernon Sanders, vice president of Amazon Studios, paid tribute to New Zealanders ahead of the studio's departure.

'We want to thank the people and the government of New Zealand for their hospitality and dedication and for providing the series with an incredible place to begin this epic journey,' he said.

'We are grateful to the New Zealand Film Commission, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Tourism New Zealand, Auckland Unlimited, and others for their tremendous collaboration that supported the New Zealand film sector and the local economy during the production of Season One.'

Announcing the news that New Zealand faces the prospect of tough border measures until at least 2022, Arden said changes would be 'careful and deliberate' to avoid allowing variants such as the highly contagious Delta strain into the country.

'Rushing could see us in the situation many other countries are finding themselves in,' Ardern said, citing an outbreak of the Delta variant in neighbouring Australia that has forced its two largest cities into renewed lockdown.

The government is also warning its citizens to be prepared for a strict lockdown at the first sign of an outbreak of the Delta variant.

Ardern said the government planned to follow the advice of experts and maintain their elimination strategy.

'While the pandemic continues to rage overseas, and the virus continues to change and mutate, the best thing we can do is lock in the gains achieved to date while keeping our options open,' she said.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. Despite pledges that the country would be 'at the front of the queue' for the vaccine, the rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with less than 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated.

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows.

COVID-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said the government's response to an outbreak of the Delta variant is likely to be 'swift and severe.' New Zealand has stamped out the spread of the virus and had previously planned to rely primarily on contact tracing for any small outbreaks.

But Hipkins said the problems that Sydney currently faces in trying to contact trace a growing outbreak showed the delta variant was extremely hard to manage and that New Zealand's tolerance for risk was now very low.

Its vulnerability was exposed after unvaccinated port workers in Tauranga berthed a ship where 11 of the 21 crew had tested positive for the virus. More than 90 port workers have been tested but so far no one has returned a positive test.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. The rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with under 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows

The announcement comes as Ardern faced calls to ease border measures from sectors such as healthcare, hospitality and agriculture, which are facing acute labour shortages due to the absence of foreign workers.

The country's tourism industry - one of its main economic drivers - is on its knees with the borders shut to non-residents and non-citizens.

New Zealand's success in erasing the coronavirus has allowed life to return almost to normal. The South Pacific nation of 5 million people has reported just 26 deaths since the pandemic began.

That's been achieved in part by closing borders to those who aren't residents or citizens.

But many question whether its feasible for New Zealand to maintain a zero-tolerance approach to the virus once international travel resumes.

Ardern said vaccinations would ramp up with the goal of offering jabs to all the eligible population by year's end, allowing a relaxation of border policies.

She said that from the first quarter of next year, the country would begin allowing travelers to arrive on a carefully managed basis.

Under the proposed changes, international arrivals would be assessed on vaccination status and whether they have travelled from a country deemed high, medium or low risk.

Fully vaccinated travelers from low-risk countries would not be required to quarantine, she said. Those arriving from medium-risk countries would need to complete some form of quarantine. And those arriving from high-risk countries, or who were unvaccinated, would need to stay 14 days in a quarantine hotel run by the military, Ardern said.

The government did not provide a ranking of countries by risk, saying it could change quickly.

'Our ultimate goal is to get to quarantine-free travel for all vaccinated travellers,' Ardern said, without providing a timetable.

She said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic.

'Vaccines, border testing and maybe a bit of monitoring of symptoms when you travel will eventually become our baseline. And we will get used to it,' she said.

Ardern said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic

Ardern said a new trial would begin in October that would allow some business travelers to quarantine at home rather than in military-run hotels as a test of the new system it planned to introduce for medium-risk countries next year.

Ardern also announced it was increasing the standard time scheduled between Pfizer vaccine doses from three weeks to six weeks. She said the initial groups targeted for the vaccine - border workers and older people - had already been fully vaccinated.

'From a population basis, it makes sense to get as many New Zealanders at least partially vaccinated quickly,' Ardern said.

The changes were generally welcomed by business owners, including those in the struggling tourism industry. Before the pandemic, more than 3 million overseas travelers visited New Zealand each year and tourism was among the country's largest industries.

'It's important to have a roadmap so all businesses, including tourism operators, can plan ahead and make informed decisions,' said Chris Roberts, the chief executive of Tourism Industry Aotearoa.

Opposition Leader Judith Collins said Ardern's announcements were a step in the right direction but the government needed to speed up its vaccination program.

About 29 per cent of New Zealanders have received one dose of the vaccine and 17 per cent are fully vaccinated.

New Zealand's tentative attempts to relax border controls have so far met with mixed success.

A travel bubble with Australia faced numerous disruptions and was finally suspended in June as multiple outbreaks spread across the Tasman Sea.

Quarantine-free travel is allowed with the tiny Cook Islands, and New Zealand this month launched a scheme to bring in seasonal workers from Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu without having to self-isolate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Moment police helicopter found missing girl, six, asleep in a field after she vanished from her home in the middle of the night

A police helicopter was called out in the middle of the night to find a missing six-year-old girl who had disappeared from her rural home in the middle of the night. She was found asleep in a field using the...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People talk a lot these days about social mobility and ‘levelling up’.

Barely an hour passes without some government minister popping up to wax lyrical about the vital importance of one or the other and there seem to be endless shiny initiatives dedicated to the cause.

But if you want long-term, sustainable results; if you want to make sure you provide everyone, regardless of creed, colour or social background, with access to the best chances in life, the real priority has to be education.

Education is a child’s ladder to the stars. Education is what takes bright kids off the streets and offers them an alternative.

The sad truth is that over the past 18 months in Britain — almost two whole academic years — our education system has stalled. [Stock image]

Education is what allows people to write their own story, regardless of the hand they have been dealt. It is the ultimate social mobility tool, the principal and most effective engine of social and personal growth.

Clever politicians have always understood this. Tony Blair made it the central plank of his election strategy and it worked, up to a point.

David Cameron also understood the importance of improving the state school system — and with the help of my husband Michael Gove and (somewhat ironically, with hindsight) Dominic Cummings, took up where Blair left off and managed to make serious inroads, before the combined might of the teaching unions and the pollsters put a stop to their reforms.

That is all ancient history, of course; in many ways the Government faces a far bigger problem now.

Because the sad truth is that over the past 18 months in Britain — almost two whole academic years — our education system has stalled.

Thanks to Covid, the gap between the haves and have-nots in schools has become a black hole, into which thousands of young people are disappearing.

This year’s A-level results were a stark indicator of just how bad the situation is. True, we have seen unprecedented grade inflation — more As and A*s than ever before, 45 per cent of the overall results.

But drill down into those higher grade figures and you’ll see the ratio soars to an astonishing 70 per cent at fee-paying independent schools; compared with 42 per cent at state academies, 39 per cent at comprehensives and 35 per cent at sixth form colleges.

The same is true for GCSEs. In independent schools, 61 per cent achieved grade 7 or above, compared with 23 per cent in comprehensives.

It is a clear and depressing picture: the pupils who have suffered most from the lockdowns, school closures and exclusions during the pandemic are those who can least afford to do so — that is to say, state school students.

The ones who have done best are those who, in terms of life chances, probably have a much broader raft of options available to them: namely private school pupils, whose parents can not only afford the fees but are also, for the most part, better placed to give their kids a leg up in life.

That is not to denigrate the achievements of students in the private sector. Or, for that matter, the desire of independent school parents to want the best for their children.

As a parent, I understand that compulsion completely. But personally, I have always held a very strong belief that a good education should not be limited to the elite.

Thanks to the response to Covid, though, that is more the case now than ever before.

This year, private schools radically improved on the proportion of As and A*s their pupils achieved before the pandemic, from 44 per cent of overall grades to 70, while state sixth- form colleges saw a far smaller increase, with higher grades rising from 22 to 35 per cent.

That is a huge discrepancy which will have a knock-on effect when it comes to university admissions.

Thanks to Covid, the gap between the haves and have-nots in schools has become a black hole, into which thousands of young people are disappearing. [Stock image]

Covid has exposed the cracks in the system and reminded us that, for all the fine words and rhetoric, social class and wealth remain the principal determiners of success.

If ‘levelling up’ really is the aim, our education system is clearly not up to the task.

Anecdotally, this has certainly been the case among my children’s friends. My daughter has just finished A-levels, my son GCSEs.

Like everyone in these two year groups, they have had the worst of the pandemic, educationally speaking.

Both are (or were) at state schools in London. But they have a mixed bag of friends from both sectors.

The difference has been stark. Almost without exception, their mates in the private sector have aced their results.

Sadly, the same is not true of friends — equally bright, committed and clearly capable — in the state system.

Some of them have effectively had to teach themselves their A-level courses, at times receiving only one Zoom session a week per topic.

Some teachers have been absent, overwhelmed or simply incapable of engaging. Others, by contrast, have gone the extra mile. For these pupils, it really has been the luck of the draw.

And it’s not just at secondary level.

According to the Department for Education’s own figures, published in June, during this year’s lockdown alone, primary school children lost an average of two months’ learning in the spring term (with disadvantaged children losing more than double that).

By the time they returned in March, they had regressed to where they were in September.

Thanks to the ‘pingdemic’, numbers rocketed to a record 1.13 million absent pupils in mid-July — of whom, maddeningly, only 48,000 had a confirmed Covid case.

I have one friend whose son was pinged three times, each ping necessitating a ten-day quarantine.

Quite apart from the loss of school time, she then had to stay at home to look after him. Had she been on a zero-hours contract or freelance, she would have been in serious trouble.

Luckily for her boy, she is not — and she is also a brilliant parent, so did everything she could to make sure he spent his time in quarantine productively. As a family, they had the tools to make this happen. But many did not.

That was why this newspaper launched our Laptops for Kids campaign in January: at the peak of the pandemic, an estimated one million children did not have appropriate access to technology and so were effectively shut out — not just physically from school but intellectually, too.

The regional breakdown shows the best performing area for GCSEs of 4/C and above is London, followed by the South East

Thanks to our campaign and the customary civic-minded generosity of Mail readers who donated so generously, many of those children were able to re-engage with their learning.

But too many have not. Some — especially older pupils aged 16 to 18 — have simply vanished off the educational map.

According to the Centre for Social Justice think-tank, during the first term back after the pandemic (autumn 2020), 93,514 pupils were ‘severely absent’.

This compares with 60,244 pupils in the same term in 2019. That is an increase of more than 50 per cent: an additional 33,270 pupils.

Worse, some figures speak of problems even darker than simple absenteeism. The number of referrals for child abuse made by the NSPCC between April and November last year rose by 80 per cent.

For some children, school is not just a place of learning, it is a refuge — somewhere they can escape from the troubles of a dysfunctional family. Take that away and they are at the mercy of their circumstances.

The situation many young people now face is pretty stark.

After the fiasco of last year when the Department for Education’s infamous algorithm downgraded pupils in droves, causing widespread anguish and forcing thousands of grades to be reassessed (but not before pupils had lost their places at university and college), this year’s methodology has not been much better.

Yes, the Government’s decision to go with teacher-assessed grades has made it a much less bumpy ride politically, since the teaching unions are — surprise, surprise — all in favour of giving more power to their members.

But the idea that teachers are infallible or, for that matter, above bias, is flawed.

In fact, a 2009 study by Bristol University showed that teacher assessment is highly subjective, often resulting in an inherent bias against certain types of pupil.

In particular, black Caribbean and black African pupils are under-assessed relative to white pupils, while Indian, Chinese and mixed white-Asian pupils tend to be over-assessed.

In his fascinating book The Aristocracy Of Talent: How Meritocracy Made the Modern World, Adrian Wooldridge makes a similar point: children who excel in certain teacher-pleasing activities — ‘captain of the sailing team, president of the robotics club’ — are consistently assessed more favourably than those who lack the resources to take part in similar activities — which is to say, those from poorer socio-economic backgrounds.

In other words, teacher assessments favour well-behaved middle and upper-class kids who toe the line and tick the boxes; and disadvantage those who come from less stable or affluent backgrounds and are therefore more challenging in terms of attitude and commitment.

That is why the decision to cancel exams for the second year running was, to my mind, a huge mistake. Exams are the ultimate level playing field.

In an exam, it doesn’t matter whether you are teacher’s pet or the most irritating, disruptive pupil in school. What matters is what you know, then and there, in that exam hall.

Whatever happens, you own it. If you pass, no one can question it or take away from your achievement.

Yet that opportunity has been denied to this and last year’s students. Because the quality of online learning was so uneven, it was felt that assessing them under exam conditions would be unfair, as some would have had better teaching resources than others.

That may have been the case (although really it should not have been) but even so, some children will always have advantages over others simply because some schools are better than others.

And disadvantages related to lockdown could easily have been mitigated by allowing certain exam aids, such as being able to bring in textbooks or notes.

That might not have been a perfect solution but it would at least have been fair, unlike the one we have ended up with: a highly subjective system that actively penalises certain students.

In case you were in any doubt about teachers’ capacity for making mistakes, let me tell you a little story.

Like thousands of other A-level students, my 18-year-old got her results this Tuesday. To her delight (and slight astonishment), she achieved the grades she wanted for her first choice of university.

Or she would have done so, had her school not sent the wrong results to the exam board.

That’s right: they awarded her one set of results but sent another, lower, set to the exam board. A simple case of ‘human’ error, we were told, a slip of the keyboard.

We discovered this only when we went to collect her results — so by the time we found out, it was too late to save her university place.

The school notified the exam board as soon as they realised the mistake, but not before the marks had been communicated to UCAS — and her university withdrew the offer on the grounds that she hadn’t made the grade.

We must now wait for the correct grades to be confirmed by the board (they have until September 8 to do so), at which point we will see what can be salvaged.

But what ought to have been a happy day for her, the culmination of months of hard work under very difficult circumstances, has instead turned into an administrative nightmare.

Of course, my daughter is by no means a disadvantaged pupil and I’m sure we will work something out for her.

She’s a tough girl and pretty resourceful. And besides, what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger, right?

Luckily it didn’t happen to anyone else at her school, either. But there are plenty of pupils for whom such a setback would have presented a real barrier.

What her experience shows is that teachers are not infallible. They can and indeed do make mistakes; and being human, they can also display bias for or against certain pupils.

And whatever measures the Government puts in place to restore confidence in the education system, the sad truth is that for so many of this year’s A-level students, especially those in the state system, their window of opportunity has closed.

It’s on to the next lot now. And this year’s 16 and 18-year-olds, who had barely a term and a half of uninterrupted teaching before the world shut down, are left picking up the pieces. They had one shot — and it was blown, through no fault of their own.

Some will never return to education at all. Others will manage somehow. But that lingering sense of ‘what if’ will stay with them — and with parents like me — for years to come.

The truth is, they deserved better. Let’s make sure it never happens again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hate preacher Anjem Choudary is secretly posting vile messages to his followers on an encrypted smartphone app favoured by Islamic State terrorists, The Mail on Sunday can reveal.

The extremist imam, who called the 9/11 hijackers 'magnificent martyrs' and radicalised the killers of soldier Lee Rigby, is sending messages on the Telegram app after he was banned by Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp for violating hate-speech rules.

Choudary told his Telegram followers last week that Britain is a 'police state' and preached that Muslims are having their freedoms taken away 'under the guise of counter-terrorism'.

Hate preacher Anjem Choudary (above) is secretly posting vile messages to his followers on an encrypted smartphone app favoured by Islamic State terrorists, The Mail on Sunday can reveal

The extremist imam, who called the 9/11 hijackers 'magnificent martyrs' and radicalised the killers of soldier Lee Rigby, is sending messages on the Telegram app after he was banned by Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp for violating hate-speech rules

He also told of his love of Sharia law, writing: 'I am not an advocate for liberty, freedom and democracy and believe that the Shari'ah and Islam are a perfect and better way of life.'

The father-of-five, who is on a United Nations terrorist list, was jailed for six-and-a-half years in 2016 for inviting support for IS, but was released in 2018 after serving less than half the sentence.

He was freed on licence under strict conditions, which included observing a night-time curfew at his home in Ilford, East London, and not using social media or the internet.

But these restrictions expired last month and Choudary started preaching online again. The 54-year-old set up a new Twitter account, which immediately attracted hundreds of followers, but it was suspended after uproar from anti-extremism activists.

Within days, he was tweeting again from a different account, which was taken down last Friday.

At the same time, he started posting his vitriol on Telegram, which uses an online encryption that makes it almost impossible for MI5 or the police to monitor.

The Russian-owned messaging service has been criticised as a safe haven for criminals and hackers.

The app is so secure that it is impossible to know how many users are following Choudary's posts. But in one message he called himself a 'martyr to the cause' and said he was the victim of a 'police state'.

The father-of-five (pictured in July), who is on a United Nations terrorist list, was jailed for six-and-a-half years in 2016 for inviting support for IS, but was released in 2018 after serving less than half the sentence

He wrote: 'Having experienced decades of Islamic activism in Britain since the early 1990s until my incarceration in 2016, I can personally testify that fundamental values, liberties and rights which liberal democracies, such as the UK, have lauded and prided itself on have today been shredded by successive governments and are today in tatters.'

For years, Choudary was the leader of the banned Al-Muhajiroun (ALM) group, which has been linked to some of the most infamous Islamic terrorists in Britain.

He helped to radicalise ALM members Michael Adebolajo and Michael Adebowale, the killers of Fusilier Rigby in South-East London in 2013.

Another follower was Khuram Butt, ringleader of the London Bridge terror attack that killed eight victims in 2017.

Dozens of Choudary's followers joined IS in Syria, including Siddhartha Dhar, also known as Jihadi Sid, who was seen in a video executing a victim.

Telegram was founded in 2013 by Russian brothers-in-exile Pavel and Nikolai Durov. They keep the headquarters of Telegram a secret.

In October 2015, IS issued a notice to its followers to use Telegram as it felt it had the best encryption at the time. A spokesman for Telegram was unavailable for comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A six-year-old Israeli boy who was the only survivor of a cable car tragedy is now the centre of a bitter custody battle between the families of his two aunts - one of whom accuses the other of 'kidnapping' him.

Eitan Biran miraculously survived the tragedy in the Alps on May 23, but his mother, father, younger brother and great-grandparents all lost their lives.

The cable car was carrying the passengers up a mountain overlooking Lake Maggiore when it dropped 1,000ft away from the station shortly after 12pm.

The crash had killed his mother Tal, 26, father Amit, 30, two-year-old brother Tom and great-grandparents Itshak and Barbara Cohen, 82 and 70.

Eitan has been living with paternal aunt Aya Biran-Nirko, a mother of two and doctor who lives near Pavia, north Italy, since he was released from a hospital in Turin in June.

But last week his maternal aunt Gali Peleg revealed her family would be taking legal action so he could have a 'normal' life in Israel, The Times reports.

Eitan (pictured bottom with family) miraculously survived the tragedy in the Alps on May 23, but his mother, father, younger brother and great-grandparents all lost their lives

Emergency workers surround the wreckage of a cable car that fell from the Stresa-Alpine-Mottarone line, May 23

Tal Peleg-Biran is pictured left with her sister Gali Peleg. Ms Peleg revealed her family would be taking legal action so Eitan could have a 'normal' life in Israel

Mrs Peleg said: 'He was abducted by relatives who don't know him at all. [Biran-Nirko] was not close to him in any way. The family there won't take him to a park or out to eat, things we have done so he feels he has a family.'

She claimed her sister Tal Peleg-Biran, 26, valued Jewish and Israeli identity and this would be eroded while in Italy.

Mrs Peleg added: 'In a few years he'll look back and see where he grew up and who his parents were, and it's important to me that he sees that we were always there for him. He already lost one family and does not need to lose another.'

She added that her family had only been allowed to see the child briefly, claiming he 'breaks into tears' when she leaves.

Eitan miraculously survived the tragedy (pictured: site where cable car crashed to the ground) in the Alps, but his mother and father, younger brother and great-grandparents were all killed

Five-year-old Eitan Biran (pictured bottom) from Israel, has no memory of the cable car crash in Italy that killed his entire family, doctors revealed

Biran-Nirko's lawyers called the allegations 'surreal', adding: 'We sincerely cannot understand the reason for such acrimony and falsehood.'

Reports had earlier revealed that doctors believe the boy was suffering from post traumatic amnesia after tests ruled out any neurological damage.

In a statement translated from Italian, doctors said: 'Eitan's conditions are significantly improving both from the point of view of thoracic trauma and from the point of view of abdominal trauma.'

His aunt Aya, 41, and his grandmother both travelled from Israel to sit at his bedside after the crash on May 23 and remain with him in hospital.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The BBC hopes to make amends for the Martin Bashir scandal by paying about £1.5 million ‘guilt money’ to a charity chosen by the Royal Family, The Mail on Sunday can reveal.

The unprecedented donation includes £1.15 million – the amount the Corporation made from selling the global rights to Bashir’s explosive Princess Diana interview – plus reparations.

An inquiry by Lord Dyson in May found Bashir had lied to obtain the 1995 interview, using ‘deceitful’ methods later covered up by a ‘woefully ineffective’ internal investigation by Tony Hall, who later became BBC director-general.

While the exact terms have yet to be finalised, and there is no date set for the money to paid, it is understood it will come from BBC Studios, the Corporation’s trading arm – a commercial operation not funded by the licence fee.

The BBC hopes to make amends for the Martin Bashir scandal by paying about £1.5 million ‘guilt money’ to a charity chosen by the Royal Family

An inquiry by Lord Dyson in May found Bashir had lied to obtain the 1995 interview, using ‘deceitful’ methods later covered up by a ‘woefully ineffective’ internal investigation by Tony Hall, who later became BBC director-general

Royal sources say Princes William and Harry are likely to be involved in deciding how it should be used

Royal sources say Princes William and Harry are likely to be involved in deciding how it should be used.

Last night Diana’s close friend Rosa Monckton said: ‘This is an admirable decision, though obviously it cannot undo the damage that has been done or erase the BBC’s guilt.’

Although the scandal was uncovered by this newspaper 25 years ago, it took the BBC until earlier this year to acknowledge Bashir’s wrongdoing, having previously exonerated him.

Following publication of Lord Dyson’s report, William condemned the Corporation for deceiving his mother, ruining her life and helping to hasten her divorce.

He said the BBC’s failures had contributed to Diana’s ‘fear, paranoia and isolation’ in her final years, and that the interview made a ‘major contribution to making my parents’ relationship worse’.

It is understood that the donation idea was first suggested by Diana’s brother, Earl Spencer, who said some of the money made by the BBC should go to Diana’s charities.

It is also understood that Palace officials did not ask the BBC for a donation and are yet to be informed about the details.

The move comes against a background of ongoing discussions, initiated by William, between the broadcaster and Palace courtiers.

The Corporation humiliating confessed that ‘Martin Bashir employed lies and fake documents to gain access to the princess’ and that he ‘made a series of lurid and untrue claims'

It is understood that the donation idea was first suggested by Diana’s brother, Earl Spencer, who said some of the money made by the BBC should go to Diana’s charities

Following publication of Lord Dyson’s report, William condemned the Corporation (right) for deceiving his mother, ruining her life and helping to hasten her divorce

William is said to believe there is further evidence to uncover, and expressed interest in continuing private conversations with the BBC ‘to see what comes out’.

However, the current director-general, Tim Davie, is now likely to view the reparations as a way of drawing a line under the affair. He has already sent letters of unconditional apology to the Queen, Charles, William, Harry and Earl Spencer.

They reportedly included the humiliating confessions that ‘Martin Bashir employed lies and fake documents to gain access to the princess’ and that he ‘made a series of lurid and untrue claims’.

Mr Davie also apologised to Matt Wiessler, the whistleblower who revealed Bashir’s deceit, and who is now set to receive between £750,00 and £1 million compensation.

The award-winning graphic artist came forward a quarter of a century ago to expose the Panorama reporter for instructing him to produce phoney bank statements said to be instrumental in securing the Diana interview.

Mr Wiessler believed they were faithful reproductions of genuine documents, but when he later revealed what Bashir had done he was blacklisted by the BBC.

He was finally vindicated by Lord Dyson’s inquiry.

Two months ago it was reported that Mr Davie had agreed not to air the 1995 interview in full again but said the use of shorter clips in context should be open to further discussion.

It was claimed that the refusal to give a broader pledge never to show excerpts angered the Palace – courtiers demanded a commitment from the BBC to put stronger limits on its use.

Prince Charles was said to be furious about ‘lurid lies’ in the interview, including the claim that he was not suited to be monarch.

He is believed to be deeply concerned this clip is never replayed because of the impact it could have on public perception of his enthusiasm about inheriting the throne.

Bashir was rehired by the BBC as religion editor in 2016 but abruptly stepped down on May 14, citing poor health.

The BBC and Kensington Palace declined to respond.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's one of Hollywood's most glamorous actresses.

And Kate Beckinsale proved she's still got it at 48 as she took to Instagram on Sunday to share a smoldering slew of videos where she and a gal pal posed up a storm in sexy medieval armour costumes.

The model showed off her enviable frame and toned pins in the high-rising black number, complete with an opulent red-and-gold cape she joked about having a low cleavage.

Sizzling: Kate Beckinsale (left) showed off her toned pins as she posed up a storm in a sizzling armour costume in celebration of her friend's birthday in an Instagram video on Sunday

Besties: The afternoon of fun coincided with her friend Nina Kate's 41st birthday

The corset-style outfit accentuated the star's slim waist and featured gold detailing, complete with onyx feathers and leather straps in its bottom half.

The Much Ado About Nothing actress had tied her caramel tresses into an enormous bun and cupped her assets while joking, 'In relation to your real boobs, where are yours cos mine are here?' while gesturing downwards.

The afternoon of fun coincided with her friend Nina Kate's 41st birthday.

Strike a pose: The corset-style outfit accentuated the star's slim waist and featured gold detailing, complete with onyx feathers and leather straps in its bottom half

Wow! The Much Ado About Nothing actress had tied her caramel tresses into an enormous bun and cupped her assets

Kate wrote in the post's caption: 'Happy birthday @nina_kate. Not sure what the f*** I thought I was doing before I met you. Best girl best Sainsbury’s bag best ever xxx.'

The pals shot their best power poses towards the camera while joking that they were about to 'pillage a town' in their medieval suits.

Orange-haired Nina sported a stylish buzzcut and showed off her vast collection of tattoos in the skin-exposing ensemble.

Comedian: She joked, 'In relation to your real boobs, where are yours cos mine are here?' while gesturing downwards

Funny: The pals joked that they were about to 'pillage a town' in their medieval suits

She elevated her height in a chunky pair of glossy black shin-high lace-up heels, while Kate co-ordinated her strapped gold heels with her costume.

After the photoshoot came to an end, the Underworld actress strutted her way out of the camera's shot - but not before stumbling over her own feet while doing so.

'Just the level of encouragement when one is not feeling very pillagey and is a bit tired is why you are my favourite, @nina_kate,' the SAG Award nominee wrote in a follow-up caption.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Have you got your results today? Send your stories and pictures to jack.wright@mailonline.co.uk Advertisement

A happy A-level student at a West Midlands school thanked her teacher for her two As and A* grades today after opening her results live on television as thousands of anxious teenagers find out their marks.

Students Erin, Drew and Keehan opened their results live on GB News next to Balvinder Sidhu, the channel's West Midlands Reporter in front of their peers and headteacher Nikki Clifton this morning.

Erin was visibly delighted as she found that Kinver High School in Stourbridge had awarded her two A grades and an A* as she laughed, said 'wow, I am very happy' and turned to her teacher to say: 'Thank you'.

Today's results have been set by teachers after exams were cancelled for a second year in a row due to Covid restrictions, with reports last night anticipating nearly half to be given A* and A grades.

Appearing on GB News, Keehan said he got an A*, A and a B, and Drew - who was expecting to receive two Bs - got an A and a B, telling Ms Sidhu: 'I'm really chuffed with it, really really happy'.

Erin and Keehan said they had received the grades required to get to their universities of choice, while Drew said he planned on joining the Royal Air Force and doing an apprenticeship in intelligence.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades.

Gavin Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades after it was revealed nearly half of this morning's results are expected to be A* or A - but the Education Secretary admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers deciding the results again.

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record.

And according to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019, the last time they sat exams, as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show, but on the most popular courses up to a third of students may be rejected or have to go through clearing due to the number of people getting the required grades.

Students react as they share their results with their friends at Taunton School in Somerset

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, after they receive their A-Level results

Students react as they share their results with their friends at Taunton School in Somerset

Faith Bryant (back) and Abbie Hollis (front) are hugged at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

A student at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) finds out his A-Level results in north London

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Emelia Ambrose (L) is hugged by her friend Mali Jones after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea

Twins Kehinde (left) and Deborah Sowole at Ark Globe Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students react as receiving their A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

Left: Students at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) embrace after receiving their A-Level results in north London. Right: Ffion Young (right) hugs her friend Sara Rafique after opening their A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea

Left: Lottie Olive wiping away tears with mother Kate after she managed to get an A* at Peter Symonds College, Winchester. Right: Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Left: Martha Mileham, 18, from Taunton. Right: Max Fletcher, 18, from Taunton

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5 per cent achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record

Seventy per cent of private school students have been given an A* or A this year - compared to around 39 per cent for a non-selective comprehensive school

Students celebrating top A-level grades Student, 19, with celebral palsy says she's 'in shock' after receiving top marks Ellie Curran with her mother Margie at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool Nineteen-year-old Ellie Curran, who has cerebral palsy, celebrated receiving an A* in sociology, a B in business and a distinction in BTEC law when she picked up her results at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool. She said she was 'in shock' but very excited about going on to study criminology at Liverpool Hope University. Miss Curran, who is also a keen wheelchair football player, said: 'It's been hard working from home and trying to get everything done.' Her mother Margie said: 'She's very dedicated, in lockdown she would be up at 8am at her desk. 'She's always been dedicated, I think she just wants to prove everyone wrong and show she can do it.' Student who suffered 'life-threatening' brain tumour achieved three A*s and now hopes to study at Cambridge Melos Krasniqi poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London An A-level student who suffered a 'life-threatening' brain tumour battled back to achieve three A*s and now hopes to study at Cambridge University. Melos Krasniqi celebrated with friends and family after seeing his 'better than expected' results in maths, physics and geography. The 17-year-old, who studied at Kensington Aldridge Academy in west London, said he missed a few months in his first year after doctors discovered a tumour in his brain. He told the PA news agency: 'Midway through October in my first year I had a scan for some headaches and it turned out I wasn't very well. 'I had some complications in my brain and emailed the school to tell them what had happened. The teachers were so supportive. 'I had two surgeries to resolve everything and they removed the tumour, which was life-threatening because it had been going on for some time. 'The teachers recommended that I could skip the rest of the year and re-do Year 12 or do whatever I felt best. 'I came back part-time a few months after my surgery and had catch-up sessions, which was obviously more work on top of the pandemic.' Melos said he had no intention of missing a school year and, during his recovery, he asked his teachers for more work so he could catch up. He now hopes to study engineering at Cambridge University. It came as dozens of students poured into the school, near Grenfell Tower, on Tuesday morning to pick up their results. Another Oxbridge hopeful, Leila Jarvis, 18, had tears in her eyes after seeing she had achieved three A*s and an A. She said: 'The past two years has definitely been challenging - you do kind of wonder what kind of grades you'll get so it has been stressful. 'But the school has been great, they've really rooted for us and given us a lot of help, especially as my time in this school has seen things like the Grenfell tragedy, which has made it really hard for the community. 'I live right around the corner and obviously it's had a big impact - everyone was impacted. 'I now hope to go to Oxford University to study history and politics.' Ahmed El-Bouhy, 18, achieved four A*s and will now study natural sciences at Cambridge University. He said: 'It's been really stressful and, after last year with everyone's issues with the grading system, I was slightly worried it could have been the same situation this year. 'But I'm really happy and delighted with the results and look forward to going to university.' Other students celebrating their results included one who will be the first in her family to attend university, while another is planning to join the RAF. Nottingham students who received four A*s Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School. She said: 'This year in particular has made me more anxious to get my results. We had loads of mini exams so as much as I worked for that, it's still not the same as having one final end-of-year exam. 'I am going to Loughborough University to do Maths and Sports Science. I am not sure what I want to do next, I am taking each step as it comes. I feel university will open more doors for me. 'My friends and family have congratulated me - everyone is really happy and relieved for me. 'Nottingham High School always tends to do above average, around 45 per cent of my school got A*'s this year and 95 per cent got B's and above.' Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School. He said: 'Now I have my results, I am going to the London School of Economics to study PPE – Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Perhaps I would like a career in politics but I am keeping it open. 'This year, with lockdowns, it has been very different with the lack of time to prepare and being unsure about what was going to happen with the exams. 'But with the support of family and friends you get through it and it has turned out okay in the end. My parents are very happy and teary. 'It is nice to get the stress off my shoulders now. It feels like my school has done really well, everyone I have spoken to seems really happy - all my friends have got into their universities.' Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University. He added: 'I did very well, I'm really happy and pleased. My place is now confirmed to do Physics and Philosophy and Oxford University. 'My friends and family knew how much these A-Levels meant to me, they are very pleased and relieved - mainly for my emotional state. 'This year, for me, there has been an increase level of stress, just because normally I would have a set period of time to revise for a large final set of exams. 'The uncertainty was stressful but it has all turned out well in the end. All any of us could do was just work as hard as we could. I feel very lucky. 'I am seeing a lot of happy people, my cohort seemed to be pleased with their results. I am now excited though for what is to come - if I do well in Physics, I'll see if I can solve any big equations.' Advertisement

Headteacher Nikki Clifton said of the three students on GB News: 'They're so brave, but they're a credit to each and every youngster up and down, around the country and I couldn't be happier for them.

'Today's a fabulous day, it's one of my favourite days of the year and I think coming after the two years of disruption, I think I'm really looking forward to having a great day of fun and celebration with the students.'

Asked how she was feeling, Ms Clifton said: 'I'm excited, a little bit nervous as I always am on these days because it is a nervous day and students are nervous. But I'm hopeful that our students will open a set of results that will give (sic) them where they want to go and I hope that is replicated up and down the country.'

She added: 'It has been a very different and rigorous set of processes, and it's very different to any other year. You can't compare this set of year's results with last year, we've got a completely different set of assessment parameters, a whole new policy, a whole different way of working for our students and our staff, and I couldn't be prouder of them.'

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1 per cent - the highest proportion since the top grade was first introduced in 2010.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

Luisa McMahon, 18, of Wollaton, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Maths, Further Maths, Geography and Psychology at Nottingham High School.

She said: 'This year in particular has made me more anxious to get my results. We had loads of mini exams so as much as I worked for that, it's still not the same as having one final end-of-year exam.

'I am going to Loughborough University to do Maths and Sports Science. I am not sure what I want to do next, I am taking each step as it comes. I feel university will open more doors for me. My friends and family have congratulated me - everyone is really happy and relieved for me.

'Nottingham High School always tends to do above average, around 45 per cent of my school got A*'s this year and 95 per cent got B's and above.'

Razeen Surtee, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, got four A*'s in Biology, Chemistry, Maths and Further Maths at Nottingham High School.

He said: 'Now I have my results, I am going to the London School of Economics to study PPE – Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Perhaps I would like a career in politics but I am keeping it open. This year, with lockdowns, it has been very different with the lack of time to prepare and being unsure about what was going to happen with the exams.

'But with the support of family and friends you get through it and it has turned out okay in the end. My parents are very happy and teary. It is nice to get the stress off my shoulders now. It feels like my school has done really well, everyone I have spoken to seems really happy - all my friends have got into their universities.'

Tom Bedforth, 18, of West Bridgford, Nottingham, achieved four A*'s in Religious Studies, Maths, Physics and Further Maths at Nottingham High School and will now go on to study at Oxford University.

He added: 'I did very well, I'm really happy and pleased. My place is now confirmed to do Physics and Philosophy and Oxford University.

'My friends and family knew how much these A-Levels meant to me, they are very pleased and relieved - mainly for my emotional state.

'This year, for me, there has been an increase level of stress, just because normally I would have a set period of time to revise for a large final set of exams.

'The uncertainty was stressful but it has all turned out well in the end. All any of us could do was just work as hard as we could. I feel very lucky. I am seeing a lot of happy people, my cohort seemed to be pleased with their results. I am now excited though for what is to come - if I do well in Physics, I'll see if I can solve any big equations.'

One sixth former - David White, 18, from Romford, east London- has won a place at one of Britain's top universities despite only attending school for 63 days in the academic year after catching Covid twice in just six months.

It meant he could only attend for just over nine weeks in his final year of A-level studies with schools also shut during the second lockdown.

David also missed huge chunks in his first year during the initial lockdown and says he has hardly been at school in the last two years for his A Level course

Today, he discovered he scored the top marks in his A-levels to confirm his place to study physics at King's College London in September.

David credits staff at Drapers Academy in Harold Hill, near Romford, with keeping him on track.

He said: 'It has been totally crazy getting Covid twice in the space of six months. I was not really ill either time, but I lost my sense of taste and smell the second time.

'It was more the isolation and the time I had to take off school on top of all the time I had missed because of the lockdown.

'The school has been incredible though. They have made sure I keep up with my studies by getting all students tablets and helping us digitally. That has kept me on the right track.

'It has been a really difficult couple of years for all of us and the young people at schools have had it really hard.

'I am so pleased to get into my first-choice university. I had hardly been in school. I'm proud of what I achieved but think I could have been even better in a normal year.'

David wasn't the only person at the school to contract the virus twice. Head of Sixth Form, Lee Bryant, is still suffering from fatigue some 10 months after a second bout of Covid.

He said: 'I was off from October to December and still need to use the lift rather than the stairs. I can say in the 32 years I have been teaching that this has been the most difficult.

'Our staff have been excellent and the students on returning to class have hit the ground running after overcoming many hurdles and getting used to Zoom, internet. They have adapted so well.'

Despite a challenging year 80 per cent of Drapers Academy A-level students achieved grades A*-C with several off to top London universities.

Other high achievers at the school include Jorja Korosec, 18, of Romford, who will study History at Queen's College, Cambridge.

She said: 'I have to thank the school for their amazing support during what has been a tough year. I am so excited to be going to Cambridge.'

Drapers Academy principal Darren Luckhurst said: 'I have been totally amazed by our students who have shown such resilience. Their determination to succeed is shown through the fruits of their labour.

'I have some excellent staff here who put their heart into teaching and have taken on extra work as well as continuing to teach other school years.'

'Many of our students have parents who work in the care sector or the NHS so we often help homeschool other family members and hold down part time jobs. They worked so hard to achieve their results.'

Evie Smith, 18, gained her place at university after combining her studies with playing for Liverpool women's under-21s.

The Archbishop Blanch School pupil will be able to study sports science at Liverpool John Moores University after achieving a distinction star and distinction BTECs and a B at A-level.

She said the decision on whether she takes up the place could depend on whether she is offered a professional football contract.

She said: 'I'm really happy. I've been playing for the under-21s for the past two seasons while I've been in sixth form. It's difficult trying to balance my time but the club are really supportive with that.'

Pupils at an inner city state school are celebrating after 55 teenagers got the A-level grades needed for them to study at Oxbridge, which is more than the offers made to Eton College students.

The majority of pupils at Brampton Manor Academy in Newham, east London, are from ethnic minority backgrounds, in receipt of free school meals (FSMs), or will be the first in their family to attend university.

Sam Dobin, Brampton's sixth form director, said he is 'delighted' that 55 of its students are now set to study at Oxford or Cambridge University this year, which is more than leading independent schools.

At Eton, where Boris Johnson studied, 48 pupils secured Oxbridge offers, a fall from 69 last year.

After a bout of excited screaming, hugs and hyperventilating, Nyat Aron-Yohannes said there was 'black excellence in this building' after hearing about how many of her classmates are now heading to Oxford or Cambridge.

The 18-year-old of Purfleet, Essex, who got three A*s and is going to Oxford to study philosophy, politics and economics, said 'the struggle was real'.

She added: 'We woke up early to come into school and sometimes it did not even seem like it was worth it at those times when the grades were not matching up to your work ethic.

'Then lockdown happened and you had to persevere on your own because you did not have your classmates or teachers physically nearby to push you. You had to find strength somewhere else. I am just grateful it paid off, we were walking in faith.'

She said she was happy for her relatives, particularly her father Abraham, adding: 'I am the first in my family to go to Oxford. My father told me this could be possible. His words were of motivation.'

Ade Olugboji, 18, of Purfleet, Essex, got four A*s and is going to study maths and philosophy at Oxford.

He said: 'Brampton has a philosophy of hard work. I started at 6am and left at 6pm. I knew there was going to be work but I did not understand the level until I got here.

'The thing is once I saw everyone else working so hard and so well, it did not seem that it (success) was impossible.'

In all, 350 students took their A levels at the school this year with 330 getting into Russell Group universities, including the 55 who got into Oxbridge.

In 2014, just one Brampton student received an offer for Oxbridge, but by last year this had risen to 51.

Brampton Manor opened its sixth form in 2012 with the aim of transforming progression rates to Oxford, Cambridge and other elite Russell Group universities for pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The oversubscribed selective sixth form accepts 300 to 400 students a year and some of them travel for as long as two hours each way to attend. Kenny Ikeji, 18, of Dagenham, east London, got the three A* grades he needed to study computer science at Harvard.

After picking up his grades, he said: 'The feeling is good and seeing everyone happy as well is great because during the two years (of study) everyone was stressed out but on a day like this, it is as if all the hard work has paid off.

'There are lots of people going to Oxford and Cambridge and I am not surprised because you would expect it when you see how hard everyone here works. Once they had their university offers, there was a new fire in them to study to make sure they got the grades to go.'

He described the school as a place where people do not let their inner city surroundings affect their hopes.

He said: 'It is peer pressure because when everybody around you is studying, you see your friends getting better grades and then you want to get better grades. The teachers all push us and they make you want to do well so that you want to work. They do not force you to do it.'

Susan Hope, 18, also from Dagenham, is going to study education at Cambridge with the aim of a career in child psychology. She said: 'I did not want to apply (to Cambridge) because of the fear of me getting rejected, but coming here made me think 'If they can do it, then why can't I?'

'Coming from this area you do not see that many people going to university at all, but if you take that chance, work hard and you can achieve anything - that is what Brampton teaches us.

'I came here expecting to have to work hard, and I think that is just the work ethic the school instils in us. We are all willing to work for it and we are in a support system that just nudges us a bit further to achieve those dreams that we are all pretty much capable of.'

Nana Arthur, 18, of Rainham, east London, who is heading to Cambridge University to study philosophy, said: 'We are disadvantaged people and this school gave us a way to move up.

'To be honest, as soon as you come into this school you can't not succeed - it is quite infectious.'

Her friend, Kerena Arthur, of Dalston, east London, also 18, is going to Oxford to study politics, philosophy and economics after getting three A*s.

She said: 'I am very, very pleased. I was not expecting it at all and struggled a lot but I worked hard. It is crazy.

'If you are slacking, your friends will tell you. You were not on your own. It was very much like a family in terms of the way people pushed each other. I can't lie, the teachers push you as well and, if you are slacking, you will know about it.'

Romero Featherstone, 18, of Plaistow, east London, said he was 'a little' surprised but pleased after he got the three A* grades which will take him to Cambridge to study chemical engineering.

He said: 'The school prepares you well. The school regularly get people into Oxbridge, so going here meant that I thought I had a good chance.'

Left: Head girl Charlotte Maxwell at Regent House School & Preparatory Dept. in Newtownards. Right: Laily Tuhill smiles after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House

Left: Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results. Right: Emelia Ambrose hugs a friend after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea

Left: Students react after receiving their A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London. Right: Rachael Folorunsho, 18, at Brampton Manor Academy in London reacts after receiving her A-Level results at Brampton Manor Academy

Students receive their A-level results on August 10, 2021 in London

Students receive their A-level results on August 10, 2021 in London

Faith Bryant (left) and Abbie Hollis at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Leila Jarvis hugs her mother (name not given) after receiving her grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Shalayna Morton reacts as she finds out her A-level results at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham (LAET) in north London

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results this morning

Lulu Sorano, 18, with her mother Tracey (left) at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire, as students receive their A-Level results

Fatima Al-Kinani (Left) and Maram Al Dandal at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London

Students celebrate at Brampton Manor Academy in London, as they receive their A-Level results

Ayomide Olumade (L) with Segal Kumar (R), after they received their results at Peter Seymonds College, Winchester

Shy schoolgirl, 18, got top grades to become a doctor after building her confidence by working at a 'Del Boy' market stall Mia Goddard, 18, plucked up the courage to start working on a market stall when she was just 14-years-old A shy schoolgirl got top grades to become a doctor after building her confidence - by working at a 'Del Boy' market stall. Mia Goddard, 18, plucked up the courage to start working on a market stall when she was just 14-years-old. She spent the next two years speaking to passers-by - and was inspired to help her lonely customers by becoming a doctor. Mia has now picked up A* grades in biology, chemistry and maths at A level following her years working at Cardiff Market. She is now set to study at Cardiff University School of Medicine after leaving her Saturday job on the haberdashery stall. Mia said: 'Working at Cardiff Market for two years propelled me to do medicine,' she said. It was a people facing job which gave me a lot of skills and I met a lot of different people. 'Some people would come to the stall telling you they felt isolated or lonely and talking to them and seeing those scenarios has given me more empathy. 'Most of the conditions I saw were things like mental health, people with learning difficulties and people who were lonely. 'We had some elderly customers and some with Alzheimer's who came with their carers, some people just came to talk. That was a big part of my decision to do medicine, I knew I wanted to work with people and it helped give me those skills.' Mia got her grades after getting a full scholarship to take A levels at Cardiff Sixth Form College. The keen runner, who ran for Wales under-17s in cross country, said it had been strange studying for A levels during the pandemic. She added: 'Our lessons continued online at the college but it was hard working from home and being isolated from friends and not able to go out.' Advertisement

Mr Dobin said the students had overcome a lot of disruption over the past two years but 'they have kept incredibly determined, focused and motivated'.

He added: 'The results today just demonstrate that they are being rewarded for the immense effort they have put in and the talent they have shown.'

Paul Vicars, Headteacher of Birkenhead School said: 'The results are great but students are far more than academic results on a piece of paper.

'I'm immensely proud of all the students and I think they've probably worked harder for these results than any other cohort before them because of the pandemic.

'It's difficult not to get emotional seeing everyone coming to collect their results, knowing what they've achieved and the challenges they have overcome; these days are always impactful to watch as a teacher because you want the students to be rewarded for their efforts and they certainly have been.'

Chloe Byers, 18, got three A*s to study Biochemistry at University of Bath. She said: 'I can't believe it, I was not expecting those results, it's an incredible surprise.

'It's been hard because when you're in school you'll see your mates at break time or you can turn to someone next to you in class if you don't understand something.

'The girls have been great at keeping in touch with each other though, we have set up group FaceTime sessions on the weekends and done quiz nights so we didn't feel like we lost touch.

Her mother Ruth said: 'We've both been in tears, I couldn't be any more proud of Chloe because she has just taken everything in her stride. She was a new student at the sixth form and then went into lockdown so she's really been up against it.

'I think she would have been happy with three As but she ended up with three A*s and you could see how delighted we were it was written all over our faces. I'm a single mum and Chloe and I are very close but the lockdown definitely brought us closer.

'We converted the spare room into her office so she had a space to work without it feeling like schoolwork had taken over her home. I'm just so overwhelmed to come here today and see that all her hard work has been worth it.'

Head girl, Lizzie Hyatt, 18, got three A*s and an A to study General Engineering at University of Durham. She said: 'I think not seeing my friends and having that social interaction has been the hardest part. Coming into school and seeing my friends really helped to motivate me so within a month of sitting and doing online learning at home constantly my motivation just wasn't there anymore.

'I still felt like the quality of learning that we were getting online was great from the school, we could still speak to teachers whenever we needed and they were in touch with us everyday but it was just hard not having the support network of friends around you.

'But to come and get these results today and see everybody without having to socially distance is so special. It feels amazing just to be able to hug my friends and celebrate with them finally.'

Head boy, Archie Parker-Goff, 18, got four A*s to study Economics at University of Bristol. He said: 'It's definitely been more intense doing A-levels through lockdown.

'The learning style was a lot more independent and there were definitely days when you would wake up and couldn't be bothered and it was really hard to get motivated.

'But the teachers and the school have been amazing with their support and I was moving around different rooms in the house just to change the scene when I was studying. I spent a lot of time between home and visiting my grandma as well and it's been lovely to come and collect my results with her because she's so proud.'

His grandmother Sarah Parker said: 'I'm very proud of him. We are quite an upbeat family and we laugh a lot but it has been worrying at times how the lockdown might affect them and you feel really sorry for them because they can't go out and see their friends for a bit of light relief. But to come with him today and share this moment as he opened these results has been wonderful.'

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, Tory chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The Government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

Polish teenager who couldn't speak English when he arrived in Britain is off to Cambridge after achieving three A*s Milosz Kowalski poses with his grades at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire A Polish teenager who couldn't speak English when he arrived in Britain 'with nothing' has earned himself a place at Cambridge University after achieving three A* grades in his A Levels. Milosz Kowalski achieved the top grades in history, French and sociology - as well as an another A* in his extended project - and will now go on to study Human Social and Political Sciences at Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge. The determined 18 year old graduated from Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hants, after a tumultuous journey for his family who moved from Poland 14 years ago 'without even cutlery to put on the table'. Now 'proud' Milosz, who lives in Southampton, Hants, and plans to work as a sociologist or in politics, says family in his native Poland are in 'disbelief' at his achievement. He said: 'It's a huge achievement coming from an immigrant origin and getting into Cambridge. I feel very proud of myself. 'My family were shocked, surprised and completely amazed - especially those still living in Poland. They were just in disbelief. 'It's been a very special process. When I came to college in 2019 I never though any of this would have have happened. 'I wouldn't say it helped, but lockdowns gave me the opportunity to really focus on my studies. 'I also didn't have to commute the two and a half hours to college on the train each day, which meant I was able to rest and revise more. 'The bad side was not having as much support, and it was more difficult to motivate myself. 'A lot of the time I was quite upset with the long commutes and lockdowns, but it all feels worth it now.' Milosz, who lives with his mother, grandmother and 16 year old brother, said it felt 'special' to have come from an immigrant background and be accepted at one of the most prestigious universities in the world. 'I was born in Poland and lived there for the first three or four years of my life, then I moved here with my mother moved in around 2007,' he said. 'I do remember going to primary school and not speaking a word of English, which is so bizarre when I look back, but I learned the language quickly. 'We moved here for various reasons - economic reasons but also just to have a better life as well. 'To come here as we did with not even any cutlery on the table and to get there is a big development. 'We came here with nothing. It was difficult getting started up; building a life here... especially seeing as my mum is a single mother to me and my younger brother Jakub. 'Now it is better, but then it was quite an industrious life, building everything from scratch, getting a house.' Milosz said he was going to claim a free Nando's, with the chain offering free food for students collecting results, with college friends he has hardly been able to see until recently. He added: 'We're doing a belated birthday party with everyone who had their birthdays during lockdown. 'I didn't see any friends for months on end during lockdowns, especially because my grandmother who lives with us is vulnerable, so I was even more restricted. 'I think the main thing is to celebrate what we have done during the pandemic. Me and my friends supported each other a lot and celebrating everything we have achieved needs to be celebrated.' He now has his sights set on a career as a sociologist - though he admits politics could also be on the cards as a career option. He said: 'I want to become a sociologist, researching society for a research institution. I only recently discovered my passion for sociology whilst doing my extended project. 'Politics is also an option - I'm a bit wary because it's often toxic, but I would definitely consider it. 'I'm excited to start university in October. I'm looking forward to a fresh start. 'These past two years have been difficult, so I'm looking forward to a more normal experience at Cambridge. 'Obviously it will be difficult, but I am optimistic - especially after the pandemic.' Advertisement

Writing in the Telegraph, Mr Williamson said: 'Because of the extraordinary conditions we have faced as a country, we announced in January that exams would not go ahead this year - it would have been unfair on students who had already given up so much in the battle against coronavirus.

'Their hard work, however, deserves to be rewarded with a qualification. We must support these students in looking to the future, because their whole lives are in front of them.'

Asked on Sky News what the contingency plans are for next year's exams, Mr Williamson said: 'In the last academic year we have conducted an extensive consultation as we move back to examinations, and in a few weeks' time as we go back into the winter period we will be doing another extensive consultation as to the contingency, which will be largely based around teacher-assessed grades, but we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year, but always conscious that this pandemic, we have not always been able to predict the course of it, it has continuously changed, and it's absolutely right that we have contingencies there, as we always do.'

Asked if he was ruling out teacher assessments for this time next year, he said: 'What we are saying is you will probably have seen our consultation in the last academic year, we are very much planning to move back to examinations as a form of assessment, but we always have to have a contingency plan in place, and that's why we will be consulting in the next academic year on those plans.'

Mr Williamson has said 'employers can have real confidence' in the grades awarded to pupils.

Speaking to Sky News, he said: 'This is a culmination of 13 years in education, I think we should be incredibly proud of their achievements, incredibly proud of the grades that they achieve.'

He said: 'We do have a rigorous system of grading and awarding. People have been awarded this grade on the basis of evidence.

'We took a difficult decision, and that decision was children were to be assessed on what they had been taught. We have seen various amounts of disruption around the country and children's experiences have been different.

'But still, you have a very clear grading system, you still see children who are achieving A*s, As, Bs, Cs, have really achieved so very, very much, and I think employers can have real confidence in the grades that they get. Let's not forget this is an unprecedented year.'

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: 'Parents should be really warned not to hire lawyers to make the case for a different grade because it will impress no one, it won't impress the exam boards.'

She added: 'Dressing up an appeal in legal language is not going to bolster that appeal, or make it more likely to succeed. So if you don't want to waste your money, don't do that.'

Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'There is certainly a worry that we are going to face more appeals than normal, but we just don't know yet.

'Although the appeal system is there to bring a further level of confidence, spurious appeals or hopeful appeals will probably be a waste of time because the system that's been brought in is a robust system for this year.'

He added: 'My only appeal to students and students' parents is that a lot of work has gone into this assessment, you should be able to rely upon the assessment so simply putting an appeal in for the sake of appealing in the hope that your grade might move would be the wrong thing to do.'

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said 'legal firms turning themselves into ambulance chasers and saying to parents for a certain fee they will run an appeal' was unhelpful.

He said: 'That seems to me incredibly misguided because appeals are there for anyone who wants to use them, but they're based on two things: did the school follow due process, and was the grade awarded a fair grade. That will be down to the awarding organisation.

'If you've got a concern then the process is there, but you really don't need to be sending money to lawyers.'

The Department for Education has said all A-level grades have been checked by schools as part of a quality assurance (QA) process - and one in five schools had a sample of their grades checked by exam boards.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year there will not be an algorithm used to moderate grades. Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi), said it could be more difficult to get on to a top course this year if grades are missed.

'It could be harder to get in than usual if you fall a grade or two behind your offer and if it is a competitive course,' he said. 'My advice would be to act swiftly if you need to find a place somewhere else.'

An analysis conducted by PA Media suggests that the day before results were due to be released, for applicants living in England, there were more than 26,000 courses with availability.

It shows that, as of Monday afternoon, 14 of the 24 Russell Group universities had vacancies on courses for English residents - around 2,390 courses between them - on the Ucas clearing site. The numbers of courses listed change frequently as different courses are filled, or become available.

At the same point last year, the day before results day, 17 of the Russell Group institutions had around 4,485 undergraduate courses listed on clearing with potential availability for students in England.

Last week, the head of the admissions service warned that clearing is likely to be 'more competitive' for students seeking places at selective universities this year due to uncertainty on teacher-assessed grades.

Clare Marchant, Ucas's chief executive, urged students receiving their grades to make a decision 'in a matter of days' rather than waiting weeks.

But she added: 'On Tuesday, I am expecting to wake up and have record numbers with their first choice.'

Last week, the Medical Schools Council, which represents 44 heads of medical schools across the UK, warned that some schools may still struggle to increase the number of students they admit despite the announcement that medicine and dentistry schools will receive funding to expand courses.

Left: Georgia Davies laughs after opening her A Level results at Ffynone House school on August 10, 2021 in Swansea. Right: Lanre Dada poses with his grades at Kensington Aldridge Academy in London, as students receive their A-Level results

A student is congratulated by her mother after receiving her A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

Milosz Kowalski, Natasha Pell (centre) and Millie Smith, pose with their grades at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire

Student Amina Lounici, 18 (centre), celebrates with her friend at Brampton Manor Academy in London

Students at Archbishop Blanch School in Liverpool, receive their A-Level results

Students at Nottingham High School get their A level results today

Left: Ed Menlove, 18, poses with his grades at Peter Symonds College in Winchester, Hampshire. Right: Student Kenny Ikeji at Brampton Manor Academy after receiving his A-Level results

HOW WILL EXAM RESULTS BE DECIDED AND HOW CAN STUDENTS APPEAL? When will pupils receive their A-level and GCSE results? Students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will receive their A-level and GCSE results this week. A-level and AS level results day is Tuesday, August 10 and GCSE results day is Thursday, August 12. Pupils should check with their school or college whether they are still required to pick up their results in person in the morning, or whether they will be sent out by email or post instead. The Scottish Highers results are also being released on A-level results day. How have the grades been decided this year? All four nations - England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - adopted a system of awarding grades this summer based on teacher based assessment. Teachers in England have been required to consider a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards, to make decisions on pupils' grades. Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate. Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks. Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted. In some cases, where the evidence did not support the grades submitted, schools and colleges have been asked to review their grades. Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm, before Ofqual announced a U-turn. But this year, no algorithm will be used to moderate teachers' grades. What should students do if they are unhappy with their final grades? Pupils in England who want to appeal against their grade must first request that their school or college reviews whether an administrative or procedural error was made. Each school or college will set their own deadlines by which students must ask them to review a grade. If the school or college rules no error was made, then students can escalate the appeal to the exam boards, which their school or college is expected to submit on their behalf. In England, the deadline to send an appeal to the exam board is September 17. There is an earlier deadline of August 23 for priority appeals, for example, if a student has not got their first choice of university place confirmed. Can students sit an exam if they do not like their results? Students in England who are unhappy with their A-level or GCSE grades will have the opportunity to take exams in the autumn. AS and A-level exams will be held in October, while GCSE exams will take place in November and December. The higher grade will count for applicants who wish to take an autumn exam. What is the plan for the summer exams in 2022? In England, ministers hope that exams will go ahead in summer 2022 after two years of cancelled exams. But pupils taking GCSE and A-level exams next year could be given advance notice on the focus of exam papers to ensure they are not disadvantaged as a result of lost learning during the pandemic. The proposals include giving schools and colleges some choice over the topics that students are assessed on, as well as providing exam aids, but final details will not be confirmed until the autumn term. Advertisement

Students who want to study medicine will have the option to defer their places until next year or choose to move to a different medical school amid capacity constraints, the MSC said.

Last night, Ofqual's interim chief regulator Simon Lebus said that traditional tests only provided a 'snapshot' of a pupil's ability and the new system allowed a fairer assessment gauged over a longer time period.

Speaking to the BBC, Mr Lebus admitted that grades may be slightly higher this year, adding: 'I think a good way to think of it is exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph - you capture an instant, it's a form of sampling.

'Whereas teacher assessment, it allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment.

'I think, from that point of view, we can feel satisfied that it's likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.'

Ms Bousted told the Times: 'I think there was a political decision to put teachers in the firing line. We think there will be a rise in the top grades but I've been assured by government that they won't say teachers have been too generous.'

Mr Lebus said that the watchdog wanted to create a system where every student was given a fair chance to show what they can do.

'I'm very confident that, when they get their grades on Tuesday and Thursday this week, they'll be able to feel satisfied that that's happened,' he told the broadcaster.

Mr Lebus said there have been three stages of checks to ensure students can feel they have been 'fairly treated', including Ofqual checking the policies that schools have for awarding grades and exam boards looking over them.

Headteachers had to submit a personal declaration that they believed grades to be accurate. Schools and colleges were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

It comes as Tory peer Lord Lucas predicted that private school pupils will get short shrift in admissions because universities are prioritising the disadvantaged.

The editor of the Good Schools Guide said yesterday that institutes will be 'pretty cautious' about giving places to fee-paying youngsters who missed their grades as they had 'all the chances' to succeed.

Instead, they will give leg-ups to pupils who experienced 'challenges' such as having 'nowhere to work' during lockdown.

But despite alleged grade inflation, individual pupils could lose out and there is likely to be variability between schools.

Last night, Ofqual defended the system, claiming the results are 'more accurate' than if exams had been held mid-pandemic.

The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard during an extremely challenging time. We know exams are the fairest form of assessment but in their absence this year there is no one better placed to judge their abilities than their teachers.'

Suggestions that almost half of today's grades will be an A or A* were reported in the Times.

Mr Williamson wrote to all teachers, thanking them for their 'hard work' on grading. The Association of School and College Leaders stressed that qualifications had not been 'devalued'.

Lord Lucas said anyone not getting the grades they need for university should call the admissions tutor. But he said that 'tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well'.

He added that institutes will be 'pretty cautious about giving extra space to someone from an independent school' as 'they've had all the chances' to succeed.

'I think admissions tutors will say the hardest time has been had by state schools but by and large, independent schools have got through Covid pretty well,' he said. 'They haven't had half the challenges of someone else who has nowhere to work, or doesn't have an online connection.'

Kate Green, Labour's shadow education secretary, said: 'Students have worked incredibly hard in extraordinary circumstances and should be proud of the results they are receiving today. They have done this in spite of a Conservative government which has let them down at every turn and shown no ambition for their futures.'

It came after Sir Keir Starmer warned that 'chaos and incompetence' in Government had created extra stress for those awaiting their results.

The Labour leader said Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Mr Williamson had failed to act early enough to ensure this summer's results operations run smoothly.

'It frustrates me immensely that this week's big moment in so many young people's lives is being risked by the chaos and incompetence at the top of this Government,' he said.

The Department for Education said it recognises the 'unprecedented challenges pupils and students have faced' during the pandemic and that a 'rigorous system to ensure grades are fair' has been put in place.

Have you got your results today? Send your stories and pictures to jack.wright@mailonline.co.uk.

Sixth-formers at state school 'left in tears after being unable to access their A-Level results for more than three hours because of an IT problem' By Nick Craven for MailOnline Sixth-formers at one highly-rated state school were left in tears this morning after being unable to access their A-Level results for more than three hours because of an IT problem. The students should have been to see their grades from 8am on an IT platform called CloudSchool, but were unable to do so. Separately, at the same time, pupils are emailed by UCAS, the university admissions service, to be advised whether their place at college was confirmed or rejected. So many pupils still anxious to see their results were contacted by UCAS to be told they had been refused for the University courses they had applied for without knowing how close they came to the required grade. The school sent a holding email to parents and pupils saying they were 'working with CloudSchool to resolve issues,' but it did little to quell parents' anger. 'It was a shambles,' said one mother, who asked not to be named. 'The school had one job – to organise the results process properly so everyone got to know their grades at 8am, and it wasn't until about 11.30am that they were finally released. 'The breakdown of modules, which is almost as important for some pupils, didn't come through until about 2pm. ' In an email, co-headteachers Zoe Judge and Jo Davey and director of sixth form Madeleine St Amour wrote to parents: 'Please can you let your son/ daughter know that we have posted a message on google classroom regarding the delay in exam results this morning. 'We are working with Cloud School to resolve the issues as quickly as possible. If your son/daughter has a concern regarding their UCAS offer they can call the school or come in and meet with one of the Sixth Form team. 'We apologise for the undoubted stress that this has caused this morning.' Fortismere is rated 'outstanding' by Ofsted and is the highest-rated state school in the London borough of Haringey. It was rated 30th best school in London for A-Levels by the Sunday Times recently. The school – which has 1,220 students in Years 7 to 11 and a further 450 students in the Sixth Form – is often heavily oversubscribed and house prices in neighbouring Muswell Hill have soared as parents battle to move into its catchment area. Another mother, Jenny Papaeliopoulos, whose daughter was receiving her results today, told the Ham & High: 'It's been frankly completely farcical. They have messed up posting the A Level results.' Jenny said her child was 'in floods of tears – and so has half of the school year', continuing: 'It's not like they didn't know this date was coming, it's set in stone.' Jenny, who works in the NHS, said her child had luckily met their university offer, but had been forced to call school staff in order to find out her actual grades. Fortismere School's co-head Jo Davey told the Ham & High the school at responded to the computer issues by inviting pupils in for an 'old-school physical collection' of their results, and phoning students where possible. Speaking about the results in general, Ms Davey and Ms Judge said: 'Our students have impressed us throughout the last two years of interrupted education. Their resilience, determination and hard work, supported by their teachers, have enabled them to overcome many of the difficulties Covid has presented.' Another mum told MailOnline that some pupils were able to access their results yesterday (MON), due to yet another computer glitch. 'So some of them knew their results, and others didn't, then those results were removed from the website and when the time came for them to be posted, nothing happened for more than three hours. 'On top of all the problems this group have had with lockdowns and inadequately organised remote teaching, it's appalling.' One sixth-former told MailOnline that the computer failure was simply the final straw to a disappointing sixth-form experience: 'It didn't feel like the school knew what was really going on. ' I felt lost on learning. I'd worked hard to go the the sixth form and what resulted was a much worse teaching experience than my peers were encountering at other sixth forms. 'Even the process of allocating predicted grades was confusing, last-minute and seemed like an afterthought. Many of my friends feel similarly let down. Our entire experience at this school through Covid has been disappointing and this exam results furore tops it.' Posting on a private Facebook group for parents, one added: 'It's bonkers that some accidentally saw their results yesterday and today officially we can't see anything! Why can't they simply go into school to pick up a paper copy? This has always worked in the past.' Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Former prime minister David Cameron was at the centre of a fresh lobbying row today after it was revealed a firm he advised won a £123million contract after he contacted the then health secretary Matt Hancock personally.

The ex-Tory leader, who has been criticised for his work with finance house Greensill Capital, is facing further questions over his post-power business activities with a second firm.

Mr Cameron was a paid adviser for US biotech gene-sequencing company Illumina, and wrote to Mr Hancock in April 2019 to invite him to a conference attended by the firm.

Despite ignoring an invite from the firm's executive chairman Jay Flatley weeks earlier, Mr Hancock agreed to go after receiving Mr Cameron's letter, written from his taxpayer-funded post-prime ministerial office, The Times reported.

The event was held at the Four Seasons Hotel in Hampshire in September 2019. A week later the company was awarded a multimillion-pound contract for genetic sequencing without competition with Genomics England - a company owned by the Department of Health and Social Care.

Mr Cameron had written to Mr Hancock saying: 'I understand Jay [Flatley, the executive chairman of Illumina at the time] has sent this direct to your office, but I wanted to i) ensure that you had seen it personally; and ii) strongly endorse their invitation to this significant conference.'

Mr Cameron denied lobbying on any contracts for the company. He said his role was solely to promote the benefits of genome sequencing.

A government spokesperson told MailOnline: 'This contract, signed to help save lives through better diagnosis, was awarded in the correct way, through the proper process and any suggestion of undue ministerial involvement in the decision making is completely wrong.

Pictured: David Cameron, Matt Hancock, and Jay Flatley at a genomics summit in 2019

'Extensive due diligence was carried out and as set out in the transparency notice the contract was directly awarded because Illumina was the only company considered to have the technical capability to deliver this crucial work.

'The 2019 contract was a follow-on contract to the original sequencing contract with Illumina in 2014 and the company's expertise is being used to help the government roll out the world's first whole genome sequencing programme to better diagnose patients with rare disease and certain cancers.'

A spokesperson for Matt Hancock said: 'The UK's genomic sequencing capacity is one of the biggest in the world and has saved countless lives. Mr Hancock had no involvement in the awarding of these contracts and all normal processes were followed.'

But Labour deputy leader Angela Rayner said: 'There is rampant cronyism, sleaze and dodgy lobbying that is polluting our democracy under Boris Johnson and the Conservatives. They hand public money to their mates without a second thought.

'With NHS staff suggesting that it hasn't been possible to make full use of the capacity the contract provided, the Government must answer questions about why it awarded such a huge sum of money without competition in the first place.'

An Illumina spokesman told MailOnline: 'Illumina always follows the correct and necessary process in its negotiations with customers. We have worked with Genomics England since 2013 when we won a competitive tender process for the £78M contract for the 100,000 Genomes Project.

'Our ISO-accredited facilities in Cambridge were chosen by Genomics England as being the most appropriate in the UK in terms of being able to deliver this advanced genomics programme. For the £123M award, Genomics England again did their due diligence and issued a Voluntary ex ante transparency (VEAT) notice which sets out their reasoning for choosing a provider, and invites responses from competitors.

'The 2020 agreement included the sequencing of Covid samples as ''Research Samples'' within the framework of the 2019 agreement.

'The UK is acknowledged to be a world-leader in genomics. The vast majority of David Cameron's work with Illumina is outside the UK, representing the best practices of the UK in genomics to other countries.'

Jay Flatley joined Illumina as a CEO in 1999 and served in that role until 2016, when he took up the role of Executive Chair through 2019, eventually becoming Chair of the Board.

He stepped down from the Board of Directors earlier this year.

A presentation slide found on the company's website outlines how under his leadership, the firm went from having 30 employees in 1999 to more than 4,800 in 2015. Revenue growth also rose from $500,000 in 1999 to $2.2 billion in 2015.

It comes as Mr Cameron faces pressure to reveal how much money he made from finance firm Greensill Capital after denying claims he cashed in more than £7million.

He was earlier this week accused of bringing in a seven-figure sum from his 25-days-per-year role at the company which later collapsed, putting thousands of public sector jobs in jeopardy.

The BBC's Panorama programme claimed to have discovered documents revealing he made £3.25 million after cashing in shares from the company in 2019, and a salary of roughly £700,000 a year for work as a part-time adviser.

David Cameron, left, and Lex Greensill, founder of Greensill Capital, in Saudi Arabia in January 2020

Mr Cameron - who has never revealed how much he was paid - told the programme his remuneration was a private matter.

After the story broke his spokesman said: 'David Cameron did not receive anything like the figures quoted by Panorama.'

But he declined to give an alternative figure in defence of the former premier, who worked for Greensill after quitting No10.

Mr Cameron had also met vaccines minister Nadhim Zahawi in March to discuss genetic sequencing, and Illumina was given further contracts with Public Health England worth up to £870,000, the Times reports.

The government denied that contracts had been discussed.

Mr Cameron had visited Illumina's San Diego headquarters after leaving office in 2016, and became a consultant and chairman of the company's international advisory board the following year.

He had listed Illumina as a 'commercial interest' in a statement issued following revelations of his lobbying of ministers on behalf of Lex Greensill.

A spokesman for Mr Cameron said: 'He has never lobbied the government on behalf of the company or been involved in any contract or commercial discussions.'

A source close to Mr Hancock told The Times that he had replied to Illumina's invitation when his schedule was clearer.

Freedom of information disclosures have also reportedly revealed that health ministers Nadine Dorries, Helen Whately and Jo Churchill received lobbying letters from Illumina.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The world's smallest baby who weighed just 7.5 ounces (212 grams) at birth has finally left a hospital in Singapore after more than a year.

Kwek Yu Xuan, described as a 'little fighter', was as heavy as an apple when she was delivered via emergency C-section at Singapore's National University Hospital in June last year.

Despite her small size and being born four months premature, she has survived and was discharged from the hospital's Neonatal Intensive care unit after 13 months with a weight of 6.3kg (13 pounds and 14 ounces).

The hospital believes that she is the world's lightest baby to have survived a premature birth.

The previous record holder of the world's lightest baby was a boy weighing 8.1 ounces (230 grams) born in Germany, according to the Tiniest Registry managed by the University of Iowa.

Kwek Yu Xuan, described as a 'little fighter', was as heavy as an apple when she was delivered via emergency C-section at Singapore's National University Hospital in June last year

Despite her small size and being born four months premature, she has survived and was discharged from the hospital's Neonatal Intensive care unit after 13 months with a weight of 6.3kg (13 pounds and 14 ounces). Pictured: Kwek Wee Liang (left) and Wong Mei Ling (right) with Yu Xuan when she was discharged from hospital

Her parents Kwek Wee Liang and Wong Mei Ling, both 35, looked relieved as they held Yu Xuan on July 9 as she was was discharged from the hospital.

They had initially planned to deliver Yu Xuan in Malaysia, where their four-year-old son is, but Wong underwent a C-section after suffering from high blood pressure during her pregnancy.

She underwent a C-section and remembers feeling sad that Yu Xuan was born so small.

Wong told Singapore newspaper Straits Times: 'I didn't expect to give birth so quickly, and we were very sad that Yu Xuan was born so small.

'But due to my condition, we didn't have a choice. We could just hope that she would continue to grow (and be healthy).'

Zhang Suhe, an advanced practice nurse who looked after Yu Xuan, said she couldn't believe her eyes when she was brought into the neonatal intensive care unit.

She told the newspaper: 'I was so shocked so I spoke to the professor [in the same department] and asked if he could believe it.

'In my 22 years of being a nurse, I haven't seen such a small newborn baby.'

The hospital believes that she is the world's lightest baby to have survived a premature birth

The National University hospital said babies born four months prematurely like Yu Xuan have a survival rate of about 70 per cent.

The infant was placed on a ventilator to help her breathe as her lungs had not yet fully developed while her skin was so thin and fragile that doctors found it difficult to safely place probes on her so as to monitor her condition.

Dr Yvonne Ng, a senior consultant at the neonatology department, said: 'Her daily care was the main crux of the matter, especially for the first two weeks of life..

'We needed to innovate and find some improvised methods to deal with a baby this small because this is the first time we experienced somebody this tiny.

'She was so small that even the calculation for the medication had to be down to the decimal points. '

The infant was placed on a ventilator to help her breathe as her lungs had not yet fully developed while her skin was so thin and fragile that doctors found it difficult to safely place probes on her so as to monitor her condition

The normal-sized nappies covered Yu Xuan's entire body, so the nurses decided to make their own after they were unable to supply some small enough.

Miss Zhang said: 'There are some chemicals in the diaper to absorb the baby's urine, and this can't come into direct contact with Yu Xuan's skin.

'So we had to fold and seal the edges. These are the things we had to do for her, because caring for her skin is very, very important.'

And the hard work doesn't stop now she has been discharged. Yu Xuan is differing from a chronic lung disease and her parents must place her on a ventilator at home to help her breathe.

But she has the strength to turn by herself and is learning to feed from a bottle.

Speaking of her gratitude to the nurses who looked after her and Yu Zuan, Wong said: 'I have to thank the nurses for taking care of her for such a long time, they really took very good care of her. We were very happy that everyone could come for her discharge. The team is like family.'

The hospital bill reached around $200,000 but was paid for via a crowdfund which raised around $300,000.

The additional $100,000 was split in half - one half for Yu Xuan's future care and the other was returned to the crowdfunding platform of Give Asia to help other families.

And the hard work doesn't stop now she has been discharged. Yu Xuan is differing from a chronic lung disease and her parents must place her on a ventilator at home to help her breathe

The National University Hospital said in a statement posted on Facebook: 'Baby Yu Xuan was just 212gms - barely the weight of a large apple - when she was delivered via emergency C-section in June last year.

'After 13 months in our Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, baby Yu Xuan was discharged home well. She is likely the world's lightest baby to have survived a premature birth.'

'We are happy for the little fighter and her family, and proud of the care provided by our team. Our best wishes to Little Yu Xuan as she continues to grow, thrive and beat the odds every day.'

'It was a difficult journey for Yu Xuan and we greatly appreciate the concerted effort and benevolent support from our colleagues, donors as well as the larger community who have contributed to her survival and growth,' Zubair Amin, the head and senior consultant at the hospital's Department of Neonatology, told CNN.

'This was a team effort that embodies the spirit of care and compassion.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Double-jabbed adults and all children will be set free from isolation rules on Monday as ministers finally end the pingdemic.

More than 33million people in England who have received both coronavirus vaccine doses will no longer have to quarantine if someone they have been in contact with tests positive.

The restrictions will also be lifted for everyone aged under 18 as school bubbles are scrapped.

But ministers last night said the double-jabbed should remain cautious if they get pinged and think about wearing a face covering in enclosed spaces and avoiding others, particularly the elderly and those with health conditions.

Instead of having to isolate for up to ten days, those contacted by NHS Test and Trace or through the Covid-19 app will be advised to get a PCR test as soon as possible. They will not have to isolate while waiting for the result.

More than 33million people in England who have received both coronavirus vaccine doses will no longer have to quarantine if someone they have been in contact with tests positive

The much-anticipated rule change comes after weeks of chaos that have seen millions of workers forced to stay at home and children kept away from school even if they are not infected.

Crippling staff shortages have led to empty supermarket shelves and forced businesses including restaurants and pubs to shut their doors.

Figures a fortnight ago showed that a record 1.2million were told to quarantine in just one week including nearly 700,000 who were pinged by the Covid-19 app.

The new isolation rules for England come after similar changes were made in Wales last Saturday and in Scotland on Monday.

Double-jabbed adults will have to wait until 14 days after their second dose before they are exempted from the isolation rules for close contacts.

Anyone who tests positive following a PCR test will still be legally required to isolate irrespective of their vaccination status or age.

Figures a fortnight ago showed that a record 1.2million were told to quarantine in just one week including nearly 700,000 who were pinged by the Covid-19 app. [File image]

Quarantine requirements for travellers returning from abroad will remain the same.

The removal of the isolation requirements for under-18s comes ahead of millions of pupils and students returning to school and college for the autumn term.

The bubbles system that has seen whole classes or year groups sent home will be axed.

'Stop mass testing and learn to live with virus' Only the sick should be tested for coronavirus and all but the most vulnerable should be freed from blanket ‘control measures’, a Government expert has said. Several leading scientists are setting out how Britain can shift towards ‘living with Covid’, calling for an end to disruptive measures such as mass testing and self-isolation. Professor Andrew Hayward, a member of the Government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), and others yesterday backed calls to scrap routine testing of asymptomatic people. He added that blanket lockdowns can no longer be justified as a way to control Covid and instead restrictions should only apply to the ‘most vulnerable’. Professor Hayward, a University College London epidemiologist, said: ‘As we move into a sort of endemic rather than a pandemic situation then the potential harm that the virus can cause at the population level is much less. ‘So you can’t really justify such broad population-wide control measures and we tend to target the control measures more to those who are most vulnerable.’ Meanwhile, as another 29,612 cases and 104 deaths were reported yesterday, Professor Hayward warned that herd immunity was a ‘mythical’ goal. He said: ‘I think it is a pretty distant prospect and we need to get used to the concept that this will become ... a disease that is with us all the time and probably transmits seasonally, like influenza.’ Advertisement

Secondary school and college students will instead be required to take two on-site tests at the start of the new term, followed by twice weekly lateral flow tests at home.

Ministers have promised to review the testing requirements by the end of next month.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid said last night: ‘Asking the close contacts of people with Covid-19 to self-isolate has played a critical role in helping us get this virus under control, and millions of people across the UK have made enormous sacrifices by doing this.

‘Every single one of these sacrifices has helped us protect the NHS and save lives.’

He added: ‘Getting two doses of a vaccine has tipped the odds in our favour and allowed us to safely reclaim our lost freedoms, and from Monday we can take another huge step back towards our normal lives by removing self-isolation requirements for double-jabbed people who are contacts of people with Covid-19.

'Double-jabbed people who test positive will still need to self-isolate.’

Mr Javid continued: ‘Vaccines are what will bring this pandemic to an end – the wall of defence provided by the rollout is allowing us to get even closer to normal life.

‘If you haven’t already, please make sure you come forward for your jab at the earliest opportunity.’

Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, said: ‘Thanks to the huge success of the vaccine programme, we are able to ease self-isolation requirements for double-jabbed people and under-18s.

‘It is important that close contacts continue to come forward for a PCR test, in order to detect the virus and variants of concern.

‘Although two doses of vaccine will greatly reduce your own risk of becoming unwell with Covid-19, it is still possible to contract the virus and pass it to others.’

Dr Harries added: ‘So if you develop symptoms at any time – vaccinated or not – you should get a test and be very careful in your contact with others until you have received a negative test result.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank were on their way to Balmoral today to join her beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse.

The Duke of York's younger daughter will be at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday.

The Princess jetted into Aberdeen Airport with her family on a commercial BA flight from London Heathrow which arrived at around 3.20pm.

Eugenie was first off the plane, followed closely by Jack and their nanny carrying baby son August down the stairs to an awaiting Range Rover.

It is the also the first time the couple have been pictured together since Jack was spotted sipping rosé on a vintage speedboat off the Italian coast while surrounded by bikini-clad models. A source close to Jack said he was on a business trip to Capri for his tequila brand Casamigos.

The couple appeared to make a quick stop to chat with ground staff while their luggage was offloaded before driving off the tarmac towards Balmoral Castle.

Her father Prince Andrew arrived yesterday, travelling by car with his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Ms Roberts.

The 61-year-old was already on his way to Scotland when the legal summons landed at his Royal Lodge home in Windsor. However, with the legal action hanging over him the prince could be in for some awkward discussions with his mother.

Miss Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Yesterday a lawyer described the legal action as a 'grenade waiting to go off'.

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank were on their way to Balmoral today to join her beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse

The Duke of York's younger daughter will be at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday

Eugenie was first off the plane, followed closely by Jack and their nanny carrying baby son August down the stairs to an awaiting Range Rover. They drove off the tarmac before later being spotted entering the Balmoral estate

Their may be awkward conversations for Prince Andrew in his first meeting with his mother The Queen following the filing of the civil suit by Ms Roberts in New York City on Monday

David Boies, who is representing Ms Roberts (pictured) in her US civil case against the 61-year-old son of the Queen, said the Duke's legal team had been 'totally uncooperative' in attempts to discuss the abuse claims made by his client

Astonishingly Andrew has yet to make any public comment about the lawsuit. The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Ms Roberts.

Andrew, who normally flies to Aberdeen by private jet for his visits to Balmoral, appeared to have taken steps to avoid photographers this time after apparently flying to a different airport, or even driving the whole way.

Earlier today Ms Roberts's legal team claimed Prince Andrew had 'stonewalled' against efforts at cooperation 'for the last five years' - as it was revealed that the Duke of York could face a second lawsuit from another of Jeffrey Epstein's victim.

David Boies, who is representing Ms Roberts in her US civil case against the 61-year-old son of the Queen, said the Duke's legal team had been 'totally uncooperative' in attempts to discuss the abuse claims made by his client.

'We've reached out to Prince Andrew's legal team, a number of times over the last five years, we've made an attempt to engage with him to give him an opportunity to tell his side of the story, to provide any explanation or context, that he might have for his actions to try to resolve this without the necessity of litigation. Every such effort has been rebuffed,' he told Sky News today.

He added: 'They have totally stonewalled us just like they've stonewalled the criminal prosecutors in the United States.'

It comes as it was today revealed that the Prince could face another US lawsuit from one of Jeffrey Epstein's victims who accused the royal of groping her breasts in a sickening attack involving a Spitting Image puppet of himself gifted to him by Ghislaine Maxwell.

Johanna Sjoberg has accused the Duke of York of sexually assaulting her when she was 21 years old and working as paedophile Epstein’s PA.

The incident is alleged to have taken place in front of Ms Roberts, now known as Virginia Giuffre, who has launched a bombshell legal action accusing Andrew of rape.

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was 'loaned' to the British royal and forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein, fearing she would be killed if she disobeyed.

Ms Sjoberg, now 43, had previously been unable to sue because of the amount of time since the alleged attack. But a pending US law change could now allow her to bring her ­allegations to court.

It came as Prince Andrew's working life was left hanging by a thread as he arrived in Balmoral with his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, for a holiday with the Queen last night – just 24 hours after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse.

Andrew, who was driving a Range Rover, held a stern expression while the Duchess of York appeared to be holding conversation while sat in the back seat

Johanna Sjoberg (pictured left in 2007, and right today) says Prince Andrew groped her breast with a puppet at Jeffrey Epstein's New York home. She could soon be able to launch a US lawsuit against him

Johanna Sjoberg has accused the Duke of York of sexually assaulting her when she was 21 years old and working as paedophile Epstein’s PA.

Representatives for Prince Andrew, who vehemently denies any wrongdoing, last night offered 'no comment' to the sex abuse allegations.

Meanwhile his legal team, consisting of leading defence solicitor Gary Bloxsome, who has represented Premier League stars such as Jason Puncheon in the past, and leading QC Clare Montgomery, a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, were said to be in discussions last night on how to respond.

Johanna is the second Epstein victim to claim that Andrew had attacked her while on his knee at the billionaire's New York home.

Ms Sjoberg has accused the duke of groping her by taking a Spitting Image puppet of himself and placing its hand on her breast after being jetted to the US by Epstein to 'entertain' the prince in around 2001. In another account she described Andrew touching her breasts while the puppet was used to grope Virginia Roberts.

She said that she was recruited by Maxwell in 2001, when she was a student at Palm Beach Atlantic College.

Sjoberg was under the impression she was being hired as a personal assistant, but she soon realized her job was to provide 'sexual massages' to Epstein, who she has said told her that he needed to have 'three orgasms a day.'

She claims she was 'punished' when Epstein failed to orgasm as a result of one of her massages, which Maxwell allegedly told her were necessary because 'she [Maxwell] would not be able to please him as much as he needed and that is why there were other girls around'.

Andrew's arrival at Balmoral comes as the lawyer for Epstein victim Virginia Roberts accused the Prince of 'ignoring' him after a civil suit was filed against him . The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Virginia Roberts

Prince Andrew's Spitting Image puppet, which Ms Sjoberg says was gifted to the royal by Ghislaine Maxwell (right with Jeffrey Epstein)

The beleaguered royal drove into the monarch's private Scottish estate for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Virginia Roberts Giuffre.

She alleged she was sexually abused by Andrew when she was 17 and that he knew she was the teenage victim of sex trafficking.

Miss Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Yesterday a lawyer described the legal action as a 'grenade waiting to go off'.

Astonishingly Andrew, 61, has yet to make any public comment about the lawsuit and instead travelled to Scotland with his ex-wife.

His dog arrived at Balmoral in a separate car an hour earlier, suggesting the prince could be planning a lengthy stay. The Duke of York has previously denied claims he abused Miss Roberts and forced her into sex during a visit to London more than two decades ago.

The Queen's second son stepped back from royal duties over his relationship with late financier Epstein and insiders said the lawsuit effectively ended any ambition he held of a return to public life.

Andrew, who normally flies to Aberdeen by private jet for his visits to Balmoral, appeared to have taken steps to avoid photographers this time after apparently flying to a different airport, or even driving the whole way.

Legal experts said the civil case could drag on for years and threatened to be a millstone around his – and the Royal Family's – neck for years to come.

A US lawyer warned the lawsuit would be devastating for the prince's reputation and could force him to answer questions about his own sexual history, as well as his relationship with Epstein.

Miss Roberts' legal team could interrogate Andrew over whether he had faced any allegation of sexual misconduct or impropriety in the past, a US lawyer told the Daily Mail.

Prince Andrew with Jeffrey Epstein on a stroll together after leaving Epstein's New York home in 2011

Prince Andrew has been spotted arriving at Balmoral Castle accompanied by his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson - as he prepares to face the Queen a day after being sued in New York for allegedly sexually abusing Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts

The Duke today travelled to Scotland to join other members of the royal family for the tradition summer stay at Balmoral. The Queen, on her first trip to the castle after the death of her husband Prince Philip, arrived yesterday to a guard of honour in a small ceremony outside the castle gates

Her Majesty The Queen, 95, arrived for her traditional summer holiday at Balmoral yesterday. She is seen here during an inspection of the Balaklava Company, 5 Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland at the gate

'Handpicked' to defend the Duke: Leading solicitor who represented clients facing cartel charges, and QC whose clients include Argentinian dictator Augusto Pinochet Solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases From alleged criminal cartels to Premier League football stars, high-ranking solicitor Gary Bloxsome has defended clients in some of the UK's most high profile cases. He famously defended Wimbledon's Des Byrne in 2002, when he and Chelsea stars John Terry and Jody Morris were hauled before the courts accused of being involved in a nightclub brawl. Terry and Morris were cleared on all charges, while Byrne was found guilty of possessing a bottle as an offensive weapon - but avoided jail and instead was ordered to pay a £2,000 fine. More recently, Mr Bloxsome defended Crystal Palace star Jason Puncheon after he too was accused of being involved in a night club brawl in 2017. The forward, who last season turned out for Cypriot side Pafos, initially denied a charge of assault, before later pleading guilty. He was ordered to do 210 hours of community work. Mr Bloxsome has also previously worked on cases including defending British troops against war crime allegations. He also was involved in defending an alleged criminal cartel case involving the Office of Fair Trading's review into the passenger fuel surcharge. Mr Bloxsome is thought to have been chosen by the Duke himself. He is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet. Mr Bloxsome is working alongside leading QC Clare Montgomery (pictured) - a extradition lawyer once used by Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet Ms Montgomery, of Matrix Chambers, is a specialist with dealing with 'cross border challenges', according to her resume. Among her long list of defence clients are Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator of Chile who was indicted for crimes against humanity by Spain during the 90s. General Pinochet was indicted on an international arrest warrant for human rights violations by Spain, before being arrested in a London hospital where he was undergoing minor surgery in 1998. In 1998 Mrs Montgomery represented the dictator in his case before the House of Lords -then the highest court in the country - in a hard-fought 16-month-long legal battle. She also represented the former Prime Minister of Thailand after he was ousted in a military coup in 2011; and Vijay Mallya, who India seeks to extradite from the UK to face financial crime charges. Advertisement

They would also be entitled to demand access to any communications between him, Epstein and the convicted sex offender's alleged 'madam', socialite Ghislaine Maxwell.

The lawyer, who asked not to be named, said: 'It will be a train wreck for him. This case is a grenade waiting to go off.'

Andrew has 21 days to respond to Miss Roberts' claim and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without the need for a trial, which would be potentially disastrous for his reputation.

It would raise the prospect of the ninth in line to the throne being branded a sex offender, and facing a demand for damages which could run into millions of pounds.

Such an outcome would cause enormous personal distress to the 95-year-old Queen but would also leave an indelible 'stain' on the reputation of the Royal Family, according to one royal expert.

Last night Buckingham Palace declined to comment and referred all inquiries to the Duke of York's legal team.

In the legal claim, lawyers said Epstein, Maxwell and the prince had all forced Miss Roberts to have sex with Andrew against her will after she was trafficked to London.

They alleged Andrew also sexually abused the teenager at Epstein's mansion in New York and at his private island in the US Virgin Islands, Little Saint James.

The legal document, filed to a court in New York, said Miss Roberts, now 38 and a married mother-of-three known by her married name Virginia Giuffre, had suffered 'severe and lasting' damage.

The lawsuit went on: 'In this country no person, whether president or prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her.

'It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'

Miss Roberts' lawyer Mr Boies told Channel 4 News he had made repeated attempts to contact Andrew about the case, but claimed the prince and his lawyers had 'stonewalled' and ignored him.

Mr Boies said: 'We've made every effort to reach out to him to hear his side of the story to understand whether he has anything that he can say that would put his actions in context.

'And he has simply ignored us, and he can do that, but he can't ignore judicial process.

'This is now a matter for the courts to decide. And it would be very ill advised I think for anyone to sort of thumb their nose at a federal court.

'If he did, obviously there would be a default judgment entered against him, which I think no one really wants to have happen.'

He added: 'They just have totally stonewalled, they have refused to provide any explanation, they refuse to engage in any discussions, they refuse to provide any facts.

'They've even refused to respond to any of the allegations that been made in any reasonable way.'

Referring to the now-infamous photograph of the prince with his arm around Miss Roberts, he said a jury would have to consider if Andrew had been truthful about whether they had met.

Her case is a civil lawsuit seeking unspecified damages – not a criminal case.

But experts warned evidence uncovered during civil proceedings could potentially be used by criminal authorities.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing.

A spokesperson for Prince Andrew told MailOnline this evening there would be 'no comment' on the civil suit.

Virginia Roberts' lawyer David Boies today claimed Andrew and his lawyers had 'stonewalled' against the claims for five years but warned: 'He can ignore me and he can ignore Virginia, but he can't ignore judicial process'

Prince Andrew is seen driving his car in Windsor earlier this year. He is yet to respond to her suit, filed in New York City on Monday

The Duke of York and the Queen attending St Mary the Virgin church in Hillington, Sandringham, Norfolk, last year

The US legal heavyweight who took on Microsoft, George Bush and represented Harvey Weinstein: David Boies is representing Virginia Roberts in Prince Andrew civil law suit When it comes to US lawyers, few are bigger than David Boies. The 80-year-old is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew. It is a case that will have the world's attention. But it won't be the first time Mr Boies has been in the media spotlight. One of his long-term clients was Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood film producer, who was found guilty of sex offences in February 2020, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison. But while his professional relationship with Weinstein proved somewhat of a PR disaster for Mr Boies, he maintains a stellar reputation. Famously, he represented the plaintiff in the famous case of Hollingsworth v. Perry. The judgment invalidated California's Proposition 8 - the law banning same-sex marriage. David Boies, 80, is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew Mr Boies also represented Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore in his fight against Republican candidate George Bush. The 2000 case saw a court decide on a controversial recount on the votes in Florida after claims the counting machines had missed votes. The courts eventually decided that Bush had fairly won Florida - giving him enough electoral college votes to take the Presidency. However, perhaps Mr Boies' biggest case was United States v. Microsoft Corp. The case saw the U.S. government accuse Microsoft of illegally maintaining its monopoly in the world of computers. Mr Boies initially represented the US Department of Justice in the case. After initially deciding in favour of the DoJ, the case was taken to appeal and eventually ended in a settlement between Microsoft and the US government. Advertisement

Prince Andrew arrived to Balmoral a day after Her Majesty, 95, who was welcomed back with a guard of honour in a small ceremony outside the castle gates - her first trip to Balmoral since the death of Prince Philip aged 99 in April.

Andrew may have been comforted to have his ex-wife Fergie by his side for the trip, after she was invited to stay as long as her ex-husband did. It was previously reported the Duchess would have to leave before Prince Philip turned up.

However there may be awkward conversations for Andrew in his first meeting with his mother following the filing of the civil suit by Miss Roberts yesterday.

The accuser, now 38, is seeking 'significant' damages from The Duke of York claiming she was sexually assault by him in New York, the Caribbean and London in 2001 - when she was 17 and he was 41.

Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases.

But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence.

Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'.

If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway.

But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland.

Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Miss Roberts favour, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'.

After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases.

He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London.

And, in a further blow to the Prince, royal experts today claimed the case could scupper any plans by the Duke to return to frontline royal duties.

It comes as it was today revealed that Prince Andrew does not have diplomatic immunity - a privilege which is reserved for the Queen and her immediate household.

It means that the senior royal may be brought before a court if he sets foot in the US or any of its territories - at which point a court could compel him to give evidence.

But legal experts say that will only happen if Prince Andrew willingly goes to the US. That is because Roberts' claim is a civil case, rather than a criminal one, meaning he cannot be extradited, according to experts.

Mr Anwar told MailOnline: 'The first thing is this is a civil case and under the terms of the extradition treaty, the U.S. Department of Justice can only extradite if there is a criminal prosecution.'

However, Mr Anwar added: 'It's not a matter that will simply go away.

'As I understand it, there is still an ongoing criminal investigation.'

'If they were to raise a prosecution, they would be well within their rights to seek Prince Andrew,' he said.

Prince Andrew is pictured with his mother, the Queen, his brother Prince Charles and, behind them, Princess Anne in June 2019. The Queen has diplomatic immunity; her children do not

How Prince Andrew, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases. But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence. Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'. If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland. Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'. After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases. He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London. Advertisement

Mr Anwar also believes that, should the civil case proceed without Prince Andrew appearing in New York, the Duke could still be found liable in absentia and be required to pay compensation to Roberts.

He added: 'The court would find ways in which to obtain those assets. And the complainant's country can pursue actions against Prince Andrew to chase his assets.'

Asked how much the damages cost could be, he said: 'It would be up to a jury, but I would think it could be in the millions and millions of dollars'.

However, before any of this, Mr Anwar said Prince Andrew's legal team will likely to try and have the case thrown out.

He said: 'I think the first thing he will do is instruct lawyers on the ground in the US to act for him, and to try and have the case thrown out as a 'spurious' case.'

The comments come as royal journalist and author, Robert Jobson today told MailOnline that the lawsuit would make any planned return to public life for the Duke 'impossible'.

He said: 'I cannot envisage the Duke, no matter how much he might want to returning to being a senior royal to supper the Queen while a suit is pending, or with the possibility of a verdict against him passed in his absence.

'Obviously there is a question over legal jurisdictions and I am sure the Duke's team will be looking at every angle. I cannot see them volunteering him to give evidence, or going to the US as it will leave him exposed legally.

'I suspect he will remain silent and continue to follow his lawyers advice. This of course was her only options and she only had until Saturday to lodge this civil case.'

Miss Robert's case is the first time that Prince Andrew has been the subject of a suit. Previously his name was mentioned in connection with pedophile Epstein, but until now he had not been directly targeted.

In June 2020, the then-US Attorney General Bill Barr said that he was not seeking extradition as part of the investigation into Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell.

'I don't think it's a question of handing him over,' Barr said. 'I think it's just a question of having him provide some evidence'

Meanwhile, royal commenter Richard Fitzwilliams told MailOnline that he sees 'no conceivable chance' of case leading to a court appearance for Prince Andrew.

Prince Andrew is seen in Windsor on July 23 - what would have been his 35th wedding anniversary. He and Sarah Ferguson separated in 1992, and divorced in 1996

Prince Andrew has ex-wife Fergie at his side after Duchess is brought back into royal fold As Prince Andrew is again hit by accusations of sexual abuse from Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts, he appears to have an unlikely companion at his side. In one of the most dramatic cases of royal redemption, the Prince's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson is accompanying him to Balmoral where he will face his mother for the first time since a civil suit was filed against him in New York. Fergie was exiled from the firm following her divorce from Andrew in 1996. The Duchess of York has however become a lodger at her ex-husband's Royal Lodge home in Windsor, and has slowly but surely been welcomed back into the fold. And last week, the Mail revealed that Fergie had been invited to stay at the Queen's Scottish retreat this summer. There will also be a major difference because, unlike previous visits, when she had to make a quick getaway before Prince Philip arrived, the Duchess can stay at Balmoral for as long as her ex-husband It is believed The Queen has appreciate the loyalty that Sarah has demonstrated to the Royal Family since her divorce and has been impressed by the close relationship she has maintained with Andrew, 61. The Duchess has also said she is '100 per cent' certain that Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.' The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1996, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms. 'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added. Advertisement

He said: 'As I understand it the real reason for this court case is to do with issue of statute of limitation (the time in which a person must submit a civil claim).

'But I don't think that there's a conceivable chance (that he will appear in court), given the way things have been handled so far.

'Prince Andrew said in his BBC interview that he was willing to co-operate with the FBI (in their investigation into Epstein), but he doesn't appear, from reports, to have co-operated so far. So I see absolutely nil chance.

'But this case will bring more embarrassment for him and for the royal family – as is anything to do with Andrew and Epstein,' Fitzwilliams added.

One thing Prince Andrew won't be able to do is rely on diplomatic immunity to protect him. That privilege in the case of royals is only for the Queen and members of her immediate household.

Bob Morris, a constitutional law professor at UCL said in 2019: '[Sovereign immunity] is a concept devised to protect the position of heads of state, but heads of state only, not the members of their family in their function as head of state. And you can't have more than one head of the state.

'So it doesn't apply to the members of people's families, there is no logic in doing so. Andrew is in the same position as any other UK citizen.'

In 1978 Andrew's older brother Prince Charles was sued after a visit to Ohio the year before following a bizarre confrontation with a student.

Before his address to the University of Cleveland, third-year law student Jack Kilroy, stood up and asked the Prince: 'I would like to know when England is going to stop torturing political prisoners?'

He was escorted out of the building, and then filed a civil complaint against Prince Charles for alleged deprivation of 'various rights guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the United States.'

The US Attorney General, upon the recommendation of the State Department, filed a suggestion of immunity with the court, on the view that the acts he allegedly committed were performed in his official capacity.

The court did not get as far as arguing whether Charles could be extradited for the civil case.

Andrew's visit to the US to see Epstein was entirely in a personal capacity, and so he would not be granted the same leeway.

Andrew could certainly be charged with an offence in the UK, if there were grounds to do so, although there is no indication of any such allegations being made there.

His sister Princess Anne in 2002 became the first senior Royal to be convicted of a criminal offence after pleading guilty to a charge that one of her dogs attacked two children.

The filing of a civil action against the Duke in America is certain to cause huge embarrassment for the Royal family. Virginia Roberts is pictured in Australia in February 2011

Who IS telling the truth? After months examining all the evidence for Prince Andrew's accuser's sex claims, this dossier lays bare the heart of new legal case A ‘DAMNING’ PHOTOGRAPH AND SEX IN THE BATH Her Complaint, Paragraphs 37-38: ‘On one occasion Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell’s home. During this encounter Epstein, Maxwell and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will. The photograph depicts Prince Andrew and Maxwell at Maxwell’s home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing plaintiff.’ The photo of a grinning Andrew with his hand on the naked midriff of 17-year-old Miss Roberts, who was being sexually exploited at the time by his friend Jeffrey Epstein, is the bombshell at the heart of her case. The picture, which shows Ghislaine Maxwell smiling in the background, is said to have been taken in London on March 10, 2001. It appears to corroborate Roberts’s claims of closeness between her and Andrew. For his part, the Duke has questioned its authenticity and says he cannot remember it being taken, or even having met Miss Roberts at all. He made these denials in his November 2019 car-crash interview with the BBC’s Emily Maitlis in which he said it could not have happened because he had taken his daughter Princess Beatrice, then 12, to a party at a branch of Pizza Express in Woking, Surrey. Our investigation into the events of that 24 hours revealed that Beatrice had ‘absolutely no recollection’ of the party her father claimed to have attended. Nor could her hosts recall his presence. We also revealed that, according to a family diary, the Duke had booked a home manicure that afternoon. Impeccable sources also said he had a ‘very vague’ recollection of waiting under a bridge near Pizza Express to collect his daughter. The sense of collective memory failure deepened when housekeepers on duty that weekend at the prince’s home – Sunninghill Park, Ascot – told us they ‘can’t remember’ his movements either. The royal protection officer thought to have been on duty is now dead. But questions were also asked about the accuracy of Miss Roberts’s claim that she went clubbing at Tramp in London with a ‘sweaty’ Andrew that evening. Her claim that he drank alcohol, for example, is not credible as he is well-known to be a lifelong teetotaller. Doubts have also been cast on her lurid description of bathroom fumbling which led to sex in the bath at Maxwell’s home. His supporters argue that the bath tub in place at the time did not match the one described by Miss Roberts and was ‘too small’ for such an encounter. But Andrew’s claim that he could not sweat thanks to a medical condition drew guffaws of disbelief. A royal puppet in New York Her Complaint, Paragraph 39: ‘On another occasion, Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff in Epstein’s New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew’s lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.’ In his disastrous Newsnight interview, Andrew denied that he was an overnight guest at Epstein’s Manhattan mansion at 9 East 71st Street in the spring of 2001. The Mail’s investigation proved that he had visited, however. And there was also an unexplained five hours spent by the Duke in the city earlier in the same trip. The Duke had arrived in the Big Apple on official duties connected to the Outward Bound Trust charity, of which he was chair of trustees, on Monday, April 9, 2001. That afternoon, between 1.45pm and 6.45pm, when he was due at a formal dinner, he managed to put himself in a potentially compromising situation. This period was described by two words that appeared in the confidential and previously unpublished copy of the Prince’s itinerary obtained by the Daily Mail: ‘Private Time’. Exactly how that time was spent has never been fully explained by him. But just a six-minute walk from the Consul General’s residence was the biggest townhouse in Manhattan, which belonged to his ‘business mentor’, Epstein. Flight logs appear to confirm witness accounts that earlier the same day Roberts, Epstein, Maxwell, and another young, though not under-age, female masseuse called Johanna Sjoberg had flown to New York on the tycoon’s private jet. Sjoberg said she did indeed sit on Prince Andrew’s lap on a couch at Epstein’s house and the Duke put his hand on her breast. Maxwell, who had brought out a latex Spitting Image puppet of Andrew, then placed one of its hands hand on the breast of Roberts, who was sitting on the other side of HRH. Sjoberg said the situation seemed humorous rather than predatory. But Miss Roberts, in an interview with a Sunday newspaper in 2011, her unpublished memoir of the same year, a 2015 deposition under oath, and later TV interviews, claimed events then took a sinister turn. She says she and Andrew went to a massage room known as ‘the dungeon’ where they had sex. In the 2015 deposition, filed for a defamation action against Maxwell, Giuffre’s recollection was quite specific. ‘I had sex with Prince Andrew... in Epstein’s New York mansion in spring 2001. I was 17 at the time. Epstein called me down to his office. When I got there Epstein was there, along with Maxwell, Johanna Sjoberg and Andy. ‘I was very surprised to see him again. Epstein and Maxwell were making lewd jokes about Randy Andy. I had the impression Andy had come to see Epstein and have sex with me. There was no apparent purpose for Andy to be there.’ She was purportedly paid $400 on that occasion for her services. In his Maitlis interview, the Duke was challenged about the encounter and Sjoberg’s evidence. Asked if he visited Epstein’s mansion that month. He replied: ‘I probably did... because of what I was doing, I was staying with the consul general which is further down the street on Fifth so I wasn’t... I wasn’t staying there. I may have visited but definitely didn’t, definitely, definitely no, no, no activity.’ After an overnight trip to Boston to carry out Outward Bound duties, the Mail investigation established Andrew returned to New York and stayed, with a police bodyguard, at Epstein’s mansion. The sources said Roberts was not present then, nor was Epstein or anyone aside from housekeepers. THE CURIOUS CASE OF LITTLE ST JAMES Her Complaint, Paragraph 40: ‘On another occasion Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein’s private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.’ Our investigations confirmed, for the first time, that Andrew was on Epstein’s island at the same time as Miss Roberts during the Easter weekend of 2001. Immediately after leaving New York, Andrew was due to travel to the Bahamas to join his estranged wife and their two daughters for a family holiday. Instead, on Good Friday, April 13, 2001, we revealed that Andrew flew to Little St James after new travel arrangements were made by Ghislaine Maxwell. Flight logs and personal accounts suggest Epstein, Maxwell, Roberts and Sjoberg had flown there ahead of Andrew. The Prince and his bodyguard spent 48 hours as Epstein’s guest at a ‘weekend-long party’ before flying to the Bahamas for the delayed rendezvous with his family. Sources close to the Duke conceded to the Mail that Andrew had been on the island that Easter. So was a US financier called Gwendolyn Beck. In emails to a third party in 2016, Beck, 42, recalled: ‘The Prince was always charming, polite and a gentleman to me. As I remember, he arrived very late at night (on Little St James) spent the next day/night, and left early the following morning. He was in the bungalow next to me, and I heard no strange noises or anything unusual. If anything, he was flirting with me.’ Flight logs suggest Beck left the island on Easter Monday with Epstein, Maxwell and Roberts. Roberts has told a different story of Prince’s behaviour on Little St James. Or, rather, stories. She alleges the third sex attack on her by the Prince took place on the island during an open-air orgy involving up to eight other teenage girls – not during that 2001 Easter break, but later that year. Yet there are inconsistencies in Miss Roberts’s accounts that remain unexplained. In 2011 she wrote the draft of a personal memoir called The Billionaire Playboys’ Club in which she described an episode she claims took place on Little St James days after her 18th birthday on August 9, 2001. After French model agency boss Jean-Luc Brunel arrived with an entourage consisting of Russian models, the group repaired to Epstein’s cabana. Roberts wrote: ‘There was no need for words here... Through glimpses in between bodies crossing over me, I could see Jeffrey and Brunel watching us, sitting in a chair with their hands around their (genitals). ‘“The best part is they don’t even speak English, so there’s never a need to keep them amused,” I could hear one of the men divulge and (I’m) pretty sure it came from Jeffrey.’ Under oath in January 2015 she described an identical scenario, save for an important change in participants. ‘The third time I had sex with Andy was in an orgy on Epstein’s private island,’ she stated. I was around 18 at the time. Epstein, Andy, approximately eight other young girls, and I had sex together. ‘The other girls all appeared to be under the age of 18 and didn’t really speak English. Epstein laughed about the fact they couldn’t really communicate, saying that they are the “easiest” girls to get along with.’ Now Andrew rather than Brunel was Epstein’s companion at the orgy. That second scenario was repeated in a 2015 newspaper interview she gave. All three accounts had striking similarities: The seven or eight Russian or East European girls provided by Brunel; their lack of English; Epstein’s joke about the utility of the language barrier; the provocative photoshoot which degenerated into an orgy. But in the first version of the orgy, described in her memoir from which she hoped to make significant profit, the Duke does not appear at all. In fact there is no suggestion she had sex with him on the island. THE VANISHED RANCH SEX ALLEGATION Miss Roberts’ varying accounts of the this orgy are not alone in being potentially troublesome to her case against Andrew if it goes to court. There was a fourth and final claim of sexual abuse committed by the Prince against Miss Roberts, which appears in the draft of her 2011 memoir, which has since become a legal exhibit. She described being sent by air to Epstein’s Zorro Ranch in New Mexico to spend two days with the Duke, alone save for security and domestic staff. Their time was filled with horse riding and ‘erotic massages’. In other words, sexual activity which, Roberts made plain, she didn’t want. But this interlude was never again mentioned by Miss Roberts; at least not in any of her affidavits, court testimonies or media interviews. Why? Andrew denies ever having met her at the ranch, with sources close to him suggesting to the Mail he could not have gone riding with her because of a serious horse allergy. A contemporaneous note kept by his police bodyguard, says Andrew’s companion was not Miss Roberts but a 28-year-old doctor called Melanie Walker. If the Duke never met Miss Roberts at Zorro – in a subsequent account delivered under oath she described the claim as a ‘mistake’ made by a journalist with whom she worked – what impact could that have on the credibility of her other allegations? Advertisement

The court also ordered her to keep the English bull terrier - known as Dotty - on a lead in public, to organise training for the animal and to pay £148 ($205) court costs.

She was fined £500 ($693) and ordered to pay £500 compensation. No other senior royal has attended court for 100 years, the BBC said at the time.

In late 2019, Andrew vowed to assist with any investigation. 'Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required,' he said in a statement.

At the time Buckingham Palace announced in a statement that Andrew would be suspended from public duties for the 'foreseeable future,' with the consent of the Queen.

Soon after, he gave up his role as chancellor of the University of Huddersfield and stepped down from all of his 230 patronages.

In January 2020, the Home Office recommended that the prince's security detail be downgraded. All activities carried out by the Prince Andrew Charitable Trust have also been stopped.

He is now a permanently nonactive member of the royal family, with no public-facing duties required of him.

Yet in January 2020 the United States attorney in Manhattan publicly called out the prince for breaking his commitment.

'To date, Prince Andrew has provided zero cooperation,' said the prosecutor, Geoffrey S. Berman.

Typically, if American prosecutors wanted to speak with a witness in Britain, the F.B.I. would go through its legal attaché in London, based in the United States embassy there.

Andrew is considered highly unlikely to risk traveling to the United States, even though he has not been charged with any crime.

He could be hauled before the FBI for questioning, and prosecutors could decide to request a subpoena from a judge if there is suspicion of criminal behaviour.

He could 'take the 5th' and invoke his right against self-incrimination, and refuse to answer questions.

Daniel Sternberg, a barrister specialising in extradition law at Temple Garden Chambers in London, told the BBC: 'It is important to remember that Prince Andrew has not been charged with any offence in the US.

'The FBI is investigating whether he has material evidence that could assist in its criminal investigation of alleged sex trafficking.

'While there is no way to compel Prince Andrew to give evidence in the UK or the US in either the civil or criminal case, his failure to do so does not sit well with his previous public statements that he would help any appropriate law enforcement agency with its inquiries.'

Andrew's lawyers insist they have been open and willing to cooperate.

They have yet to comment on Monday's civil case.

In her court filings on Monday, Miss Roberts accused the Duke of York of battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress in the lawsuit filed in federal court.

It was filed under a law in New York that relates to child abuse as Miss Roberts was considered a minor at the time under state law.

It lists Miss Roberts as the plaintiff and the defendant as 'Prince Andrew, Duke of York a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward' as the defendant.

The lawsuit claims that 'Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor.

'On multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched (Roberts) in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent'.

Under the section of the lawsuit that deals with the formal allegation of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the lawsuit is withering about the Duke.

It says: 'Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience.

'Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilised community'.

The lawsuit claims that Andrew was one of the 'powerful men' who Epstein loaned Roberts out to for sex.

The document accuses the Duke of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' then refusing to cooperate with the FBI.

The lawsuit notes that 'defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled'.

During each of the alleged incidents with Miss Roberts, Andrew was acting in a 'personal capacity' and not in any role for the Royal family or the UK government, the lawsuit notes.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed he has never even met Roberts, now a mother-of-three living in Australia who goes by her married name, Virginia Giuffre.

In a statement to ABC News, Miss Roberts said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.

'The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice.

'I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates.

'But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

Miss Roberts has made similar allegations before in US court documents but this is the first time she has sued the Duke directly.

She claims that the first time she was forced to have sex with Andrew was at the London townhouse of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's alleged madam.

The second time, in early 2001 was at Epstein's New York mansion, it is alleged.

The lawsuit states: 'During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her.

'During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will'.

The third alleged incident is said to have taken place on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean.

During each incident, Miss Roberts claims she was was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke.

Miss Roberts 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority', it is claimed.

Andrew allegedly had sex with Roberts knowing she was a victims of sex trafficking, it is claimed.

The Duke also knew her age from 'communications with Epstein and Maxwell', she says.

The lawsuit claims: 'Prince Andrew sexually abused (Roberts) for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires'.

The two formal allegations are battery and infliction of emotional distress.

Under the claim for battery, the lawsuit states Andrew's actions 'constitute sexual offenses as defined in (New York law) including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined (as) rape in the third degree, rape in the first degree'.

It also claims the Duke's conduct amounted to 'forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, and sexual abuse in the first degree'.

The 'sexual assault' Roberts caused her 'significant emotional and psychological distress and harm', it is claimed.

The lawsuit states: 'As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy'.

The filing mentions that Andrew has failed to cooperate with the criminal investigation by the FBI into Epstein and Maxwell, despite promising to do so in his disastrous Newsnight interview.

The lawsuit states: 'In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her.

'It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'

The lawsuit was filed under the New York Child Victims Act, which was signed into law in 2019. Previously victims had up to five years after they turned 18 to file a claim

The one-off window gave all victims the opportunity to make a legal claim, regardless of how old their claim was.

A defamation suit, filed by Roberts in 2015 against Ghislaine Maxwell, ended in a settlement – but deeply embarrassing depositions in which Maxwell discussed her sex life were made public last year.

A source said: 'This could be devastating for Andrew. If he chooses to fight it and is deposed [forced to give evidence], then those depositions could end up being made public.

'If he ignores it, he could be found guilty in absentia which would be a public relations disaster.'

Epstein hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges.

Maxwell, 59, was arrested last July and is due to go on trial in November for allegedly recruiting underage girls for Epstein. She has pleaded not guilty to all the charges.

It comes as Sarah Ferguson said she is convinced that her former husband Prince Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted pedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

The Duchess of York said she was '100 percent' certain that her ex-husband was being honest when he denied seeing anything untoward during the time he spent with the financier.

She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.'

When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him.

'I think he is an extraordinary person.'

The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1997, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms.

'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added.

'Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old': The bombshell Giuffre v Duke of York court documents in full

Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit against Prince Andrew, formally accusing him of sexually abusing her while she was being trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Over 15 pages of court documents filed at New York's southern district court, the 38-year-old makes claims that the Duke of York 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

VIRGINIA L. GIUFFRE, Plaintiff

vs.

PRINCE ANDREW, DUKE OF YORK, a/k/a ANDREW ALBERT CHRISTIAN EDWARD, in his personal capacity, Defendant.

COMPLAINT

Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre, by her attorneys Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, for her Complaint against Defendant Prince Andrew, Duke of York, a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward ('Prince Andrew'), avers upon personal knowledge as to her own acts and status and upon information and belief and to all other matters as follows:

NATURE OF THE ACTION

Virginia Giuffre filed the complaint against Prince Andrew at the Southern District Court of New York

1. This suit arises out of Defendant's sexual abuse of Plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.

2. During 2000–2002, beginning when Plaintiff was 16, Plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

3. Epstein's trafficking scheme involved recruiting young girls, often by claiming they would be paid $200 for simply providing a massage to a wealthy billionaire. This same pattern was repeated numerous times with countless children and young women.

4. As United States District Judge Kenneth Marra found, 'From between about 1999 and 2007, Jeffrey Epstein sexually abused more than 30 minor girls... at his mansion in Palm Beach, Florida, and elsewhere in the United States and overseas...

'In addition to his own sexual abuse of the victims, Epstein directed other persons to abuse the girls sexually. Epstein used paid employees to find and bring minor girls to him.

'Epstein worked in concert with others to obtain minors not only for his own sexual gratification, but also for the sexual gratification of others.'

Opinion and Order, Doc. No. 435 at 1–2, Jane Doe 1 and Jane Doe 2 v. United States, Case No. 9:08-cv-80736 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2019).

5. Like other minor children who came before and after her, Plaintiff was initially recruited to provide massages, and thereafter to engage in a variety of sexual acts, for Epstein.

Plaintiff was required to be on call for Epstein for sexual purposes and frequently traveled with him both nationally and internationally. Plaintiff was regularly abused by Epstein and was lent out by Epstein to other powerful men for sexual purposes.

6. One such powerful man to whom Plaintiff was lent out for sexual purposes was the Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.

7. Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein's sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including Plaintiff.

8. According to Prince Andrew, he met Epstein through Maxwell in 1999. Prince Andrew thereafter became a frequent guest in Epstein's various homes around the world, including New York City where he sexually abused Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation when she was a minor.

9. After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

10. Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to Plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

11. This action has been timely filed pursuant to the Child Victims Act, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g. The actions described herein constitute sexual offenses by Defendant under New York Penal Law Article 130, and were committed against Plaintiff when she was a child less than eighteen years of age, for which she suffered physical, psychological, and other injuries as a result.

PARTIES

12. Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre is an individual who is a citizen of the State of Colorado.

13. Defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

14. This Court has diversity jurisdiction over this dispute pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(2). Plaintiff is a citizen of a State and Defendant is a citizen of a foreign state, and the amount in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00 excluding interests and costs.

15. Venue is proper in this Court as a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this District. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2).

16. This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant as Defendant sexually abused Plaintiff in this state, and has thus committed a tortious action within this State pursuant to New York's long-arm statute, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2).

Defendant also visited Jeffrey Epstein in this State on numerous occasions. Defendant could reasonably anticipate that a suit based upon his acts and omissions with respect to Plaintiff could result in him being subject to suit in this State, and this suit arises directly out of the Defendant's acts or omissions with respect to Plaintiff in this state.

FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A. Epstein's Sex Trafficking Enterprise

17. Jeffrey Epstein was widely renowned as a billionaire who used his vast connections to powerful individuals, and seemingly unlimited wealth and resources, to create a web of transcontinental sex trafficking that served himself, his coconspirators, and some of the most powerful people in the world.

18. Ghislaine Maxwell is a British socialite and the daughter of disgraced publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell. Maxwell was the highest-ranking recruiter in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is currently facing criminal charges in the Southern District of New York stemming from her role in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise, and is set to face trial in the fall.

19. Epstein had perfected a scheme for manipulation and abuse of young females. As part of the scheme, Maxwell or another female recruiter would approach a young girl and strike up a conversation in an effort to quickly learn about the girl's background and any vulnerabilities they could expose. Epstein's recruiters found their targets everywhere and anywhere, including schools, spas, trailer parks, and the street.

20. The recruiter would then manipulate the young female into coming back to one of Epstein's residences by offering the young girl something she needed, depending on her situation. In many cases, the recruiter sought out girls who wanted to be professional masseuses and invited them to one of Epstein's homes by offering them what appeared to be legitimate masseuse positions.

21. Once in the residence, Epstein and his co-conspirators would work in concert to impress and intimidate the young female with displays of vast wealth and power. They would brag about their connections to very powerful political and social figures, and display photographs of themselves with those figures around Epstein's homes. They would normalize the sexual abuse by displaying photographs and art displaying nude females, and a massage table and spa related products in an effort to legitimize the area where the abuse was set to occur.

22. Once abused, Epstein and Maxwell continued to manipulate their victims, using their financial power, promises, and threats to ensure that the victim returned as directed and remained compliant with their demands. Epstein and his lawyers would even gather information about the victims to use against them if they ever disobeyed him, and his homes were under constant surveillance.

23. Message pads recovered during trash pulls at Epstein's Palm Beach mansion reflect messages that his staff took to relay to Epstein. They show the constant flow of girls to Epstein, sometimes three per day. Epstein's employees have also described young girls constantly being present at Epstein's different homes.

Epstein's constant access to young girls is also evidenced in his 'Black Book,' a book of phone numbers and contact information listing girls to call for 'massages' in various cities, flight logs documenting his frequent travel with young girls and powerful individuals on his private plane, and troves of lewd photographs of young girls recovered from his homes. In his Black Book, Epstein had at least 12 different contact numbers listed for Prince Andrew.

24. Plaintiff became a victim of sex trafficking and repeated sexual abuse after Maxwell recruited her into Epstein's sex-trafficking operation when Plaintiff was working at the Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida.

25. Between 2000 and 2002, Epstein sexually abused Plaintiff at numerous locations including his mansion in this District, at 9 East 71st Street, New York, New York 10021.

26. Epstein also flew Plaintiff on his plane nationally and internationally numerous times when she was under the age of 18.

Only portions of the flight logs of Epstein's private planes have yet been recovered, and Epstein also flew Plaintiff frequently on commercial airlines to meet him and others.

However, the chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking.

27. In addition to being abused by Epstein himself, Plaintiff was also forced to have sex with Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, at Epstein and Maxwell's direction.

28. As part of their sex trafficking efforts, Epstein and Maxwell intimidated Plaintiff into remaining silent about what had happened to her.

29. After years of abuse, Epstein sent Plaintiff to Thailand in September 2002. One of Plaintiff's assignments from Epstein was to bring a young girl back to Epstein in the United States. Fearing for her life, and not wanting to subject another young girl to the abuse she was forced to endure, Plaintiff fled from Thailand to Australia to escape from Epstein.

'The chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking,' reads the document

B. Defendant's Relationship with Epstein and Maxwell

30. According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew's close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.

31. According to available flight logs, Prince Andrew began flying with Epstein on his private plane as early as 1999, when he flew with Epstein and Maxwell to Epstein's private island, Little St. James. Prince Andrew's name also appears in other available flight log entries from around the same time, showing travel with Epstein and Maxwell to and from other locations, including West Palm Beach, Florida, and Teterboro, New Jersey.

32. In 2000, Epstein and Maxwell attended Prince Andrew's 40th birthday party. That same year, Prince Andrew threw Maxwell a birthday party in Sandringham, United Kingdom, and Epstein was among the guests.

33. In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter's 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.

34. Prince Andrew has himself confirmed that he has been on Epstein's private plane, stayed at Epstein's private island, and stayed at Epstein's homes in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York, New York. See Prince Andrew's links to Jeffrey Epstein, BBC News (Nov. 16, 2019), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-49411215.

35. Members of Epstein's house staff have confirmed witnessing Prince Andrew visit Epstein's numerous homes, both to the media and in sworn testimony.

C. Defendant's Sexual Abuse of Plaintiff

'The photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff,' the document claims

36. Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old.

37. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell's home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.

38. The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff.

39. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in Epstein's New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.

40. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein's private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.

41. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

42. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew acted with intent to compel Plaintiff's submission.

43. Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

44. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew.

45. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew knew Plaintiff's age based on communications from Epstein and Maxwell.

46. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.

47. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew was acting in his individual, personal capacity, and was not performing any duty relating to his former role as a trade envoy, any duty relating to his role as a member of the Royal Family of the United Kingdom, or any other official or diplomatic duty or function.

48. Defendant's sexual assault and battery of Plaintiff have caused her, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.

D. The Arrest, Prosecution, and Death of Epstein, and Prince Andrew's Refusal to Cooperate with the Authorities

49. In 2008, Epstein pled guilty in Florida to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution.

50. In 2010, after Epstein had served his sentence and registered as a sex offender, Prince Andrew was photographed with Epstein in Central Park and stayed at Epstein's New York City mansion.

51. Epstein flippantly referred to his sexual abuse of multiple minors, and the slap on the wrist he had received for it, in a 2011 interview with the New York Post: 'Billionaire pervert Jeffrey Epstein is back in New York City—and making wisecracks about his just-ended jail stint for having sex with an underage girl. 'I am not a sexual predator, I'm an 'offender,' the financier told The Post yesterday. 'It's the difference between a murderer and a person who steals a bagel,' said Epstein.' See Amber Sutherland, Billionaire Jeffrey Epstein: I'm a Sex Offender, Not A Predator, New York Post (Feb. 25, 2011), available at https://bit.ly/2s3ebwk.

52. Around the same time, Prince Andrew began to face criticism over his well- publicized friendship with Epstein.

53. In early 2015, after Plaintiff had publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexually abusing her, Prince Andrew emailed Maxwell stating, 'Let me know when we can talk. Got some specific questions to ask you about Virginia Roberts.'

54. On July 2, 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York ('SDNY') charged Epstein with sex trafficking conspiracy and sex trafficking in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1591.

55. Epstein was arrested on July 8, 2019, pursuant to a Sealed Two Count Indictment.

56. Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center on August 10, 2019.

57. Just one year before his death, Epstein told a New York Times reporter 'that criminalizing sex with teenage girls was a cultural aberration and that at times in history it was perfectly acceptable.' James B. Stewart, The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People, N.Y. Times (Aug. 12, 2019), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/12/business/jeffrey-epstein-interview.html.

58. After Epstein's second arrest and death, numerous of his co-conspirators and the wealthy individuals to whom he trafficked girls—including Prince Andrew—began to face increased public scrutiny for having close ties to a convicted sex offender.

59. In November 2019, in response to this renewed scrutiny, Prince Andrew sat for an interview with BBC Newsnight. Prince Andrew stated that he did not regret his friendship with Epstein and that he had no recollection of meeting Plaintiff, despite photographic evidence to the contrary.

60. Prince Andrew publicly pledged, including in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview, to assist the U.S. authorities with their criminal investigation of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

A statement by His Royal Highness The Duke of York (Nov. 20 2019), available at https://www.royal.uk/statement-his-royal-highness-duke-york ('Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.').

61. Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities. Former SDNY U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman stated that Prince Andrew had provided 'zero co-operation' despite U.S. prosecutors and the FBI contacting Prince Andrew's counsel. Prince Andrew gives 'zero co-operation' over Epstein inquiry, US prosecutor says, BBC News (Jan. 27, 2020), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51271871.

62. Prince Andrew and his counsel have also refused to cooperate with counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking. Counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking, including counsel for Plaintiff, have repeatedly asked for a meeting or telephone call with Prince Andrew and/or his representatives to enable Prince Andrew to provide whatever facts, context, or explanation he might have, and to explore alternative dispute resolution approaches. Prince Andrew and his representatives have rejected all such requests, and responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on Plaintiff and others.

63. On July 19, 2021, counsel for Plaintiff proposed a tolling agreement that would have enabled Plaintiff not to sue Prince Andrew at this time, while avoiding any argument that her failure to do so caused her claims to be time-barred. Again Prince Andrew stonewalled—ignoring Plaintiff's letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now. A copy of the July 19, 2021, letter proposing a tolling agreement is attached as Exhibit A to this Complaint.

64. In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION (Battery)

65. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

66. Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor. As described above, on multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched Plaintiff in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent.

67. Prince Andrew's actions constitute sexual offenses as defined in New York Penal Law Article 130, including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined in Article 130.20, rape in the third degree as defined in Article 130.25, rape in the first degree as defined in Article 130.35, forcible touching as defined in Article 130.52, sexual abuse in the third degree as defined in Article 130.55, and sexual abuse in the first degree as defined in Article 130.65. See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g.

68. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION (Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress)

69. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

70. As a direct result of these allegations as stated, Prince Andrew committed intentional infliction of emotional distress against Plaintiff.

71. Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.

72. Prince Andrew knew or disregarded the substantial likelihood that these actions would cause Plaintiff severe emotional distress.

73. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.





PRAYER FOR RELIEF

WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests judgment against Defendant, awarding compensatory, consequential, exemplary, and punitive damages in an amount to be determined at trial; costs of suit; attorneys' fees; and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper.

JURY DEMAND

Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury on all causes of action asserted within this pleading.

Dated: August 9, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It brings to an end a four-month 'positive streak' for the UK housing market

The number of enquiries by house hunters has started falling as stamp duty savings come to an end.

More estate agents said contacts from new buyers were falling rather than rising in July, according to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS).

It brings to an end a four-month 'positive streak' for the UK market based on the number of enquiries.

The stamp duty holiday introduced by Chancellor Rishi Sunak in England is being gradually reduced from July and the 'nil rate' band will revert to normal from October.

More estate agents said contacts from new buyers were falling rather than rising in July, according to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS)

This means many buyers agreeing deals now are likely to miss out on stamp duty savings. The number of transactions has slowed most notably in Yorkshire and the Humber, the East Midlands and East Anglia, the report said.

However, a lack of supply is still underpinning price growth, the institution added.

Growth in prices was noted across the UK, with the North of England, Wales and East Anglia recording particularly strong growth, whereas London's was more moderate.

Simon Rubinsohn, chief economist at the institution, said: 'Although the tapering in stamp duty is beginning to have some impact, the overall tone to the market remains firm.

The stamp duty holiday introduced by Chancellor Rishi Sunak in England is being gradually reduced from July and the 'nil rate' band will revert to normal from October

'A strong message is that buyers are continuing to place a premium on space.'

A net balance of 46 per cent of professionals saw a fall in new listings in July, marking the weakest reading for new instructions since the early days of the coronavirus lockdown in April 2020.

A net balance of 66 per cent of professionals predict that house prices will be higher in a year, up from 56 per cent in June.

Demand from tenants looking to rent new homes remained strong in July, Rics said.

With new instructions from landlords remaining in decline, rents are expected to rise over the next three months.

Rental expectations in London have seen a particular turnaround, with a net balance of 47 per cent of professionals expecting rents to increase.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Martin Stone (pictured), 62, recorded a woman while standing behind her

A pervert spotted upskirting a woman in a Tube station was caught and jailed within 24 hours, police have revealed.

Martin Stone, 62, recorded a woman while standing behind her on an escalator at Bank Underground station in central London.

Stone, who was visiting the UK from Israel, was arrested outside the station by an officer who followed him and found him watching footage of the woman's legs and skirt on his phone.

During a search a spy camera pen, two mobile phones, two oyster cards, and a camera was found.

CCTV footage from Bank station also showed Stone following the victim around.

In a police interview, he admitted he covered the flash on his phone with Sellotape to avoid detection while he was recording the victim unknowingly.

He declined to answer when asked if he received any sexual gratification from his behaviour.

Stone, who was visiting the UK from Israel, was arrested outside Bank Underground Station in London by an officer who followed him and found him watching footage of the woman's legs and skirt on his phone (stock image)

Stone, who was caught on August 4, was jailed the following day for 10 days after pleading guilty to one count of voyeurism at Highbury Corner Magistrates' Court.

He had been visiting family in the UK and was due to return to Israel next week.

The court also ordered for all SIM and memory cards from his phones and cameras to be destroyed.

Stone, who was caught on August 4, was jailed the following day for 10 days after pleading guilty to one count of voyeurism at Highbury Corner Magistrates' Court (pictured)

Detective Chief Inspector Sarah White said: 'Stone's vile predatory behaviour is evident from his targeted actions and specialist equipment.

'Upskirting is a sickening invasion of privacy and this result sends a clear message on how quickly we will act against this disgusting form of sexual offending.

'We have plain clothes officers conducting patrols like this every day across network. Our officers are on the network looking out for you, whether you see them or not, and we will take action.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A total of 74 people on Martha's Vineyard have tested positive for Covid- 19 since former President Barack Obama's 60th birthday extravaganza last Saturday, more than any week since April.

However, health officials note it's still too early to know whether the hundreds of guests and workers gathered for his weekend of maskless parties have contributed to the surge in cases.

'At this time we're not aware of any cases connected to the Obama party,' Tisbury health agent and boards of health spokesperson Maura Valley told DailyMail.com. 'It's a little too early and the only way we're going to know is through comprehensive contact tracing.'

Hundreds of people attended Obama's birthday bash Saturday, flying in from around the country and congregating under tents where partiers danced, ate and drank the night away on his estate in Edgartown.

A total of 74 people on Martha's Vineyard have tested positive for Covid-19 since former President Barack Obama's 60th birthday on Saturday. Obama is pictured on Sunday enjoying brunch beneath a marquee following his huge birthday party the night before

The former president had large tents over set up ahead of his bash. The spike in cases is more than any week since April on Martha's Vineyard

He gathered with friends Thursday at the Barn Bowl & Bistro, joined a larger kick-off celebration Friday at the luxury Winnetu Oceanside Resort.

Obama followed up his party with a brunch Sunday at Beach Road restaurant, dining under a specially-erected marquee beside the water in Vineyard Haven.

Martha's Vineyard was already experiencing a new surge in cases when Obama, preparing to welcome 500 guests to his mansion, announced his party would be 'scaled back' amid criticism as the Delta coronavirus variant spread across the country.

In the week leading up to his party, 48 new cases were reported on the island through Saturday, double the prior week. The number of cases has risen every day since then, with six Sunday, seven Monday, 10 Tuesday, 13 Wednesday, 18 Thursday and 20 Friday.

But despite the ex-president's insistence that he had disinvited everyone but his family and close friends, 300 to 400 people showed up to his party, everyone from Jay Z and Beyonce to Chrissy Teigen and John Legend, a staffer working the event told DailyMail.com.

Many of the guests flew in by private jet and stayed in Edgartown, the center of the island's COVID resurgence.

Obama was caught on video dancing maskless at the bash on Martha's Vineyard for his 60th birthday

Singer H.E.R., in a gray sequined dress with red decoration, posed with Barack and Michelle Obama, her manager Jeanine McClean (far left) and another partygoer. The image was posted to Instagram in the early hours of Sunday and removed several hours later

Several celebrities including Bradley Cooper checked in to the Harbor View Hotel where six staff members tested positive.

The Harbor View was among three new COVID clusters in Edgartown, along with the Alchemy Bistro & Bar with 14 cases, and Port Hunter restaurant with five, according to local health officials.

The latter two restaurants temporarily shut down, along with several other establishments including the historic Newes from America pub, the Wharf Pub and the Covington Restaurant in Edgartown.

Mask mandates have been reinstated at many bars and restaurants throughout the island.

Obama, however, insisted he was holding his guests and staff to a high standard.

A 'coronavirus coordinator' was hired to make sure the party was compliant with the most recent CDC guidance.

Attendees were required to take tests and submit their results to gain entry to the compound.

Several celebrities including Bradley Cooper checked in to the Harbor View Hotel where six staff members tested positive

Chrissy Teigen and John legend attended the event, and were seen taking their family and nannies for a walk through the Martha's Vineyard town of Edgartown

Health officials note it's still too early to know whether the hundreds of guests and workers at the maskless parties have contributed to the surge in cases

But some of the island's residents scoffed at the measures to create a COVID-free zone, given that partygoers were circulating between various events and locations, in a town raging with a Delta strain that spreads quickly.

Even vaccinated individuals aren't immune. Of the 48 people who tested positive last week, more than half were vaccinated, according to health officials.

'I wouldn't have gone to the party even if I was invited,' one resident of Edgartown, who had a friend working at the party, told DailyMail.com.

'I'm sure some attendees went home with some extra luggage they didn't pack or see. Stay tuned.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@1:43

Desperate Afghans cling on to plane as it takes off from Kabul
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The co-founder of the taliban has been declared the new President of Afghanistan after the terror group announced the 20-year Western occupation 'is over now' and proclaimed an Islamic state during a triumphant speech from the Presidential Palace in Kabul.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

In a victory speech from Kabul on Sunday, Baradar said: 'I want to congratulate the Muslim Afghan people on this huge victory, especially the citizens and residents of Kabul, and I also want to advise and demand from all the mujahideen (Taliban fighters) that we have reached a situation that is unexpected and unique, this happened with the help of God and it must not make us arrogant.

'Before we didn't have as much responsibility as we do today, because now we are all tested by God, day by day we will get involved in the service of our nation, in providing them with security and hope for their future.'

A spokesman for the Taliban's political office told Al-Jazeera TV on Sunday that the war is over in Afghanistan and that the type of rule and the form of regime will be clear soon.

'We assure everyone that we will provide safety for citizens and diplomatic missions. We are ready to have a dialogue with all Afghan figures and will guarantee them the necessary protection,' spokesman Mohammad Naeem told the Qatar-based channel.

He said the group does not think foreign forces will repeat 'their failed experience in Afghanistan again,' adding: 'We move with responsibility in every step and make sure to have peace with everyone... We are ready to deal with the concerns of the international community through dialogue'.

Taliban spokesman Suhail Shaheen vowed there would be 'no revenge' against those who worked with the previous Afghan government, but refused to guarantee that Afghans would be allowed to flee. 'Our policy is that no one should leave the country' he told the BBC. 'We need all Afghans to stay.'

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as Kabul descended into chaos, with US helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War.

US-backed Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country for Tajikistan, effectively ceding power to the Taliban and bringing the 20-year Western occupation of Afghanistan to an end, while thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the Pakistan border in a bid to escape Islamist rule.

Mr Ghani said in a Facebook post that he escaped Afghanistan to 'prevent a flood of bloodshed', claiming 'countless patriots would be martyred and the city of Kabul would be destroyed' if he had remained. He did not disclose details on his current location.

Foreigners in Kabul were told to either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 British diplomats, citizens and Afghan translators, and the British Ambassador was moved to a safe place. The US and French Ambassadors have already been evacuated as the US rushes to rescue more than 10,000 of its citizens.

Italy's defence ministry said a first military plane would arrive on Sunday to begin 'emergency evacuation' operations, while Denmark, Norway and Finland are temporarily shutting their Kabul embassies, with Finland to offer asylum to 170 local staff and their families.

However, the Kremlin's envoy said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, as China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise the rule of the Sunni extremist group which was created after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

The United States on Sunday led more than 65 nations in urging the resurgent Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

'The United States joins the international community in affirming that Afghans and international citizens who wish to depart must be allowed to do so,' Secretary of State Antony Blinken wrote on Twitter as the State Department released a statement signed by its close allies.

'Those in positions of power and authority across Afghanistan bear responsibility - and accountability - for the protection of human life,' the joint statement said.

Bagram airbase was also surrendered to the Taliban by Afghan troops, despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO to build up Afghan security forces. Upon its takeover, hundreds of Taliban and Islamic State terrorists being held prisoner there were freed.

Commercial flights were later suspended after sporadic gunfire erupted at the airport, according to two senior US military officials who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss ongoing operations. Evacuations continued on military flights, but the halt to commercial traffic closed off one of the last routes available for Afghans fleeing the country.

As night fell, Taliban fighters deployed across Kabul, taking over abandoned police posts and pledging to maintain law and order during the transition. Residents reported looting in parts of the city, including in the upscale diplomatic district, and messages circulating on social media advised people to stay inside and lock their gates.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current crisis and announced his government's priority is to get UK nationals out 'as fast as we can' after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in Downing Street. He also vowed that the Middle Eastern state must not become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

But he was slammed by Tory MPs - including ex-soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - for presiding over Britain's 'biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez and called for UK troops to be redeployed. They also called the crisis a humiliation for the West.

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was also accused of 'going AWOL' after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the Afghanistan crisis unfolded. The British Foreign Office said he was returning to the UK on Sunday and was 'personally overseeing' the department's response to the situation.

President Joe Biden vowed that any action that puts Americans at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong US military response'. He also swiped his predecessor Donald Trump for the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan, claiming he left the group 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001'.

As Kabul fell to the Taliban:

Hopeful passengers gathered on Kabul Airport's runway to escape from Afghanistan;

Britain's ambassador to Afghanistan remains in Kabul, despite an SAS-backed operation to evacuate embassy staff amid a Taliban takeover of the city;

The US ambassador and embassy staff are fleeing Afghanistan after Taliban forces stormed Kabul;

Donald Trump called for President Biden to resign on Sunday over the swift Taliban takeover of Afghanistan;

President Biden ordered about 5,000 troops to help evacuate US staff 'and other allied personnel';

PM Boris Johnson said said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the crisis;

British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was forced to return to the UK from his holiday abroad;

Tory MPs called fallout from Anglo-US withdrawal 'Britain's worst foreign policy disaster since Suez';

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis;

President Biden defended the withdrawal of US troops and blamed his predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001';

General David Petraeus said President Biden must take responsibility for decision to withdraw;

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken insisted the scene in Afghanistan is not comparable to the fall of Saigon as he diverted blame for the Taliban takeover on Republicans.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar (front centre wearing a black turban), who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

The militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan after the country's president joined thousands of Afghan nationals in a mass exodus

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

A Taliban leader is seen sitting inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday, in a livestream on the Al Jazeera channel

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

The Taliban has said they will soon declare the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan from the presidential palace in Kabul. Pictured: militants sitting in the governor's HQ in the city of Sharana

Taliban militants hoisted their flag as they sat around a table in a government building on Sunday

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

UK military personnel boarding an RAF Voyager aircraft at RAF Brize Norton on August 14, 2021 to travel to Afghanistan

Bagram airbase, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power'

Left: a Taliban militant riding a motorbike in Mazar-e-Sharif, Afghanistan. Right: two militants embracing

An Afghan soldier stands in a military vehicle on a street in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 15, 2021

Afghan security forces patrol in the Afghan capital of Kabul, August 15, 2021

The militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman hours after taking control of Jalalabad, the most recent major Afghan city to fall to the insurgents as they make huge gains across Afghanistan

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as they moved into the capital, which has been gripped by panic throughout the day as US helicopters raced overhead as its diplomats were evacuated from the embassy. Bagram air base, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops on Sunday despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over the past two decades to build up Afghan security forces

A Taliban fighter sits inside an Afghan National Army (ANA) vehicle along the roadside in Laghman province on Sunday

Taliban fighters drive the vehicle through the streets of Laghman province Sunday - the same day Jalalabad fell

A Taliban fighter rides a motorbike through a street in Laghman province. A US defense official has warned it could be only a matter of days before the insurgent fighters take control of Kabul

Smoke rises next to the US Embassy in Kabul after Taliban fighters entered the outskirts of the Afghan capital

Soldiers from Afghan Security forces travel on a armed vehicle along a road in Panjshir province of Afghanistan

Armed humvee vehicles of Afghan Security forces are pictured along a path in Panjshir province

Taliban fighters stand armed with guns in Laghman province after making major gains across Afghanistan in the wake of the US departure

Afghans wait in long lines for hours to try to withdraw money in front of Kabul Bank after the Taliban sought to gain control of the capital

The Taliban have now taken over Jalalabad, spelling the fall of the last major Afghan city other than Kabul to the extremist fighters as the US withdraws its troops from the country. Pictured Taliban forces patrol Herat Saturday

Afghan passengers walk toward the airport in Kabul after the Taliban made huge gains across the country in the wake of the US military departure

Anti-missile decoy flares are deployed as US Black Hawk military helicopters and a dirigible balloon fly over the city of Kabul

Foreigners in Kabul have been told they should either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 Britons

Taliban fighters sit on a vehicle along the street in Jalalabad province after seizing the city as the terror group makes huge gains

A Pakistani soldier stands guard as stranded Afghan nationals return to Afghanistan at the border crossing point in Chaman

Taliban forces patrol a street in Herat, Afghanistan on Friday. Kabul, the Afghanistan capital, is now the only remaining major city still under government control

Residents and fighters swarm an Afghan National Army vehicle on a roadside in Laghman province as the insurgents take control of major cities

Taliban fighters stand guard on a roadside in Herat. Concerns are mounting over how long Kabul can stave off the Taliban insurgents as they have captured the northern stronghold of Mazar-i-Sharif, the second-largest city Kandahar and third-largest city Herat all within the last 48 hours

Taliban militants gather a day after taking control of Kandahar, Afghanistan, on Saturday. The second-largest city in Afghanistan was taken Friday

A man sells Taliban flags in Herat province, west of Kabul, Saturday - one day after the city was taken by the extremist group

Boris Johnson blames US withdrawal for 'accelerating' Afghan collapse and vows to get Brits out in address made just hours after clowning around with Olympic athletes - and Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was on HOLIDAY Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current situation and said the Government is getting Britons out of the country 'as fast as we can', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Now, following a meeting of Cobra, Mr Johnson said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' The Prime Minister today said that it is 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He told Sky News that it was 'fair to say the US decision to pull out has accelerated things, but this has in many ways been a chronicle of an event foretold'. Mr Johnson added: 'I think we've known for some time this is the way things were going and as I said before, this is a mission whose military component really ended for the UK in 2014, what we're dealing with now is the very likely advent of a new regime in Kabul, we don't know exactly what kind of a regime that will be.' Advertisement

Taliban negotiators were in Kabul on Sunday to discuss the transfer of power, said an Afghan official who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. It remained unclear when that transfer would take place and who among the Taliban was negotiating.

The negotiators on the government side included former President Hamid Karzai and Abdullah. Abdullah has been a vocal critic of Mr Ghani, who long refused giving up power to get a deal with the Taliban.

The British Prime Minister has vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country, calling the situation 'extremely difficult'.

After chairing a meeting of the Government's Cobra contingencies committee, Mr Johnson said the UK was determined to work with allies to prevent the country again becoming a 'breeding ground for terror'.

However, he faced a backlash from Tory MPs - including former soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - who said the West had been humiliated by insurgents armed with just basic weaponry.

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis.

In the meantime, Mr Johnson said the Government's priority was to assist the remaining British nationals as well as those Afghans who had helped the UK.

He said the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow had been at Kabul airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave.

'Our priority is to make sure that we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who helped the British effort in Afghanistan over 20 years, and to get them out as fast we can,' he said. 'We are going to get as many as we can out in the next few days.'

The Prime Minister also said Britain will work with allies to try to prevent Afghanistan again becoming a 'breeding ground for terrorism'.

'I think it is very important that the West should work collectively to get over to that new government - be it by the Taliban or anybody else - that nobody wants Afghanistan once again to be a breeding ground for terror and we don't think it is in the interests of the people of Afghanistan that it should lapse back into that pre-2001 status,' he said.

'What the UK will be doing is working with our partners in the UN Security, in NATO, to get that message over. We don't want anybody to bilaterally recognise the Taliban.

'We want a united position among all the like-minded, as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into a breeding ground for terror.'

Labour has called on the Government to 'live up to our obligations' to the Afghan people as Taliban fighters stood poised to take control of Kabul.

Shadow Home Secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds has written to Home Secretary Priti Patel saying that safe and legal asylum routes need to be put in place.

In his letter to the Home Secretary he said: 'The situation in Afghanistan is truly awful. We must now live up to our obligations, especially to those Afghan people who worked so bravely with British representatives in Afghanistan. Our resettlement scheme must, urgently, be expanded to ensure people to whom we owe a huge debt are not abandoned.'

He said the process must include looking to help Afghan workers who helped in areas such as military, media and those who supported the work of the Department for International Development.

'The Taliban's return is likely to drive many thousands of people from their homes, with women and girls at particular risk. The UK Government must put in place specific safe and legal asylum routes to help provide support,' he added.

Amid pressure to announce resettlement plans for people fleeing Afghanistan, the Home Office issued a statement on Twitter on Sunday morning.

China and Russia prepare to accept Taliban rule of Afghanistan: Beijing officials pose with leaders of militants and Kremlin has 'no plans' to evacuate its embassy due to 'good relations' China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise Taliban rule in neighbouring Afghanistan after the Islamist terror group seized the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday and the country's embattled president fled for Tajikistan. Most global powers are reluctant to recognise the rule of the militant group overthrown by US-led coalition forces in 2001, with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warning that Afghanistan cannot be allowed to become a 'breeding ground for terror' again. But Beijing and Islamabad could break rank in order to form closer ties with the likely new government, with Chinese state media preparing its people to accept the likely scenario that the ruling Communist Party might have to recognise the Islamist group. In China, a series of photos were published last month by state media showing Foreign Minister Wang Yi standing shoulder to shoulder with visiting Taliban officials decked out in traditional tunic and turban in Tianjin. Meanwhile, the Kremlin said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, with Russian state media reporting that the Sunni Islamist group formed after the Soviet withdrawal of Afghanistan has promised to guarantee the safety of its diplomatic staff. 'The organisation has 'good relations with Russia' and a 'policy in general to ensure safe conditions for the functioning of the Russian and other embassies,' news agency AP quoted Suhail Shaheen, a spokesman for the Taliban's political office, as saying to Tass. And Iran, which has long been wary of the Sunni Muslim Taliban, has moved to ensure the safety of its diplomats and staff after previously offering to help end the crisis during talks in July. Advertisement

It said: 'The Home Office has already resettled over 3,300 Afghan staff and their families who have worked for the UK. We will continue to fulfil our international obligations and moral commitments. Home Office officials are right now working to protect British nationals and help former UK staff and other eligible people travel to the UK'.

Chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, Tom Tugendhat, argued events in Afghanistan are 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster since Suez' and said the priority had to be to get as many people as possible out of Kabul.

'This isn't just about interpreters or guards. This is about those people who we trained in special forces to serve alongside us, those who helped us to understand the territory through our agencies and our diplomats,' he told BBC News.

'This is the people who, on our encouragement, set up schools for girls. These people are all at risk now. The real danger is that we are going to see every female MP murdered, we are going to see ministers strung up on street lamps.'

Mr Raab has come under fire after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the situation in Afghanistan was unravelling.

Shadow Foreign Secretary Lisa Nandy said that Mr Raab's absence during a moment of major international upheaval was unacceptable.

'For the Foreign Secretary to go AWOL during an international crisis of this magnitude is nothing short of shameful,' she said.

'A catastrophe is unfolding in front of our eyes and while the Foreign Secretary is nowhere to be seen, hundreds of British nationals are being evacuated and his department is cancelling scholarships for young Afghans.'

A Foreign Office spokesman said: 'The Foreign Secretary is personally overseeing the FCDO response and engaging with international partners. He is returning to the UK today, given the situation.'

Mr Raab meanwhile tweeted that he had been sharing his 'deep concerns' about the situation in Afghanistan with Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. He said they had agreed it was critical that 'the international community is united in telling the Taliban that the violence must end and human rights must be protected'.

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said the Prime Minister needed to set out plans to prevent the fall of the Afghan government turning into a humanitarian crisis, with thousands of displaced people trying to escape the Taliban.

The Liberal Democrats called on the Government to work with allies to establish a 'safe passage corridor' so that those Afghans who wanted to leave the country rather than remain under the Taliban could do so.

'Safety from the Taliban should not just be foreign nationals, or the lucky few who made it in time to Kabul airport,' said foreign affairs spokeswoman Layla Moran. 'A safe passage corridor must be secured immediately between Kabul and an international border.

'If we do not act now, hundreds of thousands of innocent people will be tortured, enslaved and murdered at the hands of the Taliban.'

Helicopters buzzed over Kabul to evacuate personnel from the US Embassy while smoke rose near the compound as staff destroyed important documents, in scenes of the evacuation of US Embassy staff in Saigon in 1975 after the Vietnam War.

A total of 5,000 US troops are being deployed to help safely evacuate State Department staff from the US Embassy in Kabul with some of the first diplomats starting to fly out early Sunday.

Two US officials told Reuters a 'small batch' of people had already left while most staff were ready to go as soon as they were able. The evacuation of embassy staff was originally slated to take 72 hours but officials have ramped up efforts to get all Embassy staff out within the next 36 hours as the militant assault picks up pace, sources told CBS News.

Only a small number of key personnel including top decision-makers, the Bureau of Diplomatic Security Service and top decision-makers and security engineers able to destroy sensitive information will remain.

All US diplomats should be out of the country entirely by the end of August, the sources said.

The US military is preparing to lower the American flag over the Embassy - if the State Department gives the order - signaling its closure.

Footage posted on social media is said to show Taliban fighters taking over Jalalabad. The city fell under Taliban control without a fight early Sunday morning

Children sleep on the ground in a makeshift camp at Shahr-e-Naw Park in Kabul, Afghanistan, on Saturday after fleeing their homes in parts of Afghanistan now occupied by the Taliban

Refugees staying at the park fled to Kabul as the only major city in the country no longer under Taliban rule by Sunday

Afghan refugees are fleeing the country and heading to the US and Canada as they face threats from the Taliban

Diplomats flee US Embassy in Chinook helicopters US diplomats have been evacuated from Kabul just hours before Taliban forces stormed the Afghan capital. In a stark scene mirroring that of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war, a US Air Force helicopter was seen taking off from the US Embassy earlier today. The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital. Smoke was also seen rising from near to the US embassy earlier today as security staff work to burn any important documents, including CIA information, or material that could be used 'in propaganda efforts'. The US flag is soon expected to be lowered, signalling the official closure of the embassy. As many as 10,000 US citizens are being evacuated from the city. Around 3,000 US troops are being sent to aid the mission. Meanwhile, Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, while RAF planes are being scrambled from around the world, to airlift more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Advertisement

President Biden announced on Saturday that he was increasing the number of US troops being deployed to protect the withdrawal from the US Embassy to 5,000.

Around 1,000 service members are already on the ground and 3,000 more were already being sent next week, before he announced the deployment of an extra 1,000 troops from the 82nd Airborne at Fort Bragg as the situation escalated Saturday.

Other western governments are also rapidly withdrawing their embassy staff, citizens and Afghans who worked for them from the country with the British Ambassador set to leave by Sunday evening.

Meanwhile, thousands of locals have fled to Kabul to try to escape the Taliban as they have taken control of their home provinces. This has pushed the city's four million population higher and forced refugees to set up home in makeshift camps around the city.

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken held talks with Ghani Saturday to discuss the 'urgency of ongoing diplomatic and political efforts to reduce the violence,' the State Department said in a statement.

'The Secretary emphasized the United States' commitment to a strong diplomatic and security relationship with the Government of Afghanistan and our continuing support for the people of Afghanistan.'

A virtual briefing will be held Sunday morning between Biden Administration officials and House members following a request by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

It comes as the Biden administration has come under fire over the advancement of the Taliban in Afghanistan which many are blaming on the American troop withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Mr Biden defended the withdrawal Saturday and blamed predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001'.

'One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country. And an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me,' he said in a statement.

Mr Biden also hit out at predecessor Mr Trump for the deal with the Taliban that led to the recent withdrawal.

He said: 'When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor - which he invited the Taliban to discuss at Camp David on the eve of 9/11 of 2019 - that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001.

'Shortly before he left office, he also drew US forces down to a bare minimum of 2,500.

'When I became President, I faced a choice - follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict.

'I was the fourth President to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan - two Republicans, two Democrats. I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.'

Military helicopters stand on the tarmac of the military airport in Kabul Saturday from which the US is evacuating citizens

Former CIA director and former commander of US and International Forces in Afghanistan David Petraeus also blasted the situation in Afghanistan 'disastrous', 'catastrophic' and an 'an enormous national security set back' for the world

Senator Tom Cotton tweeted that the 'fiasco' was 'predictable' and had 'humiliated' the US

Senator Mitt Romney posted that he could not understand why the US had pulled out of the country

Former Secretary of State for Trump Mike Pompeo blasted the Biden administration, claiming the Trump administration had a plan for bringing troops out

The president has been slammed by several Republicans, with House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy hitting out at the 'complete mismanagement' of the Afghanistan withdrawal.

Mr McCarthy said: 'The White House has no discernible plan other than pleading with the Taliban. The bungled withdrawal, reminiscent of his failed withdrawal from Iraq, is an embarrassment to our nation.'

'President Biden must continue to provide the close air support necessary for the Afghan government to protect themselves from the Taliban and make sure al Qaeda and ISIS do not gain a foothold due to the Biden administration's disastrous policies.'

Former CIA director and former commander of US and International Forces in Afghanistan David Petraeus also blasted the situation in Afghanistan 'disastrous', 'catastrophic' and an 'an enormous national security set back' for the world.

Mr Petraeus said on The Rita Cosby Show on WABC Radio the US withdrawal had caused a domino effect in the country.

'This is an enormous national security set back and it is on the verge of getting much worse unless we decide to take really significant action,' Mr Petraeus said.

'We are now in a situation where the Taliban are trying to encircle Kabul - a city of 5 of 6 million before hundreds of thousands of refugees starting flooding into it.'

Senator Tom Cotton tweeted that the 'fiasco' was 'predictable' and had 'humiliated' the US.

'The fiasco in Afghanistan wasn't just predictable, it was predicted. Joe Biden's ill-planned retreat has now humiliated America and put at risk thousands of Americans left in Kabul,' he said.

'At a minimum, President Biden must unleash American air power to destroy every Taliban fighter in the vicinity of Kabul until we can save our fellow Americans. Anything less will further confirm Joe Biden's impotence to the world.'

Senator Mitt Romney posted that he could not understand why the US had pulled out of the country 'without an effective strategy to defend our partners.'

The Taliban have ransacked the palatial home of top Afghan warlord and US ally General Dostum. They are pictured with a golden tea set

A fighter poses in front of a gold cabinet at the home of Army Marshal Rashid Dostum - an infamous warlord and a former Afghan vice president who has survived the past 40 years of conflict by cutting deals and switching sides

Fighters wielding guns were filmed walking around the luxurious oval-shaped room, filled with chandeliers and gold furniture, and posing in chairs

A Taliban fighter poses with a US-made Afghan air force Blackhawk helicopter at captured Kandahar airfield

Taliban fighters have seized helicopters as they continue their advance through Afghanistan, which is now approaching the outskirts of Kabul

'I understand but disagree with those who felt we should leave Afghanistan; I cannot understand why it has been done with such tragic human cost; without an effective strategy to defend our partners; and with inestimable shock to our nation's credibility, reliability, and honor,' he tweeted Saturday.

Former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo blasted the Biden administration, claiming the Trump administration had a plan for bringing troops out.

'Our administration had a model of deterrence in place as we prepared to bring the soldiers, sailors, marines, everybody who is on the ground there, home,' he tweeted. 'It looks like the Biden Administration has not been able to execute this.'

Taliban fighters invaded the palatial home of top Afghan warlord and US ally General Rashid Dostum Saturday after taking control of the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.

Dostum was a key US ally during the 20 year campaign against the Taliban and famously fought with the Special Forces 'horse soldiers' shortly after 9/11.

Before 9/11 he was an infamous warlord who was known for crushing prisoners alive beneath the wheels of a tank and in recent years he was a senior figure in the Afghan National Army. He is believed to have escaped.

On Saturday, fighters wielding guns were filmed walking Dostum's home in Mazar-i-Sharif around the luxurious oval-shaped room, filled with chandeliers and gold furniture.

Smoke rises above Kandahar, Afghanistan, Thursday as Taliban forces took control of the country's third largest city

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

Biden wrote a statement from Camp David on Saturday afternoon, insisting that he could not force the Afghan army to fight

Biden's statement in full: 'I will not pass this war on to a fifth president' 'Over the past several days I have been in close contact with my national security team to give them direction on how to protect our interests and values as we end our military mission in Afghanistan. First, based on the recommendations of our diplomatic, military, and intelligence teams, I have authorized the deployment of approximately 5,000 US troops to make sure we can have an orderly and safe drawdown of US personnel and other allied personnel and an orderly and safe evacuation of Afghans who helped our troops during our mission and those at special risk from the Taliban advance. Second, I have ordered our armed forces and our intelligence community to ensure that we will maintain the capability and the vigilance to address future terrorist threats from Afghanistan. Third, I have directed the Secretary of State to support President Ghani and other Afghan leaders as they seek to prevent further bloodshed and pursue a political settlement. Secretary Blinken will also engage with key regional stakeholders. Fourth, we have conveyed to the Taliban representatives in Doha, via our Combatant Commander, that any action on their part on the ground in Afghanistan, that puts US personnel or our mission at risk there, will be met with a swift and strong US military response. Fifth, I have placed Ambassador Tracey Jacobson in charge of a whole of government effort to process, transport, and relocate Afghan special immigrant visa applicants and other Afghan allies. Our hearts go out to the brave Afghan men and women who are now at risk. We are working to evacuate thousands of those who helped our cause and their families. That is what we are going to do. Now let me be clear about how we got here. America went to Afghanistan 20 years ago to defeat the forces that attacked this country on September 11th. That mission resulted in the death of Osama Bin Laden over a decade ago and the degradation of al Qaeda. And yet, 10 years later, when I became President, a small number of US troops still remained on the ground, in harm's way, with a looming deadline to withdraw them or go back to open combat. Over our country's 20 years at war in Afghanistan, America has sent its finest young men and women, invested nearly $1 trillion dollars, trained over 300,000 Afghan soldiers and police, equipped them with state-of-the-art military equipment, and maintained their air force as part of the longest war in US history. One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country. And an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me. When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor—which he invited the Taliban to discuss at Camp David on the eve of 9/11 of 2019—that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001 and imposed a May 1, 2021 deadline on US forces. Shortly before he left office, he also drew US forces down to a bare minimum of 2,500. Therefore, when I became President, I faced a choice—follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict. I was the fourth President to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan—two Republicans, two Democrats. I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.' Advertisement

The fighters videoed themselves lounging on Dostum's gold furniture, posing in chairs and inspecting his golden tea set.

Meanwhile, videos from Kandahar showed Taliban fighters seizing grounded US-made Blackhawk helicopters and taking to the air in Russian aircraft after turning their crew.

Mazar-e-Sharif, the country's fourth largest city, fell Saturday despite Afghan forces and two powerful former warlords vowing to defend it.

The move handed the insurgents control over all of northern Afghanistan.

'The army is not fighting. It is only Atta (Muhammad) Noor and (Marshal Abdul Rashid) Dostum's militias defending the city,' Mohammad Ibrahim Khairandesh, a former provincial council member who now lives in the city, told the New York Times.

'The situation is critical, and it's getting worse.'

'We are probably experiencing the most massive, brutal and opportunistic military campaign of violence and terror, by the Taliban, in the history of our country,' Afghan Foreign Minister Mohammed Haneef Atmar said at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute earlier this week.

Herds of civilians who escaped the violence flooded the streets of Kabul and set up camps while diplomats work with other countries to see who's willing to take in Afghan refugees.

The State Department is in talks with several other countries to house US-affiliated Afghan refugees, and Canada has already welcomed 20,000 Afghan refugees threatened by the Taliban, the IRCC - Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada - said in a Twitter statement.

So far, about 1,200 Afghans have been evacuated to the United States and that number is set to rise to 3,500 in the coming weeks under 'Operation Allies Refuge,' with some going to a U.S. military base in Virginia to finalize their paperwork and others directly to US hosts, Reuters reported.

A deal to house about 8,000 Afghans in Qatar, which hosts a large US military base, has been close for weeks, a US official told Reuters, although no official deal has been announced.

Afghan President Ghani addressed the nation in a minute-long video statement Saturday morning (US time) that was translated into English.

'Afghanistan is in serious danger of instability,' Mr Ghani said.

'Though I know that you are worried about your current situation and your future, I assure you that as your president, my focus is prevent the expansion of instability, violence and displacement of my people,' Ghani said.

'As part of a historical mission, I will do my best to stop this imposed conflict on the Afghan people to result in further killing of innocent people, loss of your achievements of the last 20 years, destruction of public property and prolonged instability.'

He said he's engaging with Afghan and international leaders, and consultations are 'urgently ongoing and the results will soon be shared.'

This was his first public comment since the Taliban demanded he resign in exchange for a reduction in violence.

Between Friday and Saturday, the Taliban made major advances in what's already been an efficient takeover of the country.

They captured Herat and Kandahar, which are the country's second- and third-largest cities, as well as the Logar province, just south of Kabul. The Taliban continued its swift movement towards Kabul by capturing Mazar-i-Sharif.

Taliban forces began reclaiming land they lost during the United State's 20-year occupation months before Biden announced his plans to withdraw troops by September 11.

The preceding Trump administration negotiated the terms of a U.S. withdrawal in talks with the Taliban last year.

Between May and June, the Taliban recaptured 50 of Afghanistan's 421 districts, Deborah Lyons, the UN's special envoy on Afghanistan, told Newsweek.

The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country after toppling the Taliban in the wake of the September 11 attacks nearly 20 years ago.

Taliban fighters sit on the back of a vehicle in the city of Herat, west of Kabul, Afghanistan on August 14

Flag of Taliban militants is raised at a square in Herat, Afghanistan, after seizing control of the city on August 13.

The US Embassy in Kabul has been ordered to destroy sensitive materials as Biden sends in 3,000 troops to help evacuate
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a triumphant speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan after the country's president joined thousands of Afghan nationals in a mass exodus.

Taliban fighters marched into the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos, with US helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War.

There were chaotic scenes at Kabul airport where thousands of desperate Afghans are gathering in an attempt to flee the country. Fighting and stampedes broke out between passengers before commercial flights were stopped and only military planes departed the terminals which are now guarded by US troops.

The Al-Jazeera news channel livestreamed the press conference from inside the palace, which showed a group of Taliban fighters sitting at the President's desk before a fighter claimed he was a former inmate of the US-controlled Guantanamo Bay detention centre in Cuba.

Established by George W Bush in 2002, suspected terrorists have been detained without trial and tortured at the facility. Donald Trump signed an executive order to keep the centre open indefinitely in 2018, while in February the Biden administration vowed to shut Guantanamo down.

A spokesman for the Taliban's political office told Al-Jazeera TV on Sunday that the war is over in Afghanistan and that the type of rule and the form of regime will be clear soon.

'We assure everyone that we will provide safety for citizens and diplomatic missions. We are ready to have a dialogue with all Afghan figures and will guarantee them the necessary protection,' spokesman Mohammad Naeem told the Qatar-based channel.

He said the group does not think foreign forces will repeat 'their failed experience in Afghanistan again,' adding: 'We move with responsibility in every step and make sure to have peace with everyone... We are ready to deal with the concerns of the international community through dialogue'.

Taliban spokesman Suhail Shaheen vowed there would be 'no revenge' against those who worked with the previous Afghan government, but refused to guarantee that Afghans would be allowed to flee. 'Our policy is that no one should leave the country' he told the BBC. 'We need all Afghans to stay.'

US-backed Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country for Tajikistan, effectively ceding power to the Taliban and bringing the 20-year Western occupation of Afghanistan to an end, while thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the Pakistan border in a bid to escape Islamist rule.

Mr Ghani said in a Facebook post that he escaped Afghanistan to 'prevent a flood of bloodshed', claiming 'countless patriots would be martyred and the city of Kabul would be destroyed' if he had remained. He did not disclose details on his current location.

Foreigners in Kabul were told to either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 British diplomats, citizens and Afghan translators, and the British Ambassador was moved to a safe place. The US and French Ambassadors have already been evacuated as the US rushes to rescue more than 10,000 of its citizens.

Italy's defence ministry said a first military plane would arrive on Sunday to begin 'emergency evacuation' operations, while Denmark, Norway and Finland are temporarily shutting their Kabul embassies, with Finland to offer asylum to 170 local staff and their families.

However, the Kremlin's envoy said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, as China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise the rule of the Sunni extremist group which was created after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

The United States on Sunday led more than 65 nations in urging the resurgent Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

'The United States joins the international community in affirming that Afghans and international citizens who wish to depart must be allowed to do so,' Secretary of State Antony Blinken wrote on Twitter as the State Department released a statement signed by its close allies.

'Those in positions of power and authority across Afghanistan bear responsibility - and accountability - for the protection of human life,' the joint statement said.

Bagram airbase was also surrendered to the Taliban by Afghan troops, despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO to build up Afghan security forces. Upon its takeover, hundreds of Taliban and Islamic State terrorists being held prisoner there were freed.

Commercial flights were later suspended after sporadic gunfire erupted at the airport, according to two senior US military officials who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss ongoing operations. Evacuations continued on military flights, but the halt to commercial traffic closed off one of the last routes available for Afghans fleeing the country.

As night fell, Taliban fighters deployed across Kabul, taking over abandoned police posts and pledging to maintain law and order during the transition. Residents reported looting in parts of the city, including in the upscale diplomatic district, and messages circulating on social media advised people to stay inside and lock their gates.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current crisis and announced his government's priority is to get UK nationals out 'as fast as we can' after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in Downing Street. He also vowed that the Middle Eastern state must not become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

But he was slammed by Tory MPs - including ex-soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - for presiding over Britain's 'biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez and called for UK troops to be redeployed. They also called the crisis a humiliation for the West.

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was accused of 'going AWOL' after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the Afghanistan crisis unfolded. The British Foreign Office said he was returning to the UK on Sunday and was 'personally overseeing' the department's response to the situation.

President Joe Biden vowed that any action that puts Americans at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong US military response'. He also swiped his predecessor Donald Trump for the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan, claiming he left the group 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001'.

As Kabul fell to the Taliban:

Hopeful passengers gathered on Kabul Airport's runway to escape from Afghanistan;

Britain's ambassador to Afghanistan remains in Kabul, despite an SAS-backed operation to evacuate embassy staff amid a Taliban takeover of the city;

The US ambassador and embassy staff are fleeing Afghanistan after Taliban forces stormed Kabul;

Donald Trump called for President Biden to resign on Sunday over the swift Taliban takeover of Afghanistan;

President Biden ordered about 5,000 troops to help evacuate US staff 'and other allied personnel';

PM Boris Johnson said said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the crisis;

British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was forced to return to the UK from his holiday abroad;

Tory MPs called fallout from Anglo-US withdrawal 'Britain's worst foreign policy disaster since Suez';

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis;

President Biden defended the withdrawal of US troops and blamed his predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001';

General David Petraeus said President Biden must take responsibility for decision to withdraw;

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken insisted the scene in Afghanistan is not comparable to the fall of Saigon as he diverted blame for the Taliban takeover on Republicans.

A Taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a victory speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

The militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan after the country's president joined thousands of Afghan nationals in a mass exodus

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Taliban militants were pictured inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul after the Afghan president fled the country

The Taliban has said they will soon declare the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan from the presidential palace in Kabul. Pictured: militants sitting in the governor's HQ in the city of Sharana

Taliban militants hoisted their flag as they sat around a table in a government building on Sunday

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

UK military personnel boarding an RAF Voyager aircraft at RAF Brize Norton on August 14, 2021 to travel to Afghanistan

Bagram airbase, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power'

Left: a Taliban militant riding a motorbike in Mazar-e-Sharif, Afghanistan. Right: two militants embracing

An Afghan soldier stands in a military vehicle on a street in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 15, 2021

Afghan security forces patrol in the Afghan capital of Kabul, August 15, 2021

The militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman hours after taking control of Jalalabad, the most recent major Afghan city to fall to the insurgents as they make huge gains across Afghanistan

Militants seized the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as they moved into the capital, which has been gripped by panic throughout the day as US helicopters raced overhead as its diplomats were evacuated from the embassy. Bagram air base, holding ISIS and Taliban fighters, was also surrendered by troops on Sunday despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over the past two decades to build up Afghan security forces

A Taliban fighter sits inside an Afghan National Army (ANA) vehicle along the roadside in Laghman province on Sunday

Taliban fighters drive the vehicle through the streets of Laghman province Sunday - the same day Jalalabad fell

A Taliban fighter rides a motorbike through a street in Laghman province. A US defense official has warned it could be only a matter of days before the insurgent fighters take control of Kabul

Smoke rises next to the US Embassy in Kabul after Taliban fighters entered the outskirts of the Afghan capital

Soldiers from Afghan Security forces travel on a armed vehicle along a road in Panjshir province of Afghanistan

Armed humvee vehicles of Afghan Security forces are pictured along a path in Panjshir province

Taliban fighters stand armed with guns in Laghman province after making major gains across Afghanistan in the wake of the US departure

Afghans wait in long lines for hours to try to withdraw money in front of Kabul Bank after the Taliban sought to gain control of the capital

The Taliban have now taken over Jalalabad, spelling the fall of the last major Afghan city other than Kabul to the extremist fighters as the US withdraws its troops from the country. Pictured Taliban forces patrol Herat Saturday

Afghan passengers walk toward the airport in Kabul after the Taliban made huge gains across the country in the wake of the US military departure

Anti-missile decoy flares are deployed as US Black Hawk military helicopters and a dirigible balloon fly over the city of Kabul

Foreigners in Kabul have been told they should either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 Britons

Taliban fighters sit on a vehicle along the street in Jalalabad province after seizing the city as the terror group makes huge gains

A Pakistani soldier stands guard as stranded Afghan nationals return to Afghanistan at the border crossing point in Chaman

Taliban forces patrol a street in Herat, Afghanistan on Friday. Kabul, the Afghanistan capital, is now the only remaining major city still under government control

Residents and fighters swarm an Afghan National Army vehicle on a roadside in Laghman province as the insurgents take control of major cities

Taliban fighters stand guard on a roadside in Herat. Concerns are mounting over how long Kabul can stave off the Taliban insurgents as they have captured the northern stronghold of Mazar-i-Sharif, the second-largest city Kandahar and third-largest city Herat all within the last 48 hours

Taliban militants gather a day after taking control of Kandahar, Afghanistan, on Saturday. The second-largest city in Afghanistan was taken Friday

A man sells Taliban flags in Herat province, west of Kabul, Saturday - one day after the city was taken by the extremist group

Boris Johnson blames US withdrawal for 'accelerating' Afghan collapse and vows to get Brits out in address made just hours after clowning around with Olympic athletes - and Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was on HOLIDAY Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current situation and said the Government is getting Britons out of the country 'as fast as we can', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Now, following a meeting of Cobra, Mr Johnson said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' The Prime Minister today said that it is 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He told Sky News that it was 'fair to say the US decision to pull out has accelerated things, but this has in many ways been a chronicle of an event foretold'. Mr Johnson added: 'I think we've known for some time this is the way things were going and as I said before, this is a mission whose military component really ended for the UK in 2014, what we're dealing with now is the very likely advent of a new regime in Kabul, we don't know exactly what kind of a regime that will be.' Advertisement

Taliban negotiators were in Kabul on Sunday to discuss the transfer of power, said an Afghan official who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. It remained unclear when that transfer would take place and who among the Taliban was negotiating.

The negotiators on the government side included former President Hamid Karzai and Abdullah. Abdullah has been a vocal critic of Mr Ghani, who long refused giving up power to get a deal with the Taliban.

The British Prime Minister has vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country, calling the situation 'extremely difficult'.

After chairing a meeting of the Government's Cobra contingencies committee, Mr Johnson said the UK was determined to work with allies to prevent the country again becoming a 'breeding ground for terror'.

However, he faced a backlash from Tory MPs - including former soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - who said the West had been humiliated by insurgents armed with just basic weaponry.

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis.

In the meantime, Mr Johnson said the Government's priority was to assist the remaining British nationals as well as those Afghans who had helped the UK.

He said the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow had been at Kabul airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave.

'Our priority is to make sure that we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who helped the British effort in Afghanistan over 20 years, and to get them out as fast we can,' he said. 'We are going to get as many as we can out in the next few days.'

The Prime Minister also said Britain will work with allies to try to prevent Afghanistan again becoming a 'breeding ground for terrorism'.

'I think it is very important that the West should work collectively to get over to that new government - be it by the Taliban or anybody else - that nobody wants Afghanistan once again to be a breeding ground for terror and we don't think it is in the interests of the people of Afghanistan that it should lapse back into that pre-2001 status,' he said.

'What the UK will be doing is working with our partners in the UN Security, in NATO, to get that message over. We don't want anybody to bilaterally recognise the Taliban.

'We want a united position among all the like-minded, as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into a breeding ground for terror.'

Labour has called on the Government to 'live up to our obligations' to the Afghan people as Taliban fighters stood poised to take control of Kabul.

Shadow Home Secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds has written to Home Secretary Priti Patel saying that safe and legal asylum routes need to be put in place.

In his letter to the Home Secretary he said: 'The situation in Afghanistan is truly awful. We must now live up to our obligations, especially to those Afghan people who worked so bravely with British representatives in Afghanistan. Our resettlement scheme must, urgently, be expanded to ensure people to whom we owe a huge debt are not abandoned.'

He said the process must include looking to help Afghan workers who helped in areas such as military, media and those who supported the work of the Department for International Development.

'The Taliban's return is likely to drive many thousands of people from their homes, with women and girls at particular risk. The UK Government must put in place specific safe and legal asylum routes to help provide support,' he added.

Amid pressure to announce resettlement plans for people fleeing Afghanistan, the Home Office issued a statement on Twitter on Sunday morning.

China and Russia prepare to accept Taliban rule of Afghanistan: Beijing officials pose with leaders of militants and Kremlin has 'no plans' to evacuate its embassy due to 'good relations' China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise Taliban rule in neighbouring Afghanistan after the Islamist terror group seized the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday and the country's embattled president fled for Tajikistan. Most global powers are reluctant to recognise the rule of the militant group overthrown by US-led coalition forces in 2001, with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warning that Afghanistan cannot be allowed to become a 'breeding ground for terror' again. But Beijing and Islamabad could break rank in order to form closer ties with the likely new government, with Chinese state media preparing its people to accept the likely scenario that the ruling Communist Party might have to recognise the Islamist group. In China, a series of photos were published last month by state media showing Foreign Minister Wang Yi standing shoulder to shoulder with visiting Taliban officials decked out in traditional tunic and turban in Tianjin. Meanwhile, the Kremlin said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, with Russian state media reporting that the Sunni Islamist group formed after the Soviet withdrawal of Afghanistan has promised to guarantee the safety of its diplomatic staff. 'The organisation has 'good relations with Russia' and a 'policy in general to ensure safe conditions for the functioning of the Russian and other embassies,' news agency AP quoted Suhail Shaheen, a spokesman for the Taliban's political office, as saying to Tass. And Iran, which has long been wary of the Sunni Muslim Taliban, has moved to ensure the safety of its diplomats and staff after previously offering to help end the crisis during talks in July. Advertisement

It said: 'The Home Office has already resettled over 3,300 Afghan staff and their families who have worked for the UK. We will continue to fulfil our international obligations and moral commitments. Home Office officials are right now working to protect British nationals and help former UK staff and other eligible people travel to the UK'.

Chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, Tom Tugendhat, argued events in Afghanistan are 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster since Suez' and said the priority had to be to get as many people as possible out of Kabul.

'This isn't just about interpreters or guards. This is about those people who we trained in special forces to serve alongside us, those who helped us to understand the territory through our agencies and our diplomats,' he told BBC News.

'This is the people who, on our encouragement, set up schools for girls. These people are all at risk now. The real danger is that we are going to see every female MP murdered, we are going to see ministers strung up on street lamps.'

Mr Raab has come under fire after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the situation in Afghanistan was unravelling.

Shadow Foreign Secretary Lisa Nandy said that Mr Raab's absence during a moment of major international upheaval was unacceptable.

'For the Foreign Secretary to go AWOL during an international crisis of this magnitude is nothing short of shameful,' she said.

'A catastrophe is unfolding in front of our eyes and while the Foreign Secretary is nowhere to be seen, hundreds of British nationals are being evacuated and his department is cancelling scholarships for young Afghans.'

A Foreign Office spokesman said: 'The Foreign Secretary is personally overseeing the FCDO response and engaging with international partners. He is returning to the UK today, given the situation.'

Mr Raab meanwhile tweeted that he had been sharing his 'deep concerns' about the situation in Afghanistan with Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. He said they had agreed it was critical that 'the international community is united in telling the Taliban that the violence must end and human rights must be protected'.

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said the Prime Minister needed to set out plans to prevent the fall of the Afghan government turning into a humanitarian crisis, with thousands of displaced people trying to escape the Taliban.

The Liberal Democrats called on the Government to work with allies to establish a 'safe passage corridor' so that those Afghans who wanted to leave the country rather than remain under the Taliban could do so.

'Safety from the Taliban should not just be foreign nationals, or the lucky few who made it in time to Kabul airport,' said foreign affairs spokeswoman Layla Moran. 'A safe passage corridor must be secured immediately between Kabul and an international border.

'If we do not act now, hundreds of thousands of innocent people will be tortured, enslaved and murdered at the hands of the Taliban.'

Helicopters buzzed over Kabul to evacuate personnel from the US Embassy while smoke rose near the compound as staff destroyed important documents, in scenes of the evacuation of US Embassy staff in Saigon in 1975 after the Vietnam War.

A total of 5,000 US troops are being deployed to help safely evacuate State Department staff from the US Embassy in Kabul with some of the first diplomats starting to fly out early Sunday.

Two US officials told Reuters a 'small batch' of people had already left while most staff were ready to go as soon as they were able. The evacuation of embassy staff was originally slated to take 72 hours but officials have ramped up efforts to get all Embassy staff out within the next 36 hours as the militant assault picks up pace, sources told CBS News.

Only a small number of key personnel including top decision-makers, the Bureau of Diplomatic Security Service and top decision-makers and security engineers able to destroy sensitive information will remain.

All US diplomats should be out of the country entirely by the end of August, the sources said.

The US military is preparing to lower the American flag over the Embassy - if the State Department gives the order - signaling its closure.

Footage posted on social media is said to show Taliban fighters taking over Jalalabad. The city fell under Taliban control without a fight early Sunday morning

Children sleep on the ground in a makeshift camp at Shahr-e-Naw Park in Kabul, Afghanistan, on Saturday after fleeing their homes in parts of Afghanistan now occupied by the Taliban

Diplomats flee US Embassy in Chinook helicopters US diplomats have been evacuated from Kabul just hours before Taliban forces stormed the Afghan capital. In a stark scene mirroring that of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war, a US Air Force helicopter was seen taking off from the US Embassy earlier today. The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital. Smoke was also seen rising from near to the US embassy earlier today as security staff work to burn any important documents, including CIA information, or material that could be used 'in propaganda efforts'. The US flag is soon expected to be lowered, signalling the official closure of the embassy. As many as 10,000 US citizens are being evacuated from the city. Around 3,000 US troops are being sent to aid the mission. Meanwhile, Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, while RAF planes are being scrambled from around the world, to airlift more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Advertisement

President Biden announced on Saturday that he was increasing the number of US troops being deployed to protect the withdrawal from the US Embassy to 5,000.

Around 1,000 service members are already on the ground and 3,000 more were already being sent next week, before he announced the deployment of an extra 1,000 troops from the 82nd Airborne at Fort Bragg as the situation escalated Saturday.

Other western governments are also rapidly withdrawing their embassy staff, citizens and Afghans who worked for them from the country with the British Ambassador set to leave by Sunday evening.

Meanwhile, thousands of locals have fled to Kabul to try to escape the Taliban as they have taken control of their home provinces. This has pushed the city's four million population higher and forced refugees to set up home in makeshift camps around the city.

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken held talks with Ghani Saturday to discuss the 'urgency of ongoing diplomatic and political efforts to reduce the violence,' the State Department said in a statement.

'The Secretary emphasized the United States' commitment to a strong diplomatic and security relationship with the Government of Afghanistan and our continuing support for the people of Afghanistan.'

A virtual briefing will be held Sunday morning between Biden Administration officials and House members following a request by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

It comes as the Biden administration has come under fire over the advancement of the Taliban in Afghanistan which many are blaming on the American troop withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Mr Biden defended the withdrawal Saturday and blamed predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001'.

'One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country. And an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me,' he said in a statement.

Mr Biden also hit out at predecessor Mr Trump for the deal with the Taliban that led to the recent withdrawal.

He said: 'When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor - which he invited the Taliban to discuss at Camp David on the eve of 9/11 of 2019 - that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001.

'Shortly before he left office, he also drew US forces down to a bare minimum of 2,500.

'When I became President, I faced a choice - follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict.

'I was the fourth President to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan - two Republicans, two Democrats. I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.'

Military helicopters stand on the tarmac of the military airport in Kabul Saturday from which the US is evacuating citizens

Senator Tom Cotton tweeted that the 'fiasco' was 'predictable' and had 'humiliated' the US

Senator Mitt Romney posted that he could not understand why the US had pulled out of the country

Former Secretary of State for Trump Mike Pompeo blasted the Biden administration, claiming the Trump administration had a plan for bringing troops out

The president has been slammed by several Republicans, with House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy hitting out at the 'complete mismanagement' of the Afghanistan withdrawal.

Mr McCarthy said: 'The White House has no discernible plan other than pleading with the Taliban. The bungled withdrawal, reminiscent of his failed withdrawal from Iraq, is an embarrassment to our nation.'

'President Biden must continue to provide the close air support necessary for the Afghan government to protect themselves from the Taliban and make sure al Qaeda and ISIS do not gain a foothold due to the Biden administration's disastrous policies.'

Former CIA director and former commander of US and International Forces in Afghanistan David Petraeus also blasted the situation in Afghanistan 'disastrous', 'catastrophic' and an 'an enormous national security set back' for the world.

Mr Petraeus said on The Rita Cosby Show on WABC Radio the US withdrawal had caused a domino effect in the country.

'This is an enormous national security set back and it is on the verge of getting much worse unless we decide to take really significant action,' Mr Petraeus said.

'We are now in a situation where the Taliban are trying to encircle Kabul - a city of 5 of 6 million before hundreds of thousands of refugees starting flooding into it.'

Senator Tom Cotton tweeted that the 'fiasco' was 'predictable' and had 'humiliated' the US.

'The fiasco in Afghanistan wasn't just predictable, it was predicted. Joe Biden's ill-planned retreat has now humiliated America and put at risk thousands of Americans left in Kabul,' he said.

'At a minimum, President Biden must unleash American air power to destroy every Taliban fighter in the vicinity of Kabul until we can save our fellow Americans. Anything less will further confirm Joe Biden's impotence to the world.'

Senator Mitt Romney posted that he could not understand why the US had pulled out of the country 'without an effective strategy to defend our partners.'

A Taliban fighter poses with a US-made Afghan air force Blackhawk helicopter at captured Kandahar airfield

Taliban fighters have seized helicopters as they continue their advance through Afghanistan, which is now approaching the outskirts of Kabul

'I understand but disagree with those who felt we should leave Afghanistan; I cannot understand why it has been done with such tragic human cost; without an effective strategy to defend our partners; and with inestimable shock to our nation's credibility, reliability, and honor,' he tweeted Saturday.

Former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo blasted the Biden administration, claiming the Trump administration had a plan for bringing troops out.

'Our administration had a model of deterrence in place as we prepared to bring the soldiers, sailors, marines, everybody who is on the ground there, home,' he tweeted. 'It looks like the Biden Administration has not been able to execute this.'

Taliban fighters invaded the palatial home of top Afghan warlord and US ally General Rashid Dostum Saturday after taking control of the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.

Dostum was a key US ally during the 20 year campaign against the Taliban and famously fought with the Special Forces 'horse soldiers' shortly after 9/11.

Before 9/11 he was an infamous warlord who was known for crushing prisoners alive beneath the wheels of a tank and in recent years he was a senior figure in the Afghan National Army. He is believed to have escaped.

On Saturday, fighters wielding guns were filmed walking Dostum's home in Mazar-i-Sharif around the luxurious oval-shaped room, filled with chandeliers and gold furniture.

Smoke rises above Kandahar, Afghanistan, Thursday as Taliban forces took control of the country's third largest city

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

Biden wrote a statement from Camp David on Saturday afternoon, insisting that he could not force the Afghan army to fight

Biden's statement in full: 'I will not pass this war on to a fifth president' 'Over the past several days I have been in close contact with my national security team to give them direction on how to protect our interests and values as we end our military mission in Afghanistan. First, based on the recommendations of our diplomatic, military, and intelligence teams, I have authorized the deployment of approximately 5,000 US troops to make sure we can have an orderly and safe drawdown of US personnel and other allied personnel and an orderly and safe evacuation of Afghans who helped our troops during our mission and those at special risk from the Taliban advance. Second, I have ordered our armed forces and our intelligence community to ensure that we will maintain the capability and the vigilance to address future terrorist threats from Afghanistan. Third, I have directed the Secretary of State to support President Ghani and other Afghan leaders as they seek to prevent further bloodshed and pursue a political settlement. Secretary Blinken will also engage with key regional stakeholders. Fourth, we have conveyed to the Taliban representatives in Doha, via our Combatant Commander, that any action on their part on the ground in Afghanistan, that puts US personnel or our mission at risk there, will be met with a swift and strong US military response. Fifth, I have placed Ambassador Tracey Jacobson in charge of a whole of government effort to process, transport, and relocate Afghan special immigrant visa applicants and other Afghan allies. Our hearts go out to the brave Afghan men and women who are now at risk. We are working to evacuate thousands of those who helped our cause and their families. That is what we are going to do. Now let me be clear about how we got here. America went to Afghanistan 20 years ago to defeat the forces that attacked this country on September 11th. That mission resulted in the death of Osama Bin Laden over a decade ago and the degradation of al Qaeda. And yet, 10 years later, when I became President, a small number of US troops still remained on the ground, in harm's way, with a looming deadline to withdraw them or go back to open combat. Over our country's 20 years at war in Afghanistan, America has sent its finest young men and women, invested nearly $1 trillion dollars, trained over 300,000 Afghan soldiers and police, equipped them with state-of-the-art military equipment, and maintained their air force as part of the longest war in US history. One more year, or five more years, of US military presence would not have made a difference if the Afghan military cannot or will not hold its own country. And an endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me. When I came to office, I inherited a deal cut by my predecessor—which he invited the Taliban to discuss at Camp David on the eve of 9/11 of 2019—that left the Taliban in the strongest position militarily since 2001 and imposed a May 1, 2021 deadline on US forces. Shortly before he left office, he also drew US forces down to a bare minimum of 2,500. Therefore, when I became President, I faced a choice—follow through on the deal, with a brief extension to get our forces and our allies' forces out safely, or ramp up our presence and send more American troops to fight once again in another country's civil conflict. I was the fourth President to preside over an American troop presence in Afghanistan—two Republicans, two Democrats. I would not, and will not, pass this war onto a fifth.' Advertisement

The fighters videoed themselves lounging on Dostum's gold furniture, posing in chairs and inspecting his golden tea set.

Meanwhile, videos from Kandahar showed Taliban fighters seizing grounded US-made Blackhawk helicopters and taking to the air in Russian aircraft after turning their crew.

Mazar-e-Sharif, the country's fourth largest city, fell Saturday despite Afghan forces and two powerful former warlords vowing to defend it.

The move handed the insurgents control over all of northern Afghanistan.

'The army is not fighting. It is only Atta (Muhammad) Noor and (Marshal Abdul Rashid) Dostum's militias defending the city,' Mohammad Ibrahim Khairandesh, a former provincial council member who now lives in the city, told the New York Times.

'The situation is critical, and it's getting worse.'

'We are probably experiencing the most massive, brutal and opportunistic military campaign of violence and terror, by the Taliban, in the history of our country,' Afghan Foreign Minister Mohammed Haneef Atmar said at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute earlier this week.

Herds of civilians who escaped the violence flooded the streets of Kabul and set up camps while diplomats work with other countries to see who's willing to take in Afghan refugees.

The State Department is in talks with several other countries to house US-affiliated Afghan refugees, and Canada has already welcomed 20,000 Afghan refugees threatened by the Taliban, the IRCC - Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada - said in a Twitter statement.

So far, about 1,200 Afghans have been evacuated to the United States and that number is set to rise to 3,500 in the coming weeks under 'Operation Allies Refuge,' with some going to a U.S. military base in Virginia to finalize their paperwork and others directly to US hosts, Reuters reported.

A deal to house about 8,000 Afghans in Qatar, which hosts a large US military base, has been close for weeks, a US official told Reuters, although no official deal has been announced.

Afghan President Ghani addressed the nation in a minute-long video statement Saturday morning (US time) that was translated into English.

'Afghanistan is in serious danger of instability,' Mr Ghani said.

'Though I know that you are worried about your current situation and your future, I assure you that as your president, my focus is prevent the expansion of instability, violence and displacement of my people,' Ghani said.

'As part of a historical mission, I will do my best to stop this imposed conflict on the Afghan people to result in further killing of innocent people, loss of your achievements of the last 20 years, destruction of public property and prolonged instability.'

He said he's engaging with Afghan and international leaders, and consultations are 'urgently ongoing and the results will soon be shared.'

This was his first public comment since the Taliban demanded he resign in exchange for a reduction in violence.

Between Friday and Saturday, the Taliban made major advances in what's already been an efficient takeover of the country.

They captured Herat and Kandahar, which are the country's second- and third-largest cities, as well as the Logar province, just south of Kabul. The Taliban continued its swift movement towards Kabul by capturing Mazar-i-Sharif.

Taliban forces began reclaiming land they lost during the United State's 20-year occupation months before Biden announced his plans to withdraw troops by September 11.

The preceding Trump administration negotiated the terms of a U.S. withdrawal in talks with the Taliban last year.

Between May and June, the Taliban recaptured 50 of Afghanistan's 421 districts, Deborah Lyons, the UN's special envoy on Afghanistan, told Newsweek.

The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country after toppling the Taliban in the wake of the September 11 attacks nearly 20 years ago.

Taliban fighters sit on the back of a vehicle in the city of Herat, west of Kabul, Afghanistan on August 14

Flag of Taliban militants is raised at a square in Herat, Afghanistan, after seizing control of the city on August 13.

The US Embassy in Kabul has been ordered to destroy sensitive materials as Biden sends in 3,000 troops to help evacuate
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The world of snooker is famed for its legendary rivalries — Alex 'Hurricane' Higgins v Steve 'Interesting' Davis, and Jimmy 'Whirlwind' White v Stephen 'Iceman' Hendry, to name two.

But today, all eyes will be on Mark 'The Pistol' Allen and his first round adversary in the British Open at Leicester's Morningside Arena — none other than 12-time women's snooker world champion Reanne Evans, aka 'The Ex'.

For not only will this be a crowd-pleasing Battle of the Sexes in a male-dominated sport — where women have only recently been allowed to compete at the top level with men — there could be a little private score-settling to add to the frisson of rivalry.

Former romantic partners, the pair split acrimoniously in 2008 after three years together. But reports of a dispute over child maintenance for their daughter, who is now aged 14, have left already frosty relations between Allen and Evans, both 35, ice cold.

Evans — who struggles to earn a living from snooker and won just £6,000 prize money for claiming her 12th women's world championship in 2019 — is reported to be seeking an increase in the child maintenance Allen pays.

But today, all eyes will be on Mark 'The Pistol' Allen (pictured) and his first round adversary in the British Open at Leicester's Morningside Arena — none other than 12-time women's snooker world champion Reanne Evans, aka 'The Ex'

This could be tricky as Northern Irishman Allen — who is ranked 12th in the world and has earned an estimated £3.3 million in snooker prize money — is currently in the process of getting divorced from wife Kyla McGuigan and declared himself bankrupt in May this year. (The couple, who married in 2013, also have a daughter.)

So that's a cue for some very awkward moments today.

'I honestly don't think there has ever been a situation quite like this in sport ever at the top level,' says Shaun Murphy, the world number 5. 'Some people who aren't snooker fans may tune in to watch the car crash unfold.'

Relations between Allen and Evans were given a blast of cold air in April at the World Championships at the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield, after Allen demanded that Evans — then working as a pundit for the BBC — be thrown out of a TV studio adjacent to his practice table because her presence was a 'distraction'.

Event organisers controversially complied, and Evans, who could only return to the studio shortly before going on air, was said to have been left feeling upset and 'embarrassed' by the episode.

Allen later said of the furore: 'There have been cases of players asking for people to be removed when they're practising ahead of a match. I'm not sure why there is such a fuss about this one.'

No wonder, then, that today's face-off across the green baize is widely seen as a grudge match — with a capital 'G'.

For not only will this be a crowd-pleasing Battle of the Sexes in a male-dominated sport — where women have only recently been allowed to compete at the top level with men — there could be a little private score-settling to add to the frisson of rivalry. Pictured: Reanne Evans

Former romantic partners, the pair split acrimoniously in 2008 after three years together. But reports of a dispute over child maintenance for their daughter, who is now aged 14, have left already frosty relations between Allen and Evans, both 35, ice cold. Pictured: Mark Allen and Reanne Evans with their daughter in 2007

Evans, who was awarded an MBE in 2020, is one of the first women to play on the main British Open tour; her No 1 ranking earned her a two-year professional card on the tour, along with Hong Kong player Ng On-yee.

Her inclusion, however, did not go down particularly well with her ex, who at the time sniffed: 'I'm not really sure what the two women are going to bring.'

Jason Ferguson, chairman of the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association, insisted that both players 'had provided reassurances that should they meet in a tournament they would conduct themselves professionally, and treat the opponent like any other player'.

Even so, there were gasps of astonishment when it was announced that the exes were pitted against each other in today's first round, with some speculating that Allen might even withdraw from the tour completely rather than face his former lover across the table.

So one can only imagine the added psychological pressure on both, as they chalk up their cues to compete in what will be a historic match in more ways than one.

Last night, Allen was the clear favourite to win at odds of 80-1 on, with Evans at 14-1. But given the strained relations between the pair, Britain's best woman snooker player must surely have an extra incentive to prove a point.

Reanne Evans, 35, who is a record 12-times women's world champion, is set to battle Mark Allen who is the father of her child

If not to her ex, then perhaps to six-time world champion Steve Davis, who in 2014 told the BBC World Service's Sports Hour that women lacked 'that single-minded determination in something that must be said is a complete waste of time — trying to put snooker balls into pockets with a pointed stick'.

Evans, who was seven-and-a-half months pregnant with her daughter when she won her first women's world champion title, winning just £800 compared with the men's £200,000 prize pot, might not agree — and says it remains her dream to qualify to play in a World Snooker Championship at the Crucible one day.

Of that first major tournament win, she recalled: 'Well, the bump was quite large but the doctors said if I felt all right there was no reason why I couldn't play. A few shots were awkward. I could only just reach to break off! By the end my legs swelled up and I was completely shattered.'

Certainly, today's match between the exes will be the first time Allen and Evans — who says she grew up in a snooker-loving household — have played against each other since happier days of old when, as a young couple, they used to practise together.

In an interview with the Mail in 2007, Evans, from Dudley in the West Midlands, talked about how tough it was to make a living as a woman in the sport and how her then partner, Mark, supported her ambitions.

While men's snooker has attracted big sponsorship money and TV deals, women's snooker has always been the poor relation fighting for recognition.

'I'm lucky with Mark, he helps keep my spirits up. Sometimes it's so hard to be motivated, you feel like you're banging your head against the wall. We do practise together, and, yes, I have beaten him,' said Evans.

Allen later added: 'We're both really competitive. Whenever we play each other as boyfriend and girlfriend we take it very seriously.

'I think Reanne will admit I've beaten her more times, but I'm not embarrassed to admit it, she has beaten me!

'She always lets me remember it and winds me up, but we can both have a laugh about it.'

Whoever wins today's match, it would seem a sure bet neither will be laughing, given the difficulties that followed their split 13 years ago.

Evans has spoken of the financial struggle as a single mother to reach the top of women's snooker as an amateur. She once said: 'I have won the ladies' world title for the past nine years and got virtually nothing for it. The simple question was, can I keep going on like this, earning no money?'

Meanwhile, Allen has talked of the depression he suffered after their break-up, exacerbated by the pressures of professional snooker and the long tours that prevented him from seeing their daughter as much as he would have liked.

'Speaking to a psychiatrist, I realised it's been coming for a long time for me,' Allen said after a World Championship comeback match ended a run of disappointing results in 2011. 'It's only really come to the fore in the last couple of months but at least now I'm trying to deal with it.

'On and off the table I'm a fighter and I don't want to give up on my life because it will affect everything. I was trying to shy away from it, closing up instead of opening up which I should have done. I'm starting to realise you can't close up.

'The difficulties in contact with our daughter are part of it, not a nice part of it but something that I've had to deal with. Obviously with me and Reanne not being together I knew I wasn't going to see her as much but I didn't realise it was going to be as hard as it is.'

There is no doubt that snooker fans will never have seen a match quite like this one. Allen will be in one tense corner, while Evans will be in hers. Each will have their supporters, but the big question is: who will their daughter want to win?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Republican National Committee webpage highlighting Donald Trump's support for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan and his 'historic peace agreement with the taliban' has disappeared.

The page was titled 'President Trump Is Bringing Peace In The Middle East' and described how he 'continued to take the lead in peace talks'.

It also claimed 'while President Trump has championed peace, Joe Biden has taken the lead in pushing for endless wars' and how the former president had 'taken action to defeat and eliminate dangerous leaders.'

When users tried to visit the page on Sunday night, they were met with an error message and an image of the current president saying 'it looks like you're as lost as Biden is'.

A source however told DailyMail.com that the RNC site recently underwent maintenance and there are no pages older than January 1, 2021.

Trump made a conditional peace deal with the Taliban in 2020 to reduce the number of Afghan troops if the Taliban did not provide support to terrorists.

He also said he wanted a complete withdrawal by May 1 of this year. Biden extended the deadline to September 11 and then pledged to have all US troops out by August 31.

The Republican National Committee has taken down this page from their website highlighting their support for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan and Donald Trump's 'historic peace agreement with the Taliban'

When users try and get to the page they are now met with a 404 error and a photo of Biden

Biden has criticized Trump's agreement with the Taliban and said it gave him little option but to withdraw troops.

On Sunday night, Trump sent a statement to his followers calling on Biden to 'resign in disgrace' on Sunday amid the Taliban's takeover of Afghanistan after the withdrawal of US troops.

'It is time for Joe Biden to resign in disgrace for what he has allowed to happen to Afghanistan, along with the tremendous surge in COVID, the Border catastrophe, the destruction of energy independence, and our crippled economy,' Trump said in an email.

He continued perpetuating his claim that Biden won the presidency via election fraud, concluding the email: 'It shouldn't be a big deal, because he wasn't elected legitimately in the first place.'

Trump issued the statement as exclusive DailyMail.com photos showed him arriving at Trump Tower in New York City.

Trump sent a statement to his followers on Sunday calling on President Biden to 'resign in disgrace' on Sunday amid the Taliban's takeover of Afghanistan after the withdrawal of U.S. troops

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

#BREAKING: Fmr. President Trump calls on Biden to resign



"It is time for Joe Biden to resign in disgrace...it shouldn't be a big deal, because he wasn't elected legitimately in the first place!" pic.twitter.com/hmhDlY8ZpK — Breaking911 (@Breaking911) August 15, 2021

The Taliban quickly began gaining control of key Afghan cities as Biden held his promise to send the troops home before the 20th anniversary of the September 11 attacks. Trump has continued to slam Biden for his handling of Afghanistan.

Earlier Sunday, he issued another statement denouncing the Biden administration over the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan.

'Tragic mess in Afghanistan, a completely open and broken Border, Crime at record levels, oil prices through the roof, inflation rising, and taken advantage of by the entire world—DO YOU MISS ME YET?' he said in a short emailed statement on Friday.

The Trump administration negotiated the terms of a U.S. withdrawal in talks with the Taliban last year. Now the speed of a Taliban advance has rattled officials three weeks ahead of President Biden's August 31 deadline to bring all troops home. Biden has repeatedly said he has no regrets about pushing ahead with his timetable.

On Sunday, the Taliban took control of Kabul. The co-founder of the Taliban has been declared the new President of Afghanistan after the terror group announced the 20-year Western occupation 'is over now' and proclaimed an Islamic state during a triumphant speech from the Presidential Palace in Kabul.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar (front centre wearing a black turban), who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

In a victory speech from Kabul on Sunday, Baradar said: 'I want to congratulate the Muslim Afghan people on this huge victory, especially the citizens and residents of Kabul, and I also want to advise and demand from all the mujahideen (Taliban fighters) that we have reached a situation that is unexpected and unique, this happened with the help of God and it must not make us arrogant.

'Before we didn't have as much responsibility as we do today, because now we are all tested by God, day by day we will get involved in the service of our nation, in providing them with security and hope for their future.

The spokesman for the Taliban's political office told Al-Jazeera TV that the war is over in Afghanistan and that the type of rule and the form of regime will be clear soon - adding that the Islamist group does not think foreign forces will repeat 'their failed experience in Afghanistan again'.

Spokesman Mohammad Naeem told the Qatar-based channel: 'We assure everyone that we will provide safety for citizens and diplomatic missions. We are ready to have a dialogue with all Afghan figures and will guarantee them the necessary protection.'

Taliban spokesman Suhail Shaheen vowed there would be 'no revenge' against those who worked with the previous Afghan government, but refused to guarantee that Afghans would be allowed to flee. 'Our policy is that no one should leave the country' he told the BBC. 'We need all Afghans to stay.'

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as Kabul descended into chaos, with U.S. helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War.

U.S.-backed Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country for Tajikistan, effectively ceding power to the Taliban and bringing the 20-year Western occupation of Afghanistan to an end, while thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the Pakistan border in a bid to escape Islamist rule.

Mr Ghani said in a Facebook post that he escaped Afghanistan to 'prevent a flood of bloodshed', claiming 'countless patriots would be martyred and the city of Kabul would be destroyed' if he had remained. He did not disclose details on his current location.

Foreigners in Kabul were told to either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 British diplomats, citizens and Afghan translators, and the British Ambassador was moved to a safe place. The U.S. and French Ambassadors have already been evacuated as the U.S. rushes to rescue more than 10,000 of its citizens.

Bagram airbase was also surrendered to the Taliban by Afghan troops, despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the U.S. and NATO to build up Afghan security forces. Upon its takeover, hundreds of Taliban and Islamic State terrorists being held prisoner there were freed.

Commercial flights were later suspended after sporadic gunfire erupted at the airport, according to two senior US military officials who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss ongoing operations. Evacuations continued on military flights, but the halt to commercial traffic closed off one of the last routes available for Afghans fleeing the country.

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

As night fell, Taliban fighters deployed across Kabul, taking over abandoned police posts and pledging to maintain law and order during the transition. Residents reported looting in parts of the city, including in the upscale diplomatic district, and messages circulating on social media advised people to stay inside and lock their gates.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current crisis and announced his government's priority is to get UK nationals out 'as fast as we can' after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in Downing Street. He also vowed that the Middle Eastern state must not become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

Biden vowed that any action that puts Americans at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong U.S. military response'. He also swiped his predecessor Trump for the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan, claiming he left the group 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katya Jones performed a crazy stunt with two time Olympic snowboarder Aimee Fuller, 30, which she shared to her Instagram page on Monday.

The Strictly Come Dancing pro-dancer, 32, wore a white robe before wiping it off to reveal a stunning gold and black sequins costume.

Katya attempted to wake surf on Aimee's shoulders - who was also wearing a white robe - for the daring TikTok challenge.

Skills: Katya Jones, 32, performed a crazy stunt with two time Olympic snowboarder Aimee Fuller

Amazingly the duo pulled off the incredible stunt seamlessly and the dancer even de-robbed while on Aimee's shoulders.

The slopestyle snowboarder wore black bikini bottoms and a pink crop top under her robe.

The beauties posed for some snaps after the stunt and jumped back into the water.

The stunt comes days before the Strictly cast enter their bubbles ahead of the new series.

Wow! The Strictly Come Dancing pro-dancer wore a white robe before wiping it off to reveal a stunning gold and black sequins costume

Go girls! Katya attempted to wake surf on Aimee's shoulders- who was also wearing a white robe- for the daring TikTok challenge

Well done: Amazingly the duo pulled off the incredible stunt seamlessly and the dancer even de-robbed while on Aimee's shoulders

So cool! Aimee after the Ladies' Slopestyle Snowboard Final during day three of the PyeongChang 2018 Winter Olympic Games in South Korea

The new series of the BBC One show is starting to gear up again as a handful of the new famous faces have been announced.

The cast of 2021 will include Tom Fletcher, AJ Odudu, Robert Webb, John Whaite and Rhys Stephenson.

CBBC presenter Rhys said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn.

Looking amazing: Katya on Strictly Come Dancing in 2019

Pose: The slopestyle snowboarder wore black bikini bottoms and a pink crop top under her robe

Fun! The beauties posed for some snaps after the stunt and jumped back into the water

New faces: Katya's stunt comes as many famous faces have been announced for the 2021 line up of the BBC One show, including McFly's Tom Fletcher (pictured)

The presenter revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday and said: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

This year is historic as the Great British Bake Off winner John revealed he will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

Exciting: AJ Odudu is also among those who have been signed up for the show

Can't wait: CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson is also set to appear and has said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phoebe Dynevor and Pete Davidson have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating.

The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon.

However a source has now claimed that the duo have split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship.

Claims: Phoebe Dynevor and Pete Davidson have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating (pictured at Wimbledon in the UK in July)

A source told The Sun: 'Pete and Phoebe's romance was a real whirlwind and from the start they were both totally committed.

'It was pretty telling when Phoebe headed to Croatia with her mates this week rather than going to see Pete in America.

'It was wild while it lasted... But the distance has put a strain on them. They will remain close but unless something drastic changes their relationship won't recover.'

The source continued that both of the stars have very busy schedules at the moment, with Phoebe filming Bridgerton series two in the UK and Pete working on Saturday Night Live in the US as well as filming a movie called Meet Cute.

All over? The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon (pictured at the tennis)

It is also thought that travel restrictions have added a further pressure to their romance as it isn't easy to just 'jump on a plane' and see each other.

MailOnline has contacted Phoebe and Pete's representatives for further comment.

Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April.

In exclusive pictures obtained by MailOnline the duo were seen enjoying a stroll in Stoke-on-Trent during his visit to the UK.

Busy: A source has claimed that the duo split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship and added that they both having busy schedules making it hard to see each other (Phoebe is pictured on Bridgerton)

It has been previously reported that Pete fell for her after watching her raunchy love scenes on Bridgerton.

The Saturday Night Live star is said to have told pals he thought the actress was 'hot as hell' over her character Daphne's intimate scenes with Simon, The Duke of Hastings (Regé-Jean Page).

A Los Angeles based friend of Pete's told The Mirror: 'Pete just loved Bridgerton and just got totally tripped out by Phoebe.

'She was totally his type - fresh faced, youthful, innocent looking beauty.

'We all joked with him about the naughty scenes, and of course he confessed he found them hot. He binge watched the show and felt it was his destiny to meet her.'

Cosy: Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April

Sun: It comes after Phoebe enjoyed a girls' trip to Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week

MailOnline contacted a representative for Pete Davidson for comment at the time.

The reports of their break-up come as Phoebe enjoys a sun-soaked break in Croatia with her co-star Sabrina Bartlett.

In snaps shared on Instagram, the actress wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with pal, 29, who plays Siena Rosso in Bridgerton.

The pair also enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

Filming on the second series of Bridgerton was recently delayed yet again after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

Farewell: Phoebe is currently working on series two of Bridgerton (pictured with Regé-Jean Page who bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is a critically acclaimed actress thanks to her incredible talent and movie star looks.

And Naomi Watts showed exactly where she gets them from on Sunday.

The actress posted several pictures of her gorgeous grandmother as she turned 96.

The apple doesn't far fall from the tree! Naomi Watts showed just where she gets her stunning good looks from as she posted pictures of her gorgeous grandmother on her 96th birthday over the weekend

Just like Naomi, her nan has sparkling blue eyes and a beautiful smile.

The 21 Grams star revealed in the caption of her picture that she hadn't seen her grandmother in almost two years.

'Happy birthday, Nanna!! 96 today!! These pics were taken in December 2019 (the last time i saw her!!). She’s the OG matriarch in our family,' she wrote.

'Tells a great story to this day. Loves to cook and boss everyone about. I attribute my hard work ethic to her. "Get off ya dinger" is a regular saying.

What a beauty! Just like Naomi, her nan has sparkling blue eyes and a beautiful smile

'I miss her so much. Can’t wait to see you when the world opens up! xox PS. I just heard they’ve suddenly gone into lockdown, so Nana is solo today!' she added.

'Please wish her the happiest birthday. ❤️'

Naomi is clearly missing her family.

Last week, she revealed one of her very favourite fashion pieces was a stunning vintage Ozzie Clarke dress, handed down from her beloved mother Myfanwy.

A classic beauty! Last week, Naomi revealed one of her very favourite fashion pieces was a stunning vintage Ozzie Clarke dress that was handed down from her beloved mother Myfanwy.

The floor-length floral dress had long sleeves and a large cut-out in the middle which showed off the 21 Grams star's décolletage and flat stomach.

The mother-of-two explained she has been wearing the vintage piece for 'decades'.

'I can’t remember if it was gifted or grifted. But this is my mum's #ozzieclark dress from 1975, and I’ve worn it for decades,' she wrote.

'A true classic. My hoarding gene is paying off! Nanna taught me right.'

Naomi was raised by her mother Myfanwy after her father Peter Watts died from an overdose in 1976.

The Mulholland Drive star was just seven-years-old when her father lost his life at the age of 31.

Back in an interview with The Guardian in 2017, Naomi said that rock band Pink Floyd stepped in to support her family after her father Peter Watts died from an overdose in 1976.

Peter was a sound engineer for the Wish You Were Here hitmakers, who helped the Watts family in the immediate aftermath of his death.

Hero: Naomi was raised by her mother Myfanwy after her father Peter Watts died from an overdose in 1976. They are pictured her together in 2011

She said: 'When he died, my dad hadn’t saved money, and I guess my mum didn’t have any. 'So they, the band, very kindly… ‘Trust fund’ doesn’t sound right at all. I think they gave my mum a few thousand dollars to help get things under way. A lump sum, to help. It was kind that they did that.'

The actress said she burst into tears when a Pink Floyd fan gave her a photo of her father in which she could clearly see his smile for the first time in her life.

She spoke of the importance of the moment: 'You’ve got to understand, I’ve got maybe three photos of my dad, and maybe two memories, and all of the photos of him are either out of focus or he’s a tiny speck in the background.'

The actress' parents Myfanwy Roberts and Peter Watts had divorced when she was four.

Close: Naomi is incredibly close with her mother (centre) who often accompanies the actress to events

Reflecting on her parents quirky styles, she said: 'I’d had enough of cool. I didn’t want cool. I wanted my parents to wear three-piece suits and tweed, not leather pants and four-inch platform boots.'

The Kent-born star credits moving around a lot as a child after her father's death- she went to nine different schools in England before emigrating to Australia at 14 - with learning how to reinvent herself.

The family moved to the North Shore area of Sydney where Naomi settled and eventually made friends with a teenage Nicole Kidman.

The aspiring actresses were cast together in Australian comedy, 1991's Flirting.

After a few episodes of Home & Away she was cast in the Hollywood movie Tank Girl and moved to the States.

Naomi, who labelled herself 'unhireable' spend many years being rejected at every audition before she got her big break in 2001's Mulholland Drive.

She was in a long-term relationship with Spotlight actor Liev Schreiber. After 11 years, the couple went their separate ways last year, but maintain a close relationship for their sons Sasha and Samuel.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She rose to fame three years ago on Love Island.

And Zara McDermott, 24, showed off her enviably toned figure in a tiny black and white leopard print bikini on Sunday.

The Made In Chelsea star took to Instagram to upload a cheeky swimwear throwback snap from her recent getaway in Madeira.

Stunning: Zara McDermott, 24, showed off her enviably figure in a tiny black and white leopard print bikini on Sunday

The reality star wowed in the stylish bikini which was embellished with a neon yellow boarder.

She posed with a bag of Cheetos and she playfully looked over her shoulder to the camera with a crisp in her mouth.

The blonde beauty captioned the post: 'Cheetos I love u.'

The stunning upload comes after Zara celebrated her beau Sam Thompson's 29th birthday in London last week.

Pose: The Made In Chelsea star took to Instagram to upload a cheeky swimwear throwback snap from her recent getaway in Madeira

Sam spent his birthday in spectacular style as his loved ones pulled out all the stops to ensure his birthday was a special one.

The Made In Chelsea star was in for a treat as his girlfriend Zara gifted him a brand new Vespa Scooter, while she was also presented with cupcakes decorated with shirtless images of best pal Pete Wicks.

Both Sam and his family, including sister Louise Thompson and her fiancé Ryan Libbey took to social media to document the fun-filled celebrations including a family dinner at his favourite restaurant.

Happy birthday! She celebrated her beau Sam Thompson's 29th birthday in London last week with his mother and sister Louise Thompson

Presents! The Made In Chelsea star was in for a treat as his girlfriend Zara gifted him a brand new Vespa Scooter, while she was also presented with cupcakes

Sam shared a plethora of snaps of his big day to his Instagram, with images including ones of his family as they helped mark his big day.

Captioning his post, he penned: 'It’s my birthday today, spending it with the nearest and dearest. I won’t get overly emotional, but I am under no illusions as to how unbelievably lucky I am to have my family, who put up with me and keep me in check. I love you guys so much and you’re my rock.'

He added: 'Here’s to many more years of acting like a child......LET THE BOTOX BEGIN!! (ps yes those are @p_wicks01 cupcakes) swipe to see what my amazing girlfriend got me!!!'

The collection of images also saw Sam and Zara sitting on the black scooter she brought for his birthday, with large blue '29' balloons seen hanging on the back.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Nervous teenagers across the UK have been sharing funny GIFs on Twitter overnight as more than half a million students are set to find out their GCSE grades this morning after this summer's exams were cancelled for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions.

The hashtag #GCSEresults2021 was trending this morning after thousands of pupils across England, Wales and Northern Ireland suffered a sleepless night - with many taking to Twitter to say they fear they have failed their exams because they had not prepared for them.

The grades will determine if pupils can get into their chosen sixth form or college, with many hoping for similar success that was seen in the record-breaking A-level results this week. However, they face an unprecedented battle with each other for A-level places as state schools become increasingly selective over who they admit for the next two years.

Almost one in three GCSE entries got top results today as ministers consider an overhaul to stop grades becoming meaningless and degraded because exams were cancelled and teachers had the final say. Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems, with Gavin Williamson being tipped to be sacked by Boris Johnson.

Traditional A*-G grades have been scrapped and replaced with a 9-1 system amid reforms, with 9 the highest result and a 4 broadly equivalent to a C grade, while a 7 is broadly equivalent to an A. Students receiving GCSE results in England are getting numerical grades for all their subjects as all courses have moved over to the grading system.

The proportion of GCSE entries awarded top grades rose to a record high last year after grades were allowed to be based on teachers' assessments, with 26.2 per cent of UK GCSE entries were awarded one of the three top grades, compared to 20.8 per cent in 2019, the last year that exams were pre-Covid.

Girls also pulled further ahead than boys amid the surge in top grades awarded last summer, with the gap between boys and girls achieving at least a 7 increasing from 6.5 percentage points in 2019 to eight percentage points in 2020.

The cancellation of the summer exams for a second year in a row has prompted some education leaders and politicians to call on ministers to consider reforming GCSEs in the post-Covid years.

Addressing concerns about possible grade inflation, Paul Whiteman, general secretary of school leaders' union NAHT, said: 'Grades have been arrived at in a completely unique way, so it would not be sensible to compare this year's results with any other, and any talk of 'grade inflation' is unhelpful to students.'

Mr Williamson, who could be sacked by the Prime Minister in the next cabinet reshuffle after presiding over mass grade inflation, said: 'Students should feel proud of their achievements and will now be looking forward to taking their next steps.

'I am also hugely grateful to teachers and school leaders for their hard work to ensure students get the grades they deserve and need to progress to the next stage of their lives. There have never been so many great options available for young people, whether that's going on to study A-levels, our pioneering T Levels, starting an apprenticeship or a traineeship.

'Whatever option young people choose, they can do so with the confidence it will give them the skills and knowledge to get on in life.'

Nervous teenagers across the UK have been sharing funny GIFs on Twitter overnight as more than half a million students are set to find out their GCSE grades this morning after this summer's exams were cancelled for the second year in a row due to Covid restrictions

Grade 10 to beat GCSE inflation? Ministers consider overhaul of exams marking as almost a third of entries are predicted to get top results today Almost one in three GCSE entries will get top results today as ministers consider an overhaul to stop grade inflation. A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine. A record 29 per cent of entries are expected to get at least a 7 - equivalent to the old A - and around 10 per cent will get a 9, which is a high A*. Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems. A government source said a new grade 10 was 'possible' and had not been 'ruled out'. They added: 'It's a discussion that's yet to be formally framed, but there will be conversations about changing the grading this autumn.' Education expert Alan Smithers, of the University of Buckingham said: 'We have a scale that has lost its meaning as we have people continually being given 9. Adding a 10 isn't a bad idea as it would be a good new label for outstanding performance.' However, last night Education Secretary Gavin Williamson defended the results, saying they had 'value' despite the grade inflation. He said: 'Students and their teachers should feel immensely proud of what they have achieved. I want to be clear - this is a moment to celebrate our young people and their futures.' Advertisement

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said pupils collecting their GCSE and BTEC results on Thursday should be proud after they faced learning in 'exceptional circumstances'.

He tweeted: 'Good luck to students receiving their GCSE and BTEC results today. Young people across our country are hugely talented and should be proud of all they've achieved in such exceptional circumstances. Thank you to their teachers and support staff who have worked so hard this year.'

Schools Minister Nick Gibb said pupils receiving their GCSEs had been through an 'exceptional year' because of the coronavirus pandemic.

Speaking to Sky News, Mr Gibb said: 'This is an exceptional year, designed to make sure that despite the pandemic, despite the fact we had to cancel exams, because it wouldn't have been fair for children, young people, to sit exams when they've had such different experiences of Covid - the different levels of self-isolation and so on - so a teacher-assessed system was the best alternative to make sure they can go on to the next phase of their education or careers.'

He said the Government wanted examinations to return next year, adding: 'We've already announced the adjustments to the exams - we expect all young people to be taking exams in 2022 but we will be making adjustments to those exams to reflect the fact that this cohort will have had disruption to their education as well.

'And the regulator Ofqual will be saying more about the grading standard that will be used for those exams in the autumn term.'

He also defended his boss Mr Williamson, following calls for the Education Secretary to be sacked. Sir Keir said Boris Johnson should fire Mr Williamson amid reports the Prime Minister is considering replacing him with Equalities Minister Kemi Badenoch at the next reshuffle.

Mr Gibb, asked on Sky News why Mr Williamson should keep his job, said: 'Because he is a very effective Education Secretary.

'I've worked with Gavin Williamson for the last two years and he is driven to make sure that no student will suffer long-term damage to their prospects as a consequence of the pandemic.

'He is driven to continue the reform programme in our education system where we saw, up until Covid, that attainment gap close in primary school and in secondary school.

'And he is driven to do more to make sure we continue to drive up standards in our education system so that background does not matter in terms of the opportunities available for young people.'

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework, and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), is expecting pressure to be placed on admissions teams at sixth forms colleges and schools if grades are inflated this summer.

He also warned that some young people could be 'turned away' from courses if centres cannot increase capacity due to limited space and staff.

Mr Barton added: 'I think what we'll see admissions tutors doing on Thursday, and heads of sixth form, is doing their best to make sure that irrespective of grades a young person moves on to what they had wanted to do in terms of their course and the course best suited to them.

'Because what we don't want is young people euphoric that they got higher grades than they had hoped for on results day, and then three or four weeks into a new term feeling out of their depth on a course which actually isn't the appropriate course for them.

'I think there'll be quite a lot of work going on behind the scenes, sometimes persuading young people and their parents to stick to what their course of action was.'

If more students achieve higher grades than anticipated - and they want to study A-levels rather than attend an further education (FE) college - it could cause logistical issues for sixth forms, he warned.

Mr Barton said: 'That will leave some courses struggling to be able to run and some courses oversubscribed and definitely a need for further resources.

'Or some young people just simply disappointed and turned away because there is no way you could increase capacity because of the accommodation and number of teachers you've got.'

Sixth-form colleges are calling for more funding from the Government to cope with another likely surge of pupils who will be able to meet entry requirements.

James Kewin, deputy chief executive of the Sixth Form Colleges Association, said: 'Our members certainly saw an increase in the number of students that met the entry criteria last year, and we expect a similar increase this year.

'The Government has provided some welcome additional capital funding to help sixth forms expand, but that was only for one year, so we would like to see that extended for the longer term in this year's spending review.'

Thousands of terrified teenagers are waiting in anticipation for their teacher-assessed grades, which were reintroduced in January after exams were cancelled across the UK owing to the Covid-19 pandemic

Several critics pointed to the 'grade inflation' seen across the country, where a furious row erupted as the bridge between private and state pupils grew further yet again. Above: Two delighted students in Belfast celebrate receiving their A-level results

GCSE pupils face 'Wild West' battle for sixth form places: Grade inflation due to exams being axed will see record haul of top marks today with poorer pupils most likely to miss out on moving up to A-levels GCSE students will today receive their results with record numbers getting top marks just days after rampant grade inflation in A-levels and seething anger that private school children are racing further ahead of their many 'have-not' state counterparts. Teenagers trying to get places at sixth-forms and colleges face an unprecedented battle with each other for A-level places as state schools become increasingly selective over who they admit for the next two years. Almost one in three GCSE entries will get top results today as ministers consider an overhaul to stop grades becoming meaningless and degraded because exams were cancelled and teachers had the final say. Ministers will examine changes to grading in the autumn to restore faith in the A-level and GCSE systems, with Gavin Williamson being tipped to be sacked by Boris Johnson. A new top grade of 10 could be introduced to the current 1-9 system in future, to allow the very brightest students to shine. A record 29 per cent of entries are expected to get at least a 7 – equivalent to the old A – and around 10 per cent will get a 9, which is a high A*. Experts have predicted today's results will be like the 'wild west' for those applying to sixth forms because grades are so high with the gap between private and comprehensive schools expected to dominate debate again. Lee Elliot Major, professor of social mobility at Exeter University, has said some popular state sixth forms have set such high entry requirements some students will now be excluded from staying on. Advertisement

He added: 'Additional in-year revenue funding to meet the anticipated surge in demand would also be very welcome, particularly as sixth forms are funded based on the number of students they recruited the previous year.'

It comes as a report by the Centre for Education and Employment Research (CEER) at the University of Buckingham suggests that parents could get behind a campaign to scrap GCSE exams permanently if even more top grades are awarded this year.

It will be hard for ministers to 'put the genie back into the bottle' and go ahead with formal exams after two years of teacher assessments, and more top grades could be awarded to GCSE pupils this summer, the report by Professor Alan Smithers said.

He added: 'Plentiful top grades make pupils and parents happy, but they are less helpful for those using the grades for admission to the next stage of education or recruitment to employment.

'With another bumper crop of top GCSE grades, the future of exams at age 16 is likely to come under threat. There is already a pressure group to ditch them and if parents get a liking for plentiful top grades they may become involved.'

On Tuesday, the proportion of A-level entries awarded top grades reached an all-time high after exams were cancelled, with 44.8 per cent achieving an A or above.

Prof Smithers has suggested that teachers have 'put more emphasis on rewarding' students for their efforts, 'rather than on the information the qualifications carry into future life.'

'Schools and teachers do not like GCSE exams because they are judged on their pupils' results in league tables and inspectors' reports. With teacher assessment, they are in control,' he added.

'Independent schools do not like GCSE exams either because, with the great majority of their pupils staying on until 18, they interrupt the smooth progression to A-level.

'Many educationists do not want exams at age 16 because they believe they distort the curriculum, are harmful to adolescent well-being, and are biased against the disadvantaged. It'll be quite a task for the Government to put the genie back into the bottle.'

Sir Keir called on the Government to do more to address lost learning during the pandemic, with Labour estimating that more than half a million Year 11 students receiving their GCSE results will leave secondary school without receiving catch-up support.

On a visit to a school in Swindon to meet students receiving their GCSE results, the Labour leader is expected to say the current plans to catch up on lost learning 'risk holding back a generation of kids'.

Sir Kevan Collins, the former education catch-up commissioner, quit his role in June over the Government's proposal of a £1.4billion fund to help children recover missed lessons, describing it as 'a bit feeble' - he had proposed a £15billion recovery package.

The Labour Party says that face-to-face teaching lost this year amounts to more than eight weeks per pupil, in addition to an average of 14 weeks last year, with some groups such as pupils on free school meals and those in the north of England being disproportionately affected.

Labour estimates 560,000 year 11 students are leaving secondary school this summer without catch-up support, and says that is set to rise to 1.9 million children by 2024.

The party is calling on the Government to match Labour's children's recovery plan, which it says would provide a £15billion package, including small group tutoring, breakfast clubs, mental heath support, more professional development for teachers, and extra investment to support the pupils who struggled the most with lockdown learning.

On his visit to a school in Swindon, the Labour leader, Sir Keir, is expected to say: 'These young people are excited for their futures and every one of them must be allowed to reach their potential.

'Yet the Conservatives are failing to give children the support they need to catch up on lost learning. They risk holding back a generation of kids. Labour's Children's Recovery Plan would give every child the support to learn, play and develop after this pandemic, delivering them a brighter future.

'It's time for the Conservatives to get behind Labour's plan and match our ambition for children's futures.'

Labour's shadow education secretary, Kate Green, said the Government's recovery plan for students is 'inadequate' and 'will leave millions of children without any additional support, showing a shocking lack of ambition their future ambitions and life chances'.

A Government spokesperson said: 'We have committed to an ambitious and long-term education recovery plan, including an investment to date of over £3billion and a significant expansion of our tutoring programme, to support children and young people to make up for learning lost during the pandemic.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A heartbreaking video of an Afghan girl voicing her anguish at the world's treatment of her country has gone viral, days before the taliban successfully established their control on Sunday.

The emotional video has already garnered millions of views after being posted to Twitter by human rights activist Masih Alinejad, and features a crying girl whose identity remains unknown.

'We don't count because we were born in Afghanistan,' the tearful girl explains in the 45-second clip.

'I cannot help crying,' she adds. 'No one cares about us. We'll die slowly in history.'

The Taliban previously ruled Afghanistan from 1996-2001 before they were ousted by a US-led campaign following the 9/11 attacks.

Under Taliban rule, girls were banned from attending school, while women could only appear in public wearing full body coverings and accompanied by male escorts.

Women who did not faithfully observe the Taliban's strict interpretation of Islamic law were publicly flogged or executed.

A heartbreaking video of an Afghan girl voicing her anguish at the world's treatment of her country has gone viral, days before the Taliban successfully established their control of Afghanistan on Sunday

The emotional video, which garnered roughly 1.6M views, was initially posted to Twitter by human rights activist Masih Alinejad and features a crying girl whose identity remains unknown

On the same day the video was posted, United Nations' Secretary-General António Guterres said in a statement that 'Afghanistan is spinning out of control' and that the conflict is 'taking an even bigger toll on women and children.'

In addition, Guterres said he's 'deeply disturbed by early indications that the Taliban are imposing severe restrictions on human rights in the areas under their control, particularly targeting women and journalists.'

'It is particularly horrifying and heartbreaking to see reports of the hard-won rights of Afghan girls and women being ripped away from them,' he added.

Pakistani activist and Nobel Peace Prize winner Malala Yousafzai also shared her concerns via Twitter on Sunday.

'We watch in complete shock as Taliban takes control of Afghanistan. I am deeply worried about women, minorities and human rights advocates.

'Global, regional and local powers must call for an immediate ceasefire, provide urgent humanitarian aid and protect refugees and civilians.'

Malala became a symbol for human rights advocates when in 2012 she survived being shot in the head by a Taliban gunman in Pakistan.

Pakistani activist Malala Yousafzai tweeted about her concerns regarding the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan after she was shot in the face on a bus by a Taliban gunman

Previously, Afghan women were not allowed to work, study, or be treated by male doctors unless accompanied by a male chaperone.

Individuals who violated the sexist laws were imprisoned, publicly flogged, and even executed.

The international community eventually worked to open schools for girls and allowed women to return to work following the Taliban's ousting from power in 2001.

However, now that the Taliban has taken control of the Afghan capital Kabul, the future for Afghan women remains uncertain.

Local reports say Taliban fighters are already going door-to-door and forcibly marrying girls as young as 12 as Jihadist commanders order imams to create 'marriage lists' and offer girls for sexual servitude.

Girls as young as 12 are being taken from their homes and forcibly married to Taliban fighters in areas of Afghanistan they now control as part of the 'spoils of war' (file image)

Hundreds of thousands of Afghanis have been displaced from their homes in recent weeks by fighting, with fears that could swell to millions if entire country falls

Taliban soldiers are to marry the women aged from 12 to 45 for their because they view them as 'qhanimat' or 'spoils of war' - to be divided up among the victors.

Thousands of people have attempted to flee the country at Kabul airport, while others have already begun preparations in anticipation of what is likely to be a brutal and misogynistic Taliban rule.

A workman was seen painting over the image of a female model on a beauty shop in Kabul yesterday, amid fears that businesses and individuals seen to be promoting women's rights will face severe punishment.

A beauty salon owner has today been seen painting over the image of a female model in Kabul amid fears that women's rights could be torn up by the misogynistic Taliban

Taliban fighters raise their flag at the Ghazni provincial governor's house, in Ghazni, southeastern, Afghanistan, Sunday, Aug. 15, 2021

Divorced women, human rights activists and female journalists in particular face a serious threat from the Taliban takeover.

One female journalist described fleeing a city in northern Afghanistan - which she did not name - and going into hiding with her uncle for fear the Islamists would hunt her down and execute her.

The 22-year-old said she fled under the noses of Taliban gunmen while disguised beneath a burqa and went with her unclear to a nearby village - but was forced to flee again after informants told the militants of her presence.

Now holed up in a remote location somewhere in the country's north, she said she fears for her life and the safety of her family - 'Will I ever go home? Will I see my parents again? Where will I go? How will I survive,' she said.

The Taliban's return to power occurred despite hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the United States building up Afghan government and its defense forces.

On Sunday, the US Ambassador to Afghanistan and some of his staff were seen fleeing their Kabul workplace as the Pentagon increased the number of troops deployed in the region from 1,000 to 6,000.

Ambassador Ross Wilson was seen arriving at Kabul airport, as other Americans still in the country were ordered to shelter in place, after shots were fired at the city's airport.

A rapid evacuation is underway at Kabul airport - the only route out of Afghanistan - after Taliban leaders entered the presidential palace

Biden deploys 1,000 more US troops to Kabul - bringing total number to 6,000 - as shots are fired at the airport where ambassador has fled with embassy flag

Late Sunday night, the State Department announced all personnel had been evacuated from the US Embassy in Kabul and were at the airport.

'We can confirm that the safe evacuation of all Embassy personnel is now complete. All Embassy personnel are located on the premises of Hamid Karzai International Airport, whose perimeter is secured by the US Military,' State Department spokesperson Ned Price said in a statement.

Initially, the aim had been to have staff removed within 72 hours, but the Taliban's advances across the Afghan capital Kabul prompted the immediate removal of all staff.

A U.S. Chinook helicopter flies near the U.S. Embassy as smoke rises in Kabul, Afghanistan, late on Sunday night

Afghan displaced people who fled from their homes during the fighting carry their belongings in a public park in Kabul
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Muslim police officer facing investigation for tweeting racist messages once admitted that her employer found her views ‘extreme’.

Ruby Begum, 26, posted the comment when she worked for a market-research company.

The Mail on Sunday revealed last week that Ms Begum used Twitter in the months before joining the Metropolitan Police to insult Jews and mock the 9/11 terror attacks.

She was also in contact with a suspected female jihadi in Syria.

She frequently used the offensive term ‘kuffar’ to describe non-believers, writing in July 2014: ‘Kuffar lips have been all over my mug there is no way I’m using that thing again.’

Elsewhere, she referred to Pakistanis as ‘p***s’.

Ruby Begum (above), 26 - a Muslim police officer hailed as a role model for bravely confronting anti-lockdown protesters - was facing an urgent investigation after it was revealed she tweeted a torrent of racist messages and was in regular contact with a suspected female jihadi in Syria

As Scotland Yard faced questions over how her rants (example, above) were missed during vetting, it emerged she communicated over many months with a woman thought to have fled Europe in 2014 to live under the Islamic State's so-called caliphate

Miss Begum – who works for the Met's Taskforce, a division which deals with public order – has been running a Twitter account under the name Ruby Beees since 2012, posting more than 25,000 messages

Miss Begum also mocks the 9/11 attacks in her tweets, even as recently as 2019 when she was a full-time officer in the Met. On September 11, 2019, as the world marked the 18th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, Miss Begum tweeted: 'Omg [O my God] it's 9/11 today? Jokes, I only noticed.' On the same anniversary in 2014, she tweeted: 'Must be stupid if you think I'm gonna do 2 mins silence for 9/11'

This newspaper can now reveal that when urged by a friend to switch the settings on her Twitter account from private to public 18 months after becoming a police officer, Ms Begum replied: ‘I can’t have anyone at work find me.’

Later, however, she did make her tweets publicly accessible.

She ran her account under the name Ruby Beees, posting 25,000 messages.

Photographs and film of the petite officer wearing a hijab on the front line went viral last year, with senior colleagues calling her inspirational.

But after being alerted by The Mail on Sunday, the Met launched an investigation and referred the matter to the Independent Office for Police Conduct.

Ms Begum has now been placed on ‘restricted duties’. Most of her antisemitic comments were made in 2014, when Israel launched a ferocious attack against the Palestinian militant group Hamas in the Gaza Strip.

Ms Begum wrote: ‘Dirty Zionist. Jahannam [hell] is awaiting.’ In another tweet, she wrote: ‘Israel have no limits. Scumbags I can’t wait for the day they get severely punished.’

Later that year, she said: ‘Zionists have no hearts! They’ll get what’s coming to them subhanallah [glory be to God].’

In a tweet from 2014, she wrote: ‘Don’t like being private but my company thinks I have extreme views.’

The Met said in a statement: ‘There is no place within the Met for any racist, homophobic or otherwise hateful attitudes and officers and staff can expect robust action should they be found to hold or express such views.

‘The information provided by The Mail on Sunday regarding a constable’s social media posts is concerning and is being treated very seriously.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A horrific video has emerged of a person from Afghanistan caught in the landing gear on a C-17 emergency evacuation flight. Thousands fled to the airport in Kabul in desperation to escape the country after the...

Share this video: Video: Horrific video shows Afghan caught in landing gear during evacuation
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

She has to stick to a demanding routine to keep up her astoundingly fit figure.

But Jennifer Lopez was ready to relax and enjoy some pampering as she arrived at the home of film producer Jennifer Klein for her annual Day of Indulgence party on Sunday.

The 52-year-old Hustlers star brought her 13-year-old daughter Emme along to the retreat, as they joined a host of other stars, including Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, at the luxurious home in Los Angeles' tony Brentwood neighborhood.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

The suit featured a matching top that she wore unbuttoned that hung loosely on her slender frame.

It featured pale pastel green trim with hypnotizing abstract designs.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Standing tall: Jennifer elevated her 5ft5in stature with a pair of gray open-toe stilettos

Jennifer elevated her 5ft5in stature with a pair of gray open-toe stilettos, and she added some sparkle to the muted ensemble with dangling gold necklaces, including a long pendant that hung over her midriff.

She wore her caramel-colored locks tied back tightly in a ponytail, and she blocked out the sun with a stylish set of large square sunglasses.

Emme looked cozy in a cream-colored cable knit cardigan with a white crop top and a burgundy floral pattern skirt.

Contrast: Emme looked cozy in a cream-colored cable knit cardigan with a white crop top and a burgundy floral pattern skirt

Top ticket: The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering

She rocked the voluminous green hair that she's showcased in recent weeks and carried a brown handbag under her arm.

Emme, whose twin brother Max had to stay home from the female-only event, wore chic large-frame eyeglasses and dressed down with a casual pair of white sneakers.

Jennifer was also seen walking around outside the house and cooling down with a fruity cocktail.

While inside the gathering, she was spotted grinning ear-to-ear as she chatted with friends.

Free stuff: Several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies

Catching up: While inside the gathering, she was spotted grinning ear-to-ear as she chatted with friends

The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Bold new look: Emme has been sporting a bold new green hairdo for the last few weeks after dying her naturally brunette locks an eye-catching shade

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Newcomer: Pop superstar Olivia Rodrigo was among the high-profile attendees. She looked casually yet stylish in a sheer shirt with a pink-and-green dotted pattern, along with a black mini skirt to highlight her trim legs

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back

Striking: Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath

On point: She wore matching black pants and eye-catching rose gold braided open-toe heels

Pop superstar Olivia Rodrigo was among the high-profile attendees.

She looked casually yet stylish in a sheer shirt with a pink-and-green dotted pattern, along with a black mini skirt to highlight her trim legs.

The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back.

Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath.

She wore matching black pants and eye-catching rose gold braided open-toe heels.

Low key: Alexandra Daddario, who's currently receiving rave reviews for her popular HBO series The White Lotus, opted for a casual and comfortable ensemble

No fuss: She had a simple cream-colored blouse with rolled up sleeves that was tucked loosely into her black leggings.

Accessorized: The brunette beauty wore a silver wristwatch and styled her shoulder-length hair straight down to frame her piercing blue eyes

Alexandra Daddario, who's currently receiving rave reviews for her popular HBO series The White Lotus, opted for a casual and comfortable ensemble.

She had a simple cream-colored blouse with rolled up sleeves that was tucked loosely into her black leggings.

The brunette beauty wore a silver wristwatch and styled her shoulder-length hair straight down to frame her piercing blue eyes.

Pretty in pink: English actress Annabelle Wallis had the perfect summer look with a billowing tiered dress in shades of pink and lavender. The patchwork look featured several flower print patterns

Golden beauty: She also wore gold open-toe heels and carried a quilted beige-and-white handbag under her arm. Annabelle, who has been dating Chris Pine since 2018, parted her voluminous blond locks down the center and wore chic round-frame sunglasses

English actress Annabelle Wallis had the perfect summer look with a billowing tiered dress in shades of pink and lavender.

The patchwork look featured several flower print patterns.

She also wore gold open-toe heels and carried a quilted beige-and-white handbag under her arm.

Annabelle, who has been dating Chris Pine since 2018, parted her voluminous blond locks down the center and wore chic round-frame sunglasses.

Legs for days: Julianne Hough highlighted her toned dancer's legs in a black dress with a sky-high slit. The long-sleeve ensemble featured enlivening floral designs that complemented her long blond hair

Swag: She was seen leaving the party as she pushed her black Samsonite suitcase and carried a variety of bags with her.

Goodies: Julianne had her black-and-pink floral print bag resting on her suitcase as she attempted to get all of the extravagant gifts home

Julianne Hough highlighted her toned dancer's legs in a black dress with a sky-high slit.

The long-sleeve ensemble featured enlivening floral designs that complemented her long blond hair.

She was seen leaving the party as she pushed her black Samsonite suitcase and carried a variety of bags with her.

In addition to the suitcases, each invited guest received a LeSportSac weekenders bag with items specially tailored for each individual guest.

Julianne had her black-and-pink floral print bag resting on her suitcase as she attempted to get all of the extravagant gifts home.

No fuss: How I Met Your Mother star Cobie Smulders went with a considerably more casual and rugged look than many of the guests. She looked cool in a beige-and-white shirt covered in palm leaf patterns, which she wore with weather acid-wash jeans and beige heels

Iconic: Jordana Brewster channeled Julia Roberts' iconic brown polka dot dress from Pretty Woman as she arrived in a nearly identical number

Taking it easy: Actress Alexandra Shipp sported thick braids with a ribbed beige tank top and black jeans

How I Met Your Mother star Cobie Smulders went with a considerably more casual and rugged look than many of the guests.

She looked cool in a beige-and-white shirt covered in palm leaf patterns, which she wore with weather acid-wash jeans and beige heels.

Jordana Brewster channeled Julia Roberts' iconic brown polka dot dress from Pretty Woman as she arrived in a nearly identical number.

Actress Alexandra Shipp sported thick braids with a ribbed beige tank top and black jeans.

Woman in red: Nicole Scherzinger pulled out all the stops for her colorful ensemble as she made a grand entrance. She arrived in a busty sheer scarlet dress that whipped about in the breeze as she stepped out of her SUV

Colorful: The colorful look featured a bevy of blue-and-yellow floral designs and voluminous sleeves

Covered up: The reality judge also wore a floppy straw had and large sunglasses

On point: She wore white open-toe wedges and had a black chevron quilted Yves Saint Laurent handbag

Nicole Scherzinger pulled out all the stops for her colorful ensemble as she made a grand entrance.

She arrived in a busty sheer scarlet dress that whipped about in the breeze as she stepped out of her SUV.

The colorful look featured a bevy of blue-and-yellow floral designs and voluminous sleeves.

She wore white open-toe wedges and had a black chevron quilted Yves Saint Laurent handbag.

The reality judge also wore a floppy straw had and large sunglasses.

Runway entrance: Tyra Banks put aside her supermodel glamour for a low-key entrance

Supermodel: She had on a black T-shirt with a 'Smize Cream' design over the chest, and she paired it with matching black slacks with an unusual flap over the front

Simple: The America's Next Top Model host wore her hair tied up in a swirling top knot

On theme: She rounded out he look with black sneakers and a black mask

Tyra Banks put aside her supermodel glamour for a low-key entrance.

She had on a black T-shirt with a 'Smize Cream' design over the chest, and she paired it with matching black slacks with an unusual flap over the front.

The America's Next Top Model host wore her hair tied up in a swirling top knot.

She rounded out he look with black sneakers and a black mask.

Space invader: Laverne Cox arrived at the party in a futuristic all-black ensemble. She wore a figure-hugging bodysuit with a halter top

Skimpy: The outfit had a low-cut slit highlighting her cleavage, along with a thick black band around her midriff

Unmissable: She wore elbow-length gloves with the outfit and carried a thick black-and-white tote bag. But the most striking part of her outfit was an oil slick–colored mask that completely blocked out her eyes and mouth and made her look like an extraterrestrial visitor

Laverne Cox arrived at the party in a futuristic all-black ensemble.

She wore a figure-hugging bodysuit with a halter top and a low-cut slit highlighting her cleavage, along with a thick black band around her midriff.

She wore elbow-length gloves with the outfit and carried a thick black-and-white tote bag.

But the most striking part of her outfit was an oil slick–colored mask that completely blocked out her eyes and mouth and made her look like an extraterrestrial visitor.

Classic style: Thor: Ragnarok star Tessa Thompson looked lovely in a white blouse over a black dress as she carried a pink knit Prada tote

Simple: Miranda Cosgrove looked vibrant in a short black dress covered in white flowers

Casual: She wore a pink masked and dressed down with a set of black Prada platform sneakers

Lacy: Supergirl star Melissa Benoist also rocked a low-key look with a lacy white blouse and flared jeans

Thor: Ragnarok star Tessa Thompson looked lovely in a white blouse over a black dress as she carried a pink knit Prada tote.

Miranda Cosgrove looked vibrant in a short black dress covered in white flowers.

She wore a pink masked and dressed down with a set of black Prada platform sneakers.

Supergirl star Melissa Benoist also rocked a low-key look with a lacy white blouse and flared jeans.

Stylish: Guardians Of The Galaxy star Karen Gillan looked chic in a short pale yellow double-breasted trench coat

Red-haired beauty: She wore it with white sneakers and a black quilted handbag, and she let her voluminous red tresses cascade down her shoulders

Lustrous: Laura Harrier glowed in a white satin dress as she walked up to the party

Blue mood: Jane Levy, whose canceled series Zoey's Extraordinary Playlist was just revived for an additional movie, wore a hypnotizing blue-and-white knit sweater

Standard: She also had on black slacks with sandals and carried a black-and-white gingham handbag as she pushed her suitcase of swag out

Guardians Of The Galaxy star Karen Gillan looked chic in a short pale yellow double-breasted trench coat.

She wore it with white sneakers and a black quilted handbag, and she let her voluminous red tresses cascade down her shoulders.

Laura Harrier glowed in a white satin dress as she walked up to the party.

Jane Levy, whose canceled series Zoey's Extraordinary Playlist was just revived for an additional movie, wore a hypnotizing blue-and-white knit sweater.

She also had on black slacks with sandals and carried a black-and-white gingham handbag as she pushed her suitcase of swag out.

Sundress: It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia fixture Kaitlin Olson rocked a white dress with thick green stripes and gladiator-style brown sandals

Mix and match: Orange Is The New Black star Samira Wiley paired a lovely yellow tank top with olive-colored shorts and a matching blazer

Stylish: She draped the jacket over one shoulder and and also had on a matching fedora to block out the sun

It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia fixture Kaitlin Olson rocked a white dress with thick green stripes and gladiator-style brown sandals.

Orange Is The New Black star Samira Wiley paired a lovely yellow tank top with olive-colored shorts and a matching blazer.

She draped the jacket over one shoulder and and also had on a matching fedora to block out the sun.

Looking good: This Is 40 star Leslie Mann was all business in a white ribbed sweater

Perfection: She had on a set of high-waisted pale yellow jeans and platform heels and covered up with chunky black sunglasses

Songstress: Songwriter Diane Warren wore playful black pants decorated with Mickey Mouse designs, plus a black T-shirt and baby blue trainers

This Is 40 star Leslie Mann was all business in a white ribbed sweater and a set of high-waisted pale yellow jeans.

She wore platform heels with the colorful look and covered up with chunky black sunglasses.

Songwriter Diane Warren wore playful black pants decorated with Mickey Mouse designs, plus a black T-shirt and baby blue trainers.

Gorgeous: Actress Julianne Nicholson lit up the day with her white-and-blue striped tiered dress. She wore a white fedora with a pale blue band as well, plus white sneakers

Actress Julianne Nicholson lit up the day with her white-and-blue striped tiered dress.

She wore a white fedora with a pale blue band as well, plus white sneakers.

Dania Ramirez beamed as she arrived at the party in a multicolored striped dress.

She added more color to the pastel ensemble with a red Goyard bag and reflective aviator sunglasses, as well as a pale pink mask.

Grinning: Dania Ramirez beamed as she arrived at the party in a multicolored striped dress. She added more color to the pastel ensemble with a red Goyard bag
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cindy Crawford looked incredible as she sunbathed poolside in a one-piece swimsuit on Sunday.

The 55-year-old supermodel shared a photo on her Instagram page in which she was seen laying on the deck of a pool with the ocean in the background.

'Poolside ✨ Soaking it in…,' Cindy wrote in the caption of the sexy snap.

Wow! Cindy Crawford looked incredible as she sunbathed poolside in a one-piece swimsuit on Sunday

Crawford propped herself up by the pool's edge as she laid back on the cement. The Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover star lifted up her sculpted arm as she ran her fingers through her golden-streaked brunette locks.

The runway star showcased her taut midriff in a black one-shouldered one-piece swimsuit. She accessorized simply with a gold chain bracelet.

The catwalk queen showed off her toned and tanned legs as she lounged on the sunny afternoon. Crawford closed her eyes as she raised her head to take in the rays.

Making a profit: Crawford recently sold her Beverly Hills home for $13.5 million. Pictured in 2019

The photo was taken at the beauty's oceanfront estate in Malibu. Crawford recently sold her Beverly Hills home for $13.5 million.

Cindy made a profit of $1.88 million on the lavish property after she sold it to WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum last week.

According to reports, the sale of the home brings Cindy’s total real estate profits up to an estimated $8 million in the last six years, after she also sold two homes – one in Beverly Hills, and one in Malibu – in 2015 for a total of $80 million.

Lavish: Cindy and her husband, Rande Gerber, purchased the five-bedroom Beverly Hills home for $11.6 million in 2017 from OneRepublic rocker Ryan Tedder. Seen in 2019

Cindy and her husband, Rande Gerber, 59, purchased the five-bedroom Beverly Hills home for $11.6 million in 2017 from OneRepublic rocker Ryan Tedder. The mid-century modern home spans 5,400-square-feet and was built in 1959, although it has been completely re-designed.

Cindy and Rande - who have Kaia, 19, and Presley, 22, together - initially put the house up for sale for $16 million in August 2020 before the price was slashed to $13.5 million.

The home has high ceilings, walls of glass and an open floor plan, according to Realtor.com, who also listed the property as having a double living room with a bar and eye-catching fireplace, as well as a gourmet kitchen with a centre island made of Calacatta marble.

The gated, one-acre lot has a motor court, a large pool and private walking paths, according to the listing.

Kurt Rappaport of Westside Estate Agency represented the seller and the buyer.

News of the house sale comes after Cindy and Rande purchased a new waterfront home in Miami Beach back in January.

The couple reported spent $9.6 million on the property, which has five bedrooms, four and a half bathrooms, and almost 4,000 square feet of living space.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mickey Rourke knows firsthand the therapeutic value of dogs.

But it takes just moments to realize the Oscar-nominated actor cherishes the unconditional love and friendship they bring to his life the most.

And over the weekend the Upstate New York native put his bond with one of his four-legged family members on display during a lunch date with a friend and his beloved pooch, King Carlos, in Beverly Hills.

Lunch date: Mickey Rourke, 68, appeared to be on the lookout for a friend before sitting down for lunch in Beverly Hills over the weekend

The Wrestler star went with his casual-cool look dressed in fitted blue jeans and a charcoal black hoodie without a shirt.

He stepped out in brown cowboys boots that were adorned with metal tips and a yellow design along the sides and heels.

The acclaimed actor ended up sitting in the outside patio of Mulberry Street Pizzeria with his beloved small white dog that's among his pack of pooches at home.

At one point, he was spotted giving Carlos a hug and a kiss.

Unconditional love: The acclaimed actor gave his beloved dog King Carlos a kiss during lunch

Unique: The Wrestler star opted for his casual-cool look dressed in fitted blue jeans with a charcoal black hoodie, without a shirt, and cowboy boots

During the afternoon outing, Rourke had his pal snap a photo of himself feeding King Carlos.

'King ""lCARLOS HAVING CHICKEN MEAT BALLS,' the Barfly leading man wrote in the caption, along with a series of heart emojis and a couple of hand emojis signifying his love for his beloved pooch.

Rourke has devoted much of his Instagram page to his endless devotion and welfare of dogs, which includes helping find forever homes for animals in need.

Snack time: The Oscar-nominated actor fed King Carlos chicken meatballs during his lunch date at Mulberry Street Pizzeria

Adorable: King Carlos snuggled up with a new friend in a post last week

Rourke famously thanked his dogs when he accepted the Golden Globe for Best Actor for The Wrestler back in 2009.

'I'd like to thank all my dogs, the ones who are here and the ones who aren't here any more, because sometimes when a man's alone, all you got is your dog,' he said before adding, 'And they've meant the world to me.'

Earlier that year, during an interview, he credited his dogs for helping save his life when he contemplated suicide during one of the lowest points of life.

Along with his Oscar-nominated performance in The Wrestler (2008), Rourke's acting resume includes such acclaimed films as Diner (1982), Rumble Fish (1983), The Pope Of Greenwich Village (1984), 9 1/2 Weeks (1986), Angel Heart (1987), Barfly (1987), A Prayer For The Dying (1987), Sin City (2005), Domino (2005) and Sin City: A Dame To Kill For (2014).

His pack: Rourke snuggled up next to his dog Ivan aka (Baby Gorilla) two weeks ago
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@January Jones has grabbed the attention of admirers and critics with her consistent flow of bikini snaps on Instagram over the past couple of years.

And on Sunday the Mad Men alum sent her 1.1 million fans and followers into a frenzy once again by stepping up the sex appeal level with a series of photos where she flashes underboob in a peachy bikini.

'If only boring people are bored, I fear I may be boring,' the 43-year-old joked in the caption.

Next level: January Jones, 43, stepped up the sex appeal level and showed off some underboob in her latest series of bikini snaps she shared on Instagram on Sunday

The South Dakota native struck a pose in the peach-colored two-piece with her right leg on a chair in the first photo, which was seemingly taken in the yard of her Los Angeles home.

While the bottoms of the stylish number were moderate, the bikini top could barely hold in her burgeoning breasts.

She opted to go with a serious and stern look on her face in the first image, but changed her tune in the follow-up of the series by flashing a big beaming smile.

Jones covered up, ever so slightly, in a perfectly matched shirt that she left wide open to hold the attention firmly on her womanly curves.

Skimpy: The Mad Men alum stunned in a peach-colored bikini that could barely hold in her burgeoning breasts, along with a matching shirt she left wide open

She accessorized the ensemble with a few gold necklaces, matching earrings, and a pair of stylish sunglasses.

A third snap shared on her Insta-Story showed off more of her legs as she she again posed with her right leg on the chair and serious look on her face.

There was no shortage of fans and followers who were willing to react to her comment: 'If only boring people are bored, I fear I may be boring.'

'Boring never looked so good tho' was a common sentiment in the comments section.

Tasty: A third snap shared on her Insta-Story showed off more of her legs as she she still posed with her right leg on the chair and serious look on her face

Of course there were plenty of people who couldn't resist sharing their thoughts about her underboob with comments like, 'Underteat looking good, Jan!' and 'Not sure that fits but oh well f**k it dude.'

One concerned citizen shared her worry by writing: 'Hope that knot is tight otherwise the candy is out of the piñata.'

An obvious admirer kept it simple and sweet by writing, 'I'm not worried about you.'

Jones last starred in the Netflix drama series, Spinning Out, which premiered in January 2020 but was canceled just one month later.

She is currently shooting the action-thriller film God Is A Bullet, which is being directed by Nick Cassevetes and co-stars Jamie Foxx and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Singer John Mellencamp has split with girlfriend Natasha Barret after a brief romance, it has been revealed.

The 69-year-old rocker - previously known as Johnny Cougar - was introduced to Natasha, 46, by his daughter, ex-RHOBH star Teddi Mellencamp.

They were first spotted in May together, with reports circling that they had been dating for just a few months before that.

It's over! John Mellencamp, 69, splits with Natasha Barrett, 46, following brief courtship (the pair pictured together in May this year just a few months after they started dating)

CloserWeekly reported their split on Saturday.

Barrett works as a realtor who specializes in helping celebrities, having worked with Chris Pratt and Anna Faris on selling their LA home when they were still married.

According to the bio on her firm's website The Agency, it says the beauty enjoys 'traveling the world in search of her soulmate.'

Single again: According to the bio on her firm's website The Agency, it says celeb realtor Natasha, 46, enjoys 'traveling the world in search of her soulmate'

Setting up her dad: The 69-year-old rocker - previously known as Johnny Cougar - was introduced to Natasha, 46, by his daughter, ex-RHOBH star Teddi Mellencamp (Pictured, 2018)

Last year, John was linked to celebrity skin care specialist Jamie Sue Sherrill, 50, known as Nurse Jamie, professionally.

They were first reported to be a couple in April but split in January 2021.

John previously dated Meg Ryan, 59, but ended their engagement because he reportedly 'didn't want to get married again'.

They split in 2019 and it was claimed their romance came to an end after John realized he didn't want to tie the knot again, as he's already been married three times.

Longtime love: John previously dated Meg Ryan, 59, but ended their engagement in 2019 because he reportedly 'didn’t want to get married again'

A source told People magazine at the time: 'He didn't want to get married again. He loves her, but marriage never seemed to be a part of it. It's unclear how important a marriage was to Meg.

'But they spent a lot of time together and it's too bad they split. They really got along so well together.'

John and Meg had been together on and off for eight years, with a brief split in 2014 when the musician dated Christie Brinkley.

Lover: The rocker is also known for having dated supermodel Christie Brinkley (Pictured in 2015)

They reconciled and got engaged back in November 2018 before calling it quits in November 2019.

The Jack and Diane singer has previously been married to Priscilla Esterline from 1970 to 1981, Victoria Granucci from 1981 to 1989, and Elaine Irwin from 1992 to 2011.

John is father to five children from his previous relationships; Michelle, 50, Teddi, 39, Justice, 36, Hud, 27, Speck, 26.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Community testing in people who have very mild symptoms should be ditched

Just those who are unwell with Covid symptoms should be tested, he said

Asymptomatic Covid testing should be wound down as the UK learns to live with the pandemic, one of the country's top coronavirus experts said today.

Sir Andrew Pollard, who helped develop the Oxford University/AstraZeneca vaccine, said only people who are unwell should be swabbed.

As it stands, anyone who has a fever, has a new cough or has lost their sense of taste or smell can get a PCR tests. And anyone can order free lateral flow tests to use at home.

NHS Test and Trace was given a £37billion budget for the first two years. It had spent more than £4billion on lateral flow tests alone up to the end of March.

Sir Andrew said: 'Over time we need to be moving to clinically-driven testing... where it’s people who are unwell who get tested and treated and managed, rather than lots of community testing in people who have very mild disease.'

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the "living with Covid".'

As he called for a shift in testing policy at an All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus meeting, MPs also heard:

Vaccine booster jabs may not even be needed this autumn because there is no evidence protection is waning;

Herd immunity is not a possibility with the current Delta variant because it can still infect vaccinated people;

A Covid variant that can escape the protection delivered by vaccines are an 'absolute inevitability';

Children who aren't unwell shouldn't have to self-isolate to curb the spread of Covid.

Sir Pollard, a coronavirus expert at the University of Oxford, said the country needs to move towards clinically-driven testing - when just those unwell with the virus are given a test. He said community testing - when lots of people who do not have symptoms are tested - should be wound down as the country learns to live with the virus

Since the beginning of the pandemic, 248.3million Covid tests have been taken, with around 700,000 conducted each day since January, costing billions of pounds

'No reason to panic': Top vaccine expert suggests booster jabs may NOT be needed An autumn Covid vaccine booster programme may not be needed, one of the country's leading vaccination experts has suggested. Data suggests the vaccines are holding out against the virus and are protecting the double-jabbed from severe disease and death, Sir Andrew Pollard said. He told the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus that any waning of protection provided by the vaccines would be 'gradual' and would be picked up on quickly through UK surveillance systems. Sir Andrew said that 'there isn't any reason at this moment to panic'. And vaccine stockpiles would be better used in countries where vulnerable people are yet to be vaccinated ahead of booster programmes or vaccinating children, he suggested. Health officials have set out a timeline for a potential booster campaign, should one be needed. Under the plans, all over 50s and the clinically vulnerable could be offered a third Covid-19 vaccine at the same time as their flu shot. Health Secretary Sajid Javid today said he anticipates the programme will begin in early September. The proposals are not set in stone and have been announced so that the NHS can prepare for the programme while more information is gathered on whether or not a booster campaign is necessary. Sir Andrew told the group of parliamentarians: 'The decision to boost or not should be scientifically driven. 'The time which we would need to boost is if we saw evidence that there was an increase in hospitalisation or people dying amongst those who are vaccinated. 'That is not something that we're seeing at the moment. So there isn't any reason at this moment to panic.' Meanwhile, infectious disease expert Professor Paul Hunter told the meeting that it is 'absolutely inevitable' Covid variants will emerge that can get around the vaccines. Professor Hunter, from the University of East Anglia, said: 'It is absolutely inevitable that we are going to get escape variants coming in.' Mutations deemed variants of concern in the UK include the Kent 'Alpha' variant, the South African 'Beta' mutation, the Indian 'Delta' strain and the Brazil 'Gamma' variant. Vaccines are thought to be less effective against Beta and Delta. Advertisement

Sir Andrew, the chair of No10's advisory panel JCVI, said there should be a shift in the testing regime.

He told the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus society needs to work out what learning to live with Covid means.

Sir Andrew added: 'What does that mean in terms of the surveillance that we're doing, the testing that we're doing, and also how we should manage patients in hospital or even before hospital in their treatment to try and stop them getting into hospital?

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the 'living with Covid.

'That doesn't mean that we live with it and put up with it, we still have to manage those cases of patients who become unwell with it.'

The APPG was hearing evidence from experts on inoculating children, booster jabs and global access to vaccines.

Sir Andrew also told MPs that children who aren't unwell shouldn't have to self-isolate to curb the spread of Covid.

Last term children in England had to self-isolate for 10 days if another pupil in their bubble – which can be an entire year group – tested positive for coronavirus.

The rules caused mayhem, with 1.13million children off school on a single day in July due to the virus.

Nine in 10 of these pupils were isolating due to being in contact with an Covid case, while the rest either had symptoms or tested positive.

Education Secretary Gavin Williamson said last month that the use of 'bubbles' will come to an end. From August 16, children in England will only need to self-isolate if they have tested positive.

Pupils contacted by Test and Trace as a contact of a positive case will be required to take a PCR test but they will only have to isolate if they themselves test positive.

It prompted concerns from some experts at the time, who criticised the approach.

Sir Andrew today told the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus that he backed the move.

He said: 'Given that children have relatively mild infection compared to adults... we probably should be moving to a situation where we're clinically-driven.

'If someone is unwell, they should be tested.

'But for those contacts in the classroom, if they're not unwell then it makes sense for them to be in school and being educated.'

He said clinically-driven testing should be the approach in the community as well.

He said: 'Over time we need to be moving to clinically-driven testing as well where it's people who are unwell who get tested and treated and managed, rather than lots of community testing in people who have very mild disease.'

It comes after a study by experts at Oxford University revealed daily testing of close contacts was just as effective as isolating for stopping the spread of Covid.

The study found fewer than one in 50 people who were close contacts of an infected person had Covid.

Herd immunity 'not a possibility' with Delta variant, expert claims Herd immunity is 'not a possibility' with the current Delta variant, Sir Andrew also claimed. He told the All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Coronavirus that it is not possible for vaccines to provide enough immunity to stop the spread of the virus among people who have yet to have a jab. And emphasised the job of vaccines is to minimise severe disease and death from the virus. Speaking to MPs this morning, Sir Andrew warned vaccines alone could not ensure herd immunity. He said: 'What we know very clearly with the coronavirus that this current variant, the Delta variant, will still infect people who have been vaccinated and that means that anyone who is unvaccinated will meet the virus. 'It might not be this week, this month or this year but they will meet the virus. 'I think we are in a situation here with this current variant where herd immunity is not a possibility because it still infects vaccinated individuals.' Chair of the APPG on Coronavirus Layla Moran MP said: 'The worrying evidence we heard today suggests that given the emergence of new variants, including vaccine-resistant ones, achieving herd immunity is just a pipe dream. 'The government's plan to learn to live with Covid cannot become a byword for abdicating responsibility to the most vulnerable. 'Ministers must re-evaluate their approach and come up with a new and comprehensive, long-term plan to mitigate the risks posed by Covid and new variants. 'That must include showing moral leadership and stepping up efforts to vaccinate the world.' Advertisement

Sir Andrew added: 'Anybody who has not been vaccinated will at some point meet the virus.

'It might not be this week, this month or this year but they will meet the virus.'

He also said: 'Herd immunity is not a possibility because it still infects vaccinated people.

'I expect what it will throw up next is a variant even better at infecting vaccinated people.'

'One of the strongest argument to vaccinate children is to protect adults. The vaccine doesn't fully stop transmission, so doing that doesn't protect adults.'

Scientists have said herd immunity is a myth, because while vaccines slash the risk of hospitalisation and death, they are not as effective at preventing transmission.

This means someone infected with the virus can still pass it on to someone who is double-jabbed, although the risk is still higher in those who are not vaccinated.

But Professor Mark Woolhouse, an epidemiologist at Edinburgh University, said 'we're pretty close' to hitting the key threshold.

Professor Woolhouse, who sits on a modelling sub-committee of SAGE, told Times Radio on Sunday: 'We're pretty close.

'Ninety per cent of adults have some sort of vaccination… but there are still around 8million adults in the UK who have not been vaccinated.'

He added: 'We don't know how people's behaviour is going to change over the winter months.

'I suspect we're going to be bouncing around either side of the herd immunity threshold for quite a few months to come, probably over the whole winter.'

Separately, Sir Pollard told the APPG said the fight against Covid should focus on preventing hospitalisations and death.

He said: 'We can't do anything to stop new variants emerging around the world. We need to focus on how do we prevent people dying or going to hospital.

'We had 67,000 deaths around the world last we and more than 4billion vaccine doses were deployed globally.

'There are enough doses given out around the world to have prevented those deaths but they died anyway.

'What we can do is play a more active role in the global imperative to stop people dying and make sure vaccines are going to the right people.'

Around 30 per cent of the world has now received a dose of a vaccine and 15.5 per cent are fully immunised, according to Our World in Data.

But the data shows only 1.1 per cent of people in low-income countries have received a single dose.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Virginia Roberts has claimed she 'feared death' if she disobeyed orders from Prince Andrew, Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, as she sues the royal for sexually abusing her as a 17-year-old.

The 38-year-old accused the Duke of York of battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress and is seeking 'substantial damages' in the lawsuit filed in New York on Monday.

Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with Andrew on three occasions in 2001: at Maxwell's London townhouse, at Epstein's Manhattan mansion, and on the financier's private Caribbean island. She was 17 and he was 41 at the time.

During each incident, Roberts was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke.

Roberts 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority', it is claimed.

Prince Andrew has always vehemently denied sexual contact with Roberts.

A spokeswoman for Andrew today said there was 'no comment' when asked to respond to Roberts' civil suit.

Prince Andrew attends the Sunday service at the Royal Chapel of All Saints, at Royal Lodge, in Windsor on April 11

The Duke of York with his arm around Virginia Roberts' waist at Ghislaine Maxwell's London townhouse in March 2001. The Prince told Newsnight that he doesn't believe it was taken in London because 'when I go out in London, I wear a suit and a tie.' He also raised doubts about its provenance, calling it a 'photograph of a photograph of a photograph'

Roberts outside the federal court in New York in August, 2019

How Prince Andrew, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases. But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence. Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'. If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland. Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'. After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases. He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London. Advertisement

Roberts has made similar allegations before in US court documents but this is the first time she has sued the Duke directly.

She claims that the first time she was forced to have sex with Andrew was at the London townhouse of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's alleged madam.

The second time, in early 2001 was at Epstein's New York mansion.

The lawsuit states: 'During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her.

'During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will'.

The third incident was on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean.

Andrew allegedly had sex with Roberts knowing she was a victims of sex trafficking, it is claimed.

The Duke also knew her age from 'communications with Epstein and Maxwell'.

The lawsuit claims: 'Prince Andrew sexually abused (Roberts) for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires'.

The new lawsuit was filed under a law in New York that relates to child abuse as Roberts was considered a minor at the time under state law.

It lists Roberts as the plaintiff and the defendant as 'Prince Andrew, Duke of York a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward'.

The lawsuit claims that 'Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor.

'On multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched (Roberts) in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent'.

Under the section of the lawsuit that deals with the formal allegation of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the lawsuit is withering about the Duke.

'Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience,' it states

'Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.'

The lawsuit claims that Andrew was one of the 'powerful men' who Epstein loaned Roberts out to for sex.

The document accuses the Duke of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' then refusing to cooperate with the FBI.

The lawsuit notes that 'defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled'.

The filing of a civil action against the Duke in America is certain to cause huge embarrassment for the Royal family. Virginia Roberts is pictured in Australia in February 2011

Prince Andrew is seen driving his car in Windsor earlier this year. He is yet to respond to her suit, filed in New York City on Monday

Prince Andrew is seen in Windsor on July 23 - what would have been his 35th wedding anniversary. He and Sarah Ferguson separated in 1992, and divorced in 1996

How Prince Andrew used Pizza Express as an alibi against claims he had sex with Virginia Roberts Prince Andrew famously insisted he could not have met Virginia Roberts at a famed celebrity nightclub because he had been at a party at Pizza Express earlier that day. The Duke of York told BBC Newsnight in 2019 that he could not have had sex with Roberts in March 2001, because he had been attending a children's birthday party with Princess Beatrice in Woking. Emily Maitlis asked the royal whether he had met Roberts at Tramp Nightclub in London in 2001. Roberts alleged she went back to a house in Belgravia with the duke after dancing in the club and had sex with him on March 10, 2001. But Andrew said he had 'no recollection' of the event, and that there were 'a number of things' wrong with the story. 'On that particular day, that we now understand is the date which is the 10th of March, I was at home,' the duke said. 'I was with the children and I'd taken Beatrice to a Pizza Express in Woking for a party at I suppose, sort of, four or five in the afternoon. 'And then because the duchess [of York] was away, we have a simple rule in the family that when one is away, the other one is there.' Andrew said he was on leave from the Royal Navy at the time and was therefore at home with the children. Ms Maitlis asked why he remembered going to Pizza Express 'so specifically'. The duke replied: 'Because going to Pizza Express in Woking is an unusual thing for me to do, a very unusual thing for me to do. 'I've never been… I've only been to Woking a couple of times and I remember it weirdly distinctly. 'As soon as somebody reminded me of it, I went: 'Oh yes, I remember that'.' Ms Maitlis said Roberts had been 'very specific' about Andrew that night, claiming he was 'profusely sweating' and that she went on to have a bath. But the duke said there was a 'slight problem' with that story – claiming he was unable to perspire at the time. 'I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don't sweat or I didn't sweat at the time,' Andrew claimed. '…I didn't sweat at the time because I had suffered what I would describe as an overdose of adrenaline in the Falklands War when I was shot at and I simply… it was almost impossible for me to sweat.' He said it was only because he had 'done a number of things in the recent past' that he was able to sweat again. Advertisement

During each of the alleged incidents with Roberts, Andrew was acting in a 'personal capacity' and not in any role for the Royal family or the UK government, the lawsuit notes.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed he has never even met Roberts, now a mother-of-three living in Australia who goes by her married name, Virginia Giuffre.

In late 2019, the Duke told BBC Newsnight that he never had sex with Roberts, saying, 'It didn't happen.'

He said he has 'no recollection' of ever meeting her and told Emily Maitlis there are 'a number of things that are wrong' in Roberts' account of their 2001 meeting at Maxwell's London townhouse.

'I can absolutely categorically tell you it never happened,' Andrew said.

He famously used the alibi that he could not have been at Maxwell's house at the time because he was at home after attending a children's party at a Pizza Express in Woking.

Asked by Maitlis if he had been to Tramp nightclub in London before going back to Maxwell's Belgravia house, the prince said: 'I was with the children and I'd taken Beatrice to a Pizza Express in Woking for a party at I suppose four or five in the afternoon. And then because the duchess [Sarah Ferguson] was away, we have a simple rule in the family that when one is away the other is there.'

In a statement to ABC News on Monday, Roberts said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.

'The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice.

'I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates.

'But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

The two formal allegations are battery and infliction of emotional distress.

Under the claim for battery, the lawsuit states Andrew's actions 'constitute sexual offenses as defined in (New York law) including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined (as) rape in the third degree, rape in the first degree'.

It also claims the Duke's conduct amounted to 'forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, and sexual abuse in the first degree'.

The 'sexual assault' Roberts caused her 'significant emotional and psychological distress and harm', it is claimed.

The lawsuit states: 'As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy'.

The filing mentions that Andrew has failed to cooperate with the criminal investigation by the FBI into Epstein and Maxwell, despite promising to do so in his disastrous Newsnight interview.

Prince Andrew is sued under child sex abuse 'look back window' Prince Andrew is being sued in a federal court in Manhattan under the Child Victims Act, passed in 2018 by the state of New York to help victims of historic sex abuse seek to help victims of historical sexual abuse to seek compensation. The legislation gives victims the right to seek redress no matter how long ago the abuse occurred. A previous statute of limitation gave victims until the age of 23 to pursue legal action. However, the window for filing claims was only opened for a limited time - dubbed the 'look back window' - victims must file by August 13, 2021. The deadline had originally been scheduled for last year but Governor Andrew Cuomo extended it due to the pandemic. Advertisement

The lawsuit states: 'In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her.

'It is long past the time for him to be held to account'.

Earlier this week Roberts' lawyer David Boies threatened to sue Andrew and said that 'time's up' for the Duke.

Boies said that he was 'nearing the end of the road' with Andrew and said that this Saturday a window for her to sue expires.

The lawsuit was filed under the New York Child Victims Act, which was signed into law in 2019.

Previously victims had up to five years after they turned 18 to file a claim

The one-off window gave all victims the opportunity to make a legal claim, regardless of how old their claim was.

Boies said: 'If she doesn't do it now, she would be allowing him to escape any accountability for his actions

'And Virginia is committed to trying to avoid situations where rich and powerful people escape any accountability for their actions'.

A spokeswoman for Andrew declined to comment.

A defamation suit, filed by Roberts in 2015 against Ghislaine Maxwell, ended in a settlement – but deeply embarrassing depositions in which Maxwell discussed her sex life were made public last year.

A source said: 'This could be devastating for Andrew. If he chooses to fight it and is deposed [forced to give evidence], then those depositions could end up being made public.

'If he ignores it, he could be found guilty in absentia which would be a public relations disaster.'

Epstein hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges.

Maxwell, 59, was arrested last July and is due to go on trial in November for allegedly recruiting underage girls for Epstein.

She has pleaded not guilty to all the charges.

What happens now for Prince Andrew? Duke of York, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America - and faces damages 'in the millions' if he loses

Prince Andrew can still face a trial over alleged sex abuse allegations made by Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts - even if he never steps foot back in America - and could face damages bill of up to $100million dollars if he loses, legal experts say.

Ms Roberts is suing the 61-year-old son of the Queen in New York federal court on Monday, alleging that she was brought to the UK by pedophile financier Epstein to have sex with him.

The accuser, now 38, is seeking 'significant' damages from The Duke of York claiming she was sexually assault by him in New York, the Caribbean and London in 2001 - when she was 17 and he was 41.

Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases.

But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence.

Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'.

If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland.

Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'.

After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases.

He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London.

And, in a further blow to the Prince, royal experts today claimed the case could scupper any plans by the Duke to return to frontline royal duties.

Prince Andrew has repeatedly denied having a sexual relationship with Roberts, and a spokeswoman for the Duke today said there was 'no comment' when asked to respond to news of the civil suit.

Prince Andrew is seen driving his car in Windsor earlier this year. He is yet to respond to her suit, filed in New York City on Monday

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Virginia Roberts

Prince Andrew is pictured with his mother, the Queen, his brother Prince Charles and, behind them, Princess Anne in June 2019. The Queen has diplomatic immunity; her children do not

It comes as it was today revealed that Prince Andrew does not have diplomatic immunity - a privilege which is reserved for the Queen and her immediate household.

It means that the senior royal may be brought before a court if he sets foot in the US or any of its territories - at which point a court could compel him to give evidence.

But legal experts say that will only happen if Prince Andrew willingly goes to the US. That is because Roberts' claim is a civil case, rather than a criminal one, meaning he cannot be extradited, according to experts.

Mr Anwar, who told MailOnline: 'The first thing is this is a civil case and under the terms of the extradition treaty, the U.S. Department of Justice can only extradite if there is a criminal prosecution.'

However, Mr Anwar added: 'It's not a matter that will simply go away. As I understand it, there is still an ongoing criminal investigation.'

'If they were to raise a prosecution, they would be well within their rights to seek Prince Andrew,' he said.

Mr Anwar also believes that, should the civil case proceed without Prince Andrew appearing in New York, the Duke could still be found liable in absentia and be required to pay compensation to Roberts.

He added: 'The court would find ways in which to obtain those assets. And the complainant's country can pursue actions against Prince Andrew to chase his assets.'

Asked how much the damages cost could be, he said: 'It would be up to a jury, but I would think it could be in the millions and millions of dollars'.

However, before any of this, Mr Anwar said Prince Andrew's legal team will likely to try and have the case thrown out.

He said: 'I think the first thing he will do is instruct lawyers on the ground in the US to act for him, and to try and have the case thrown out as a 'spurious' case.'

The comments come as royal journalist and author, Robert Jobson today told MailOnline that the law suit would make any planned return to public life for the Duke 'impossible'.

He said: 'I cannot envisage the Duke, no matter how much he might want to returning to being a senior royal to supper the Queen while a suit is pending, or with the possibility of a verdict against him passed in his absence.

Robert's (pictured) case is the first time that Prince Andrew has been the subject of a suit. Previously his name was mentioned in connection with pedophile Epstein , but until now he had not been directly targeted.

'Obviously there is a question over legal jurisdictions and I am sure the Duke's team will be looking at every angle. I cannot see them volunteering him to give evidence, or going to the US as it will leave him exposed legally.

'I suspect he will remain silent and continue to follow his lawyers advice. This of course was her only options and she only had until Saturday to lodge this civil case.'

Robert's case is the first time that Prince Andrew has been the subject of a suit. Previously his name was mentioned in connection with pedophile Epstein, but until now he had not been directly targeted.

In June 2020, the then-US Attorney General Bill Barr said that he was not seeking extradition as part of the investigation into Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell.

'I don't think it's a question of handing him over,' Barr said. 'I think it's just a question of having him provide some evidence'

The issue of extradition may not even be relevant because Roberts' case against Andrew is a civil one, rather than a criminal filing made by prosecutors.

The 2003 extradition treaty, brought in by George W. Bush, appears to apply only to felonies, which are by definition criminal.

The treaty states: 'Extradition is to be granted if the offense is defined as extraditable under UK law and as a felony under U.S. law, in addition to the requirement that the offense be punishable by imprisonment or other form of detention for more than one year or by the death penalty.'

The proviso will likely come as a relief to the British government, which would be facing a nightmare scenario if the Americans were demanding extradition.

Making an argument to avoid extradition in a criminal case of sexual abuse could be challenging, although Andrew faces no such case, and continues to vehemently deny wrongdoing.

'Prince Andrew would probably face an uphill struggle persuading the court that he should be discharged from the US extradition request merely by virtue of his being an heir to the throne,' said Anna Rothwell, a lawyer with Corker Binning, in a blog in 2019.

Meanwhile, royal commenter Richard Fitzwilliams told MailOnline that he sees 'no conceivable chance' of case leading to a court appearance for Prince Andrew.

He said: 'As I understand it the real reason for this court case is to do with issue of statute of limitation (the time in which a person must submit a civil claim).

'But I don't think that there's a conceivable chance (that he will appear in court), given the way things have been handled so far.

'Prince Andrew said in his BBC interview that he was willing to co-operate with the FBI (in their investigation into Epstein), but he doesn't appear, from reports, to have co-operated so far. So I see absolutely nil chance.

'But this case will bring more embarrassment for him and for the royal family – as is anything to do with Andrew and Epstein,' Fitzwilliams added.

In 1978 Andrew's older brother Prince Charles was sued after a visit to Ohio the year before following a bizarre confrontation with a student.

Before his address to the University of Cleveland, third-year law student Jack Kilroy, stood up and asked the Prince: 'I would like to know when England is going to stop torturing political prisoners?'

He was escorted out of the building, and then filed a civil complaint against Prince Charles for alleged deprivation of 'various rights guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the United States.'

The US Attorney General, upon the recommendation of the State Department, filed a suggestion of immunity with the court, on the view that the acts he allegedly committed were performed in his official capacity.

The court did not get as far as arguing whether Charles could be extradited for the civil case.

Andrew's visit to the US to see Epstein was entirely in a personal capacity, and so he would not be granted the same leeway.

Andrew could certainly be charged with an offense in the UK, if there were grounds to do so, although there is no indication of any such allegations being made there.

His sister Princess Anne in 2002 became the first senior Royal to be convicted of a criminal offense after pleading guilty to a charge that one of her dogs attacked two children.

Princess Anne is seen arriving in court in the British town of Slough in November 2002. She pleaded guilty to her dog attacking children

The court also ordered her to keep the English bull terrier - known as Dotty - on a lead in public, to organize training for the animal and to pay £148 ($205) court costs.

She was fined £500 ($693) and ordered to pay £500 compensation. No other senior royal has attended court for 100 years, the BBC said at the time.

In late 2019, Andrew vowed to assist with any investigation. 'Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required,' he said in a statement.

At the time Buckingham Palace announced in a statement that Andrew would be suspended from public duties for the 'foreseeable future,' with the consent of the Queen.

Soon after, he gave up his role as chancellor of the University of Huddersfield and stepped down from all of his 230 patronages.

In January 2020, the Home Office recommended that the prince's security detail be downgraded. All activities carried out by the Prince Andrew Charitable Trust have also been stopped.

He is now a permanently nonactive member of the royal family, with no public-facing duties required of him.

Yet in January 2020 the United States attorney in Manhattan publicly called out the prince for breaking his commitment.

'To date, Prince Andrew has provided zero cooperation,' said the prosecutor, Geoffrey S. Berman.

Typically, if American prosecutors wanted to speak with a witness in Britain, the F.B.I. would go through its legal attaché in London, based in the United States embassy there.

Andrew is considered highly unlikely to risk traveling to the United States, even though he has not been charged with any crime.

He could be hauled before the FBI for questioning, and prosecutors could decide to request a subpoena from a judge if there is suspicion of criminal behavior.

He could 'take the 5th' and invoke his right against self-incrimination, and refuse to answer questions.

Daniel Sternberg, a barrister specializing in extradition law at Temple Garden Chambers in London, told the BBC: 'It is important to remember that Prince Andrew has not been charged with any offense in the US.

'The FBI is investigating whether he has material evidence that could assist in its criminal investigation of alleged sex trafficking.

'While there is no way to compel Prince Andrew to give evidence in the UK or the US in either the civil or criminal case, his failure to do so does not sit well with his previous public statements that he would help any appropriate law enforcement agency with its inquiries.'

Andrew's lawyers insist they have been open and willing to cooperate. They have yet to comment on Monday's civil case.

In her court filings on Monday, Roberts accused the Duke of York of battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress in the lawsuit filed in federal court.

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein.

It was filed under a law in New York that relates to child abuse as Roberts was considered a minor at the time under state law.

Prince Andrew is seen in Windsor on July 23 - what would have been his 35th wedding anniversary. He and Sarah Ferguson separated in 1992, and divorced in 1996

It lists Roberts as the plaintiff and the defendant as 'Prince Andrew, Duke of York a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward' as the defendant.

The lawsuit claims that 'Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor.

'On multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched (Roberts) in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent'.

Under the section of the lawsuit that deals with the formal allegation of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the lawsuit is withering about the Duke.

It says: 'Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience.

'Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community'.

The lawsuit claims that Andrew was one of the 'powerful men' who Epstein loaned Roberts out to for sex.

The document accuses the Duke of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' then refusing to cooperate with the FBI.

The lawsuit notes that 'defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled'.

During each of the alleged incidents with Roberts, Andrew was acting in a 'personal capacity' and not in any role for the Royal family or the UK government, the lawsuit notes.

Andrew has always strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed he has never even met Roberts, now a mother-of-three living in Australia who goes by her married name, Virginia Giuffre.

In a statement to ABC News, Roberts said: 'I am holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.

'The powerful and the rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but one can reclaim her life by speaking out and demanding justice.

'I did not come to this decision lightly. As a mother and a wife, my family comes first. I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates.

'But I knew that if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down'.

Roberts has made similar allegations before in US court documents but this is the first time she has sued the Duke directly.

She claims that the first time she was forced to have sex with Andrew was at the London townhouse of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's alleged madam.

The second time, in early 2001 was at Epstein's New York mansion, it is alleged.

The lawsuit states: 'During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her.

'During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will'.

The third alleged incident is said to have taken place on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean.

During each incident, Roberts claims she was was 'compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts' with the Duke.

Roberts 'feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority', it is claimed.

Andrew allegedly had sex with Roberts knowing she was a victims of sex trafficking, it is claimed.

The Duke also knew her age from 'communications with Epstein and Maxwell', she says.

The lawsuit claims: 'Prince Andrew sexually abused (Roberts) for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires'.

The two formal allegations are battery and infliction of emotional distress.

Under the claim for battery, the lawsuit states Andrew's actions 'constitute sexual offenses as defined in (New York law) including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined (as) rape in the third degree, rape in the first degree'.

It also claims the Duke's conduct amounted to 'forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, and sexual abuse in the first degree'.

The 'sexual assault' Roberts caused her 'significant emotional and psychological distress and harm', it is claimed.

The lawsuit states: 'As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy'.

The filing mentions that Andrew has failed to cooperate with the criminal investigation by the FBI into Epstein and Maxwell, despite promising to do so in his disastrous Newsnight interview.

The lawsuit states: 'In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her.

'It is long past the time for him to be held to account'.

Earlier this week Roberts' lawyer David Boies threatened to sue Andrew and said that 'time's up' for the Duke.

Boies said that he was 'nearing the end of the road' with Andrew and said that this Saturday a window for her to sue expires.

The lawsuit was filed under the New York Child Victims Act, which was signed into law in 2019. Previously victims had up to five years after they turned 18 to file a claim

The one-off window gave all victims the opportunity to make a legal claim, regardless of how old their claim was.

Boies said: 'If she doesn't do it now, she would be allowing him to escape any accountability for his actions

'And Virginia is committed to trying to avoid situations where rich and powerful people escape any accountability for their actions'.

A spokeswoman for Andrew declined to comment.

A defamation suit, filed by Roberts in 2015 against Ghislaine Maxwell, ended in a settlement – but deeply embarrassing depositions in which Maxwell discussed her sex life were made public last year.

A source said: 'This could be devastating for Andrew. If he chooses to fight it and is deposed [forced to give evidence], then those depositions could end up being made public.

'If he ignores it, he could be found guilty in absentia which would be a public relations disaster.'

Epstein hanged himself in prison in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges.

Maxwell, 59, was arrested last July and is due to go on trial in November for allegedly recruiting underage girls for Epstein. She has pleaded not guilty to all the charges.

Prince Andrew has repeatedly refused to help US authorities with criminal investigation despite publicly stating he would, say damning court documents as Virginia Roberts sues him for 'sex assault and battery'

Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit in New York seeking 'substantial' damages

She alleges she was sexually abused in London, Manhattan and the Caribbean

The incidents all allegedly took place in 2001, when she was 17 years old

Prince Andrew has always vehemently denied sexual contact with Roberts

But lawsuit claims he reneged on public pledges to cooperate with US officials

Prince Andrew has repeatedly refused to help US authorities with their criminal investigation into Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell despite publicly stating he would, according to damning court documents filed by Virginia Roberts.

Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit in New York, claiming she was forced to have sex with Andrew on three occasions in 2001: at Maxwell's London townhouse, at Epstein's Manhattan mansion, and on the financier's private Caribbean island.

The Duke has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

However, the lawsuit refers to occasions when Andrew 'publicly pledged' to help the US authorities with their investigations, including 'in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview.'

'Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities,' the lawsuit says.

It claims that not only has Andrew failed to co-operate, but that the Duke and his representatives 'have responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on [Roberts].'

It further alleges that in July, Roberts' legal team proposed a 'tolling agreement' which would mean that she wouldn't sue Andrew at this time but that she would not be barred from doing so in future by any statute of limitations.

'Again Prince Andrew stonewalled - ignoring [Robert's] letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now,' the lawsuit says.

A spokeswoman for Andrew said there was 'no comment' when she was asked to respond to Roberts' civil suit.

Virginia Roberts' lawsuit filed in Manhattan on Monday alleges that Duke has gone back on pledges to speak to the US authorities, it refers to his BBC Newsnight interview with Emily Maitlis in late 2019. Andrew told Maitlis: 'If push came to shove and the legal advice was to [give a statement under oath], then I would be duty bound to do so'

Andrew released a statement in November, 2019, to announce he was stepping down from his Royal duties over his 'ill-judged association with Jeffrey Epstein.'

The Duke said that he 'deeply sympathised with everyone affected' and concluded by saying: 'Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.'

But the Roberts lawsuit cites the former US Attorney for the Southern District of New York, Geoffrey Berman, who told the BBC in January, 2020, that the Duke had provided 'zero co-operation' despite requests from prosecutors and the FBI.

The lawsuit also speaks of Andrew's disastrous BBC Newsnight interview, however it is unclear specifically to which aspect of the Duke's answers to Emily Maitlis it refers.

In late 2019, the Duke told the BBC that he never had sex with Roberts, saying, 'It didn't happen.'

He also told Maitlis that he did not see, or suspect, any suspicious behaviour when visiting Epstein's homes.

Maitlis asked him: 'You seem utterly convinced you're telling the truth, would you be willing to testify or give a statement under oath if you were asked?'

Andrew replied: 'Well I'm like everybody else and I will have to take all the legal advice that there was before I was to do that sort of thing. But if push came to shove and the legal advice was to do so, then I would be duty bound to do so.'

Maitlis followed up, by suggesting: 'Because you've said there are many unanswered questions, everyone affected wants closure, you would help to provide that closure.'

The Duke responded: 'If there was… in the right circumstances, yes I would because I think there's just as much closure for me as there is for everybody else and undoubtedly some very strange and unpleasant activities have been going on.

'I'm afraid to say that I'm not the person who can shed light on it for a number of reasons, one of which is that I wasn't there long enough.'

Below in full is the 15-page legal document filed by Roberts in Manhattan on Monday alleging Andrew 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

VIRGINIA L. GIUFFRE, Plaintiff

vs.

PRINCE ANDREW, DUKE OF YORK, a/k/a ANDREW ALBERT CHRISTIAN EDWARD, in his personal capacity, Defendant.

COMPLAINT

Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre, by her attorneys Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, for her Complaint against Defendant Prince Andrew, Duke of York, a/k/a Andrew Albert Christian Edward ('Prince Andrew'), avers upon personal knowledge as to her own acts and status and upon information and belief and to all other matters as follows:

NATURE OF THE ACTION

Virginia Giuffre filed the complaint against Prince Andrew at the Southern District Court of New York

1. This suit arises out of Defendant's sexual abuse of Plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.

2. During 2000–2002, beginning when Plaintiff was 16, Plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

3. Epstein's trafficking scheme involved recruiting young girls, often by claiming they would be paid $200 for simply providing a massage to a wealthy billionaire. This same pattern was repeated numerous times with countless children and young women.

4. As United States District Judge Kenneth Marra found, 'From between about 1999 and 2007, Jeffrey Epstein sexually abused more than 30 minor girls... at his mansion in Palm Beach, Florida, and elsewhere in the United States and overseas...

'In addition to his own sexual abuse of the victims, Epstein directed other persons to abuse the girls sexually. Epstein used paid employees to find and bring minor girls to him.

'Epstein worked in concert with others to obtain minors not only for his own sexual gratification, but also for the sexual gratification of others.'

Opinion and Order, Doc. No. 435 at 1–2, Jane Doe 1 and Jane Doe 2 v. United States, Case No. 9:08-cv-80736 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 21, 2019).

5. Like other minor children who came before and after her, Plaintiff was initially recruited to provide massages, and thereafter to engage in a variety of sexual acts, for Epstein.

Plaintiff was required to be on call for Epstein for sexual purposes and frequently traveled with him both nationally and internationally. Plaintiff was regularly abused by Epstein and was lent out by Epstein to other powerful men for sexual purposes.

6. One such powerful man to whom Plaintiff was lent out for sexual purposes was the Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.

7. Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein's sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including Plaintiff.

8. According to Prince Andrew, he met Epstein through Maxwell in 1999. Prince Andrew thereafter became a frequent guest in Epstein's various homes around the world, including New York City where he sexually abused Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation when she was a minor.

9. After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

10. Prince Andrew committed sexual assault and battery upon Plaintiff when she was 17 years old. As such, Prince Andrew is responsible for battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress pursuant to New York common law. The damage to Plaintiff has been severe and lasting.

11. This action has been timely filed pursuant to the Child Victims Act, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g. The actions described herein constitute sexual offenses by Defendant under New York Penal Law Article 130, and were committed against Plaintiff when she was a child less than eighteen years of age, for which she suffered physical, psychological, and other injuries as a result.

PARTIES

12. Plaintiff Virginia L. Giuffre is an individual who is a citizen of the State of Colorado.

13. Defendant Prince Andrew is a citizen of the United Kingdom, and is currently residing at the Royal Lodge at Windsor Great Park, Berkshire, United Kingdom, where he is domiciled.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE

14. This Court has diversity jurisdiction over this dispute pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(2). Plaintiff is a citizen of a State and Defendant is a citizen of a foreign state, and the amount in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00 excluding interests and costs.

15. Venue is proper in this Court as a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this District. 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2).

16. This Court has personal jurisdiction over Defendant as Defendant sexually abused Plaintiff in this state, and has thus committed a tortious action within this State pursuant to New York's long-arm statute, N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 302(a)(2).

Defendant also visited Jeffrey Epstein in this State on numerous occasions. Defendant could reasonably anticipate that a suit based upon his acts and omissions with respect to Plaintiff could result in him being subject to suit in this State, and this suit arises directly out of the Defendant's acts or omissions with respect to Plaintiff in this state.

FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A. Epstein's Sex Trafficking Enterprise

17. Jeffrey Epstein was widely renowned as a billionaire who used his vast connections to powerful individuals, and seemingly unlimited wealth and resources, to create a web of transcontinental sex trafficking that served himself, his coconspirators, and some of the most powerful people in the world.

18. Ghislaine Maxwell is a British socialite and the daughter of disgraced publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell. Maxwell was the highest-ranking recruiter in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise. Maxwell is currently facing criminal charges in the Southern District of New York stemming from her role in Epstein's sex-trafficking enterprise, and is set to face trial in the fall.

19. Epstein had perfected a scheme for manipulation and abuse of young females. As part of the scheme, Maxwell or another female recruiter would approach a young girl and strike up a conversation in an effort to quickly learn about the girl's background and any vulnerabilities they could expose. Epstein's recruiters found their targets everywhere and anywhere, including schools, spas, trailer parks, and the street.

20. The recruiter would then manipulate the young female into coming back to one of Epstein's residences by offering the young girl something she needed, depending on her situation. In many cases, the recruiter sought out girls who wanted to be professional masseuses and invited them to one of Epstein's homes by offering them what appeared to be legitimate masseuse positions.

21. Once in the residence, Epstein and his co-conspirators would work in concert to impress and intimidate the young female with displays of vast wealth and power. They would brag about their connections to very powerful political and social figures, and display photographs of themselves with those figures around Epstein's homes. They would normalize the sexual abuse by displaying photographs and art displaying nude females, and a massage table and spa related products in an effort to legitimize the area where the abuse was set to occur.

22. Once abused, Epstein and Maxwell continued to manipulate their victims, using their financial power, promises, and threats to ensure that the victim returned as directed and remained compliant with their demands. Epstein and his lawyers would even gather information about the victims to use against them if they ever disobeyed him, and his homes were under constant surveillance.

23. Message pads recovered during trash pulls at Epstein's Palm Beach mansion reflect messages that his staff took to relay to Epstein. They show the constant flow of girls to Epstein, sometimes three per day. Epstein's employees have also described young girls constantly being present at Epstein's different homes.

Epstein's constant access to young girls is also evidenced in his 'Black Book,' a book of phone numbers and contact information listing girls to call for 'massages' in various cities, flight logs documenting his frequent travel with young girls and powerful individuals on his private plane, and troves of lewd photographs of young girls recovered from his homes. In his Black Book, Epstein had at least 12 different contact numbers listed for Prince Andrew.

24. Plaintiff became a victim of sex trafficking and repeated sexual abuse after Maxwell recruited her into Epstein's sex-trafficking operation when Plaintiff was working at the Mar-A-Lago Club in Palm Beach, Florida.

25. Between 2000 and 2002, Epstein sexually abused Plaintiff at numerous locations including his mansion in this District, at 9 East 71st Street, New York, New York 10021.

26. Epstein also flew Plaintiff on his plane nationally and internationally numerous times when she was under the age of 18.

Only portions of the flight logs of Epstein's private planes have yet been recovered, and Epstein also flew Plaintiff frequently on commercial airlines to meet him and others.

However, the chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking.

27. In addition to being abused by Epstein himself, Plaintiff was also forced to have sex with Defendant, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, at Epstein and Maxwell's direction.

28. As part of their sex trafficking efforts, Epstein and Maxwell intimidated Plaintiff into remaining silent about what had happened to her.

29. After years of abuse, Epstein sent Plaintiff to Thailand in September 2002. One of Plaintiff's assignments from Epstein was to bring a young girl back to Epstein in the United States. Fearing for her life, and not wanting to subject another young girl to the abuse she was forced to endure, Plaintiff fled from Thailand to Australia to escape from Epstein.

'The chart below, which shows Plaintiff's flights on Epstein's private plane from the limited logs that are available, illustrates the international scope of Epstein's sex trafficking,' reads the document

B. Defendant's Relationship with Epstein and Maxwell

30. According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew's close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.

31. According to available flight logs, Prince Andrew began flying with Epstein on his private plane as early as 1999, when he flew with Epstein and Maxwell to Epstein's private island, Little St. James. Prince Andrew's name also appears in other available flight log entries from around the same time, showing travel with Epstein and Maxwell to and from other locations, including West Palm Beach, Florida, and Teterboro, New Jersey.

32. In 2000, Epstein and Maxwell attended Prince Andrew's 40th birthday party. That same year, Prince Andrew threw Maxwell a birthday party in Sandringham, United Kingdom, and Epstein was among the guests.

33. In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter's 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.

34. Prince Andrew has himself confirmed that he has been on Epstein's private plane, stayed at Epstein's private island, and stayed at Epstein's homes in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York, New York. See Prince Andrew's links to Jeffrey Epstein, BBC News (Nov. 16, 2019), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-49411215.

35. Members of Epstein's house staff have confirmed witnessing Prince Andrew visit Epstein's numerous homes, both to the media and in sworn testimony.

C. Defendant's Sexual Abuse of Plaintiff

'The photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff,' the document claims

36. Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff on separate occasions when she was under the age of 18 years old.

37. On one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell's home. During this encounter, Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will.

38. The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, Plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell's home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing Plaintiff.

39. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in Epstein's New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew's lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit to New York, Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.

40. On another occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein's private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.

41. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff was compelled by express or implied threats by Epstein, Maxwell, and/or Prince Andrew to engage in sexual acts with Prince Andrew, and feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying Epstein, Maxwell, and Prince Andrew due to their powerful connections, wealth, and authority.

42. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew acted with intent to compel Plaintiff's submission.

43. Prince Andrew engaged in each of the aforementioned sexual acts with Plaintiff at Epstein and Maxwell's invitation, knowing that she was a sex-trafficking victim being forced to engage in sexual acts with him.

44. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Plaintiff did not consent to engaging in sexual acts with Prince Andrew.

45. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew knew Plaintiff's age based on communications from Epstein and Maxwell.

46. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.

47. During each of the aforementioned incidents, Prince Andrew was acting in his individual, personal capacity, and was not performing any duty relating to his former role as a trade envoy, any duty relating to his role as a member of the Royal Family of the United Kingdom, or any other official or diplomatic duty or function.

48. Defendant's sexual assault and battery of Plaintiff have caused her, and continue to cause her, significant emotional and psychological distress and harm.

D. The Arrest, Prosecution, and Death of Epstein, and Prince Andrew's Refusal to Cooperate with the Authorities

49. In 2008, Epstein pled guilty in Florida to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution.

50. In 2010, after Epstein had served his sentence and registered as a sex offender, Prince Andrew was photographed with Epstein in Central Park and stayed at Epstein's New York City mansion.

51. Epstein flippantly referred to his sexual abuse of multiple minors, and the slap on the wrist he had received for it, in a 2011 interview with the New York Post: 'Billionaire pervert Jeffrey Epstein is back in New York City—and making wisecracks about his just-ended jail stint for having sex with an underage girl. 'I am not a sexual predator, I'm an 'offender,' the financier told The Post yesterday. 'It's the difference between a murderer and a person who steals a bagel,' said Epstein.' See Amber Sutherland, Billionaire Jeffrey Epstein: I'm a Sex Offender, Not A Predator, New York Post (Feb. 25, 2011), available at https://bit.ly/2s3ebwk.

52. Around the same time, Prince Andrew began to face criticism over his well- publicized friendship with Epstein.

53. In early 2015, after Plaintiff had publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexually abusing her, Prince Andrew emailed Maxwell stating, 'Let me know when we can talk. Got some specific questions to ask you about Virginia Roberts.'

54. On July 2, 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York ('SDNY') charged Epstein with sex trafficking conspiracy and sex trafficking in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1591.

55. Epstein was arrested on July 8, 2019, pursuant to a Sealed Two Count Indictment.

56. Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center on August 10, 2019.

57. Just one year before his death, Epstein told a New York Times reporter 'that criminalizing sex with teenage girls was a cultural aberration and that at times in history it was perfectly acceptable.' James B. Stewart, The Day Jeffrey Epstein Told Me He Had Dirt on Powerful People, N.Y. Times (Aug. 12, 2019), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/12/business/jeffrey-epstein-interview.html.

58. After Epstein's second arrest and death, numerous of his co-conspirators and the wealthy individuals to whom he trafficked girls—including Prince Andrew—began to face increased public scrutiny for having close ties to a convicted sex offender.

59. In November 2019, in response to this renewed scrutiny, Prince Andrew sat for an interview with BBC Newsnight. Prince Andrew stated that he did not regret his friendship with Epstein and that he had no recollection of meeting Plaintiff, despite photographic evidence to the contrary.

60. Prince Andrew publicly pledged, including in a statement stepping down from his public duties and in his Newsnight interview, to assist the U.S. authorities with their criminal investigation of Epstein and his co-conspirators.

A statement by His Royal Highness The Duke of York (Nov. 20 2019), available at https://www.royal.uk/statement-his-royal-highness-duke-york ('Of course, I am willing to help any appropriate law enforcement agency with their investigations, if required.').

61. Despite this public pledge, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with U.S. authorities. Former SDNY U.S. Attorney Geoffrey Berman stated that Prince Andrew had provided 'zero co-operation' despite U.S. prosecutors and the FBI contacting Prince Andrew's counsel. Prince Andrew gives 'zero co-operation' over Epstein inquiry, US prosecutor says, BBC News (Jan. 27, 2020), available at https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51271871.

62. Prince Andrew and his counsel have also refused to cooperate with counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking. Counsel for the victims of Epstein's sex trafficking, including counsel for Plaintiff, have repeatedly asked for a meeting or telephone call with Prince Andrew and/or his representatives to enable Prince Andrew to provide whatever facts, context, or explanation he might have, and to explore alternative dispute resolution approaches. Prince Andrew and his representatives have rejected all such requests, and responded by escalating their vile and baseless attacks on Plaintiff and others.

63. On July 19, 2021, counsel for Plaintiff proposed a tolling agreement that would have enabled Plaintiff not to sue Prince Andrew at this time, while avoiding any argument that her failure to do so caused her claims to be time-barred. Again Prince Andrew stonewalled—ignoring Plaintiff's letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now. A copy of the July 19, 2021, letter proposing a tolling agreement is attached as Exhibit A to this Complaint.

64. In this country no person, whether President or Prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection. Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION (Battery)

65. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

66. Prince Andrew intentionally committed battery by sexually assaulting Plaintiff when she was a minor. As described above, on multiple occasions Prince Andrew intentionally touched Plaintiff in an offensive and sexual manner without her consent.

67. Prince Andrew's actions constitute sexual offenses as defined in New York Penal Law Article 130, including but not limited to sexual misconduct as defined in Article 130.20, rape in the third degree as defined in Article 130.25, rape in the first degree as defined in Article 130.35, forcible touching as defined in Article 130.52, sexual abuse in the third degree as defined in Article 130.55, and sexual abuse in the first degree as defined in Article 130.65. See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 214-g.

68. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION (Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress)

69. Plaintiff repeats and re-alleges the allegations stated above as if fully set forth herein.

70. As a direct result of these allegations as stated, Prince Andrew committed intentional infliction of emotional distress against Plaintiff.

71. Prince Andrew's actions, described above, constitute extreme and outrageous conduct that shocks the conscience. Prince Andrew's sexual abuse of a child who he knew was a sex-trafficking victim, and when he was approximately 40 years old, goes beyond all possible bounds of decency and is intolerable in a civilized community.

72. Prince Andrew knew or disregarded the substantial likelihood that these actions would cause Plaintiff severe emotional distress.

73. As a direct and proximate result of Prince Andrew's criminal acts, Plaintiff has in the past and will in the future continue to suffer substantial damages, including extreme emotional distress, humiliation, fear, psychological trauma, loss of dignity and self-esteem, and invasion of her privacy.





PRAYER FOR RELIEF

WHEREFORE, Plaintiff respectfully requests judgment against Defendant, awarding compensatory, consequential, exemplary, and punitive damages in an amount to be determined at trial; costs of suit; attorneys' fees; and such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper.

JURY DEMAND

Plaintiff hereby demands a trial by jury on all causes of action asserted within this pleading.

Dated: August 9, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has played the role of Reggie Jackson in Call The Midwife since 2017.

And trailblazing Down's Syndrome star Daniel Laurie comes from an acting family, as his late father has been revealed as Leslie Grantham who played 'Dirty Den' Watts in EastEnders.

Actor Daniel, 25, has also starred in popular shows such as Vera, Stella and Finding Alice.

Family: Call the Midwife star Daniel Laurie's famous father has been revealed as Leslie Grantham who played 'Dirty Den' Watts in EastEnders (Daniel is pictured)

All together: Leslie married Jane Laurie in 1981 and had three sons - Daniel (centre), Spike (right) and Jake (left)- before they divorced in 2013, with Daniel choosing to use his mother's surname

Leslie married Jane Laurie in 1981 and had three sons - Daniel, Spike and Jake - before they divorced in 2013, with Daniel choosing to use his mother's surname.

Talking about when she found out she was pregnant with him, Jane explained: 'I told him [Leslie] I was expecting another baby - and that I was sure it had Down's Syndrome.

'He was shocked, because a third child had simply never been on the agenda, but when I suggested perhaps we should have a test to find out about the Down's Syndrome, Leslie shook his head and said firmly: 'Whatever we get, it's our baby'.'

In a 2006 interview with the Daily Mail, Jane praised Leslie as a 'fantastic' dad, saying: 'When he was just a few days old, Leslie looked down at the baby and said 'you know, there are some hard things in life, but this isn't one of them'.'

Although Leslie himself was notoriously private when it came to his family life, the late actor did speak about his son occasionally.

Speaking about Daniel having Down's syndrome during an interview with The Guardian in 2003, Leslie hailed his son as 'fantastic', saying: 'We didn't know [he had Down's syndrome] before he was born, but it wouldn't have made a difference. He's fantastic.'

Seven years earlier during an interview with The Mirror, he said he is 'proud and very lucky to have been given Daniel'.

Leslie added: 'He's obviously got some problems, but they're negligible compared with other people's. My philosophy is that even a blind man knows when the sun's shining. Measured by that, Danny's got no problems at all.'

He continued: 'I have three of the best kids around. They drive me mad, but I'm also lucky to have a wife who is a superb mother.'

After Danny was born, Leslie became a fund-raiser for the Down's Syndrome Association.

'It's adults who need to realise how special these children are,' the EastEnders star said. 'His brothers are fantastic with him - a lot better than most adults.'

Tragic: Leslie (pictured) sadly passed away in 2018 after a battle with lung cancer at the age of 71

During Call the Midwife's sixth season, Daniel joined playing the part of Reggie who goes to live with his uncle Fred Buckle after his mother's death.

His time on the show explored the taboos and stigma attached to the arrival of a child with Down's syndrome in the 1960s, with fans praising the 'powerful' and 'sensitive' story line.

During a 2014 interview, Daniel spoke about having Down's syndrome, saying: 'Basically having Down's syndrome is kinda cool. To me it's absolutely cool. I so yeah, that's how I've got Down's syndrome… and you absolutely crack me up.'

Leslie sadly passed away in 2018 after a battle with lung cancer at the age of 71.

The TV star had just before his death returned to the UK for treatment after living for some time in Bulgaria.

Marriage: Leslie and Jane are pictured together in 1989 eight years after tying the knot

Unit: Jane is pictured with her three sons L-R Spike, Daniel and Jake in 2007 who she shares with Leslie

A statement from his representative announcing his death said: 'We formally announce the loss of Leslie Grantham, who passed away at 10.20am on the morning of Friday 15th June 2018.'

Grantham had been visited by close friends from TV in the weeks before his death and he told some he had terminal cancer.

Grantham became famous playing Watts in EastEnders, originally from 1985 to 1989.

A 1986 Christmas Day episode drew an audience of more than 30 million viewers, who watched as Watts handed over divorce papers to on-screen wife Angie.

Love: Leslie is seen off by his wife Jane as he leaves his home in Wimbledon in 2004 before their divorce

Role: Grantham became famous playing Watts in EastEnders, originally from 1985 to 1989 (pictured with on-screen wife Angie)

Smile: Jane is pictured with two of her three sons Daniel and Spike on a family holiday in 2018

His character was apparently killed off in 1989 but made a shock return to Albert Square in 2003.

Grantham had originally been a soldier, having enlisted in the British Army in 1965 and being sent to West Germany with the Royal Fusiliers.

In 1966, however, he was involved in a struggle with a taxi driver he was attempting to rob in Osnabruck, Lower Saxony.

The driver, Felix Reese, was shot in the head and died and, in 1967, Grantham was convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.

It was during his time behind bars - he spent ten years in British jails - that he first took to acting.

Speaking about his past in 2016, Grantham said: 'Life isn't a straight line. It's like travelling the motorway. Every now and then, you have to take a diversion. Unfortunately, some of my diversions have been quite catastrophic. But I'm safe in the knowledge that what I do now is good.

Story: Grantham had originally been a soldier, having enlisted in the British Army in 1965 and being sent to West Germany with the Royal Fusiliers (pictured in 2016)

'Of course I have regrets, but you can't go round wearing a hair shirt all your life, otherwise you'll never get out of bed in the morning. I f***** up, now I'm going to move on.'

In 2004, Grantham was exposed by a Sunday newspaper after he took part in webcam chats while performing a sex act.

He apologised to his family for the embarrassment but later said he was 'set up'.

Grantham said he was so devastated after the scandal that he attempted suicide.

Success: Daniel (centre) has played the role of Reggie Jackson in Call the Midwife since 2017
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Professor Andrew Hayward, who sits on the NERVTAG group advising the Government on respiratory viruses, said future curbs should just target the more vulnerable

Blanket lockdowns can no longer be justified as a way to control Covid as Britain moves towards living with the virus, one of the Government's top scientific advisers said today.

Professor Andrew Hayward, a University College London epidemiologist and SAGE member, said future restrictions to control outbreaks should 'target the most vulnerable', rather than involving disruptive restrictions imposed on everyone.

Covid restrictions came to an end in England last month and were eased in Scotland and Wales in the last few days, bringing an end social distancing laws and other rules.

Since Prime Minister Boris Johnson declared last month that it was time to learn to live with Covid, experts have hinted at what that may look like.

Yesterday, one of the country's top coronavirus experts Sir Andrew Pollard said Brits who do not have symptoms should no longer take routine tests.

Sir Andrew, chairman of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, told MPs swabs should only be offered if people are unwell to reduce the enormous disruption to daily life from mass testing, tracing and isolation.

And today, Professor Hayward said resorting to population-wide measures to control outbreaks will no longer be acceptable.

Daily Covid infections recorded in the UK yesterday rose by 8.4 per cent compared to the same day last week, with 23.510 people testing positive. But deaths and hospitalisations are still a fraction of the numbers seen in previous waves, suggesting curbs to control the spread will not be imposed in the near future

Covid herd immunity not possible due to 'nature of the virus', says SAGE expert Population immunity against the coronavirus cannot be achieved due to the 'nature of the virus', a SAGE expert said. But Professor Andrew Hayward said if scientists came up with a vaccine more effective and stopping the spread of the virus, it could be eradicated. It comes after Sir Andrew Pollard, a top coronavirus expert, said achieving herd immunity is 'not a possibility' because it still infects vaccinated people. Herd immunity is when enough of the population is immune to a virus that stops it spreading to others. Asked about these comments, Professor Hayward said immunity could not be achieved due to the 'nature of the virus'. He said: 'The herd immunity threshold is a very changeable thing. 'It changes according to if you've got more social mixing - the herd immunity threshold will be higher. 'For more infectious variants, such as the Delta variant, the herd immunity threshold will be higher. 'But also of course the completeness of our immunity is important to consider here. 'Whilst the vaccines are absolutely excellent at preventing severe disease and hospitalisation - probably like 95 per cent effective - they are only around maybe 60 per cent effective at preventing infection. 'And for some of the other variants, maybe less than that. 'And so we think a herd immunity threshold to stop transmission of Covid would be somewhere in the high 80s, maybe even 90 per cent. 'And if you've got a vaccine that only prevents infection in about say 60 per cent, even if you've got everybody vaccinated, it's not feasible to reach that herd immunity threshold whereby the disease would be eradicated.' He added: 'If someone could come up with a vaccine that was not only 95 per cent protective against severe disease, but 95 per cent protective against infection, then yes we would stand a chance of eradicating it. 'Viruses change over time and so the vaccines would have to change over time. So I think it's a pretty distant prospect. 'And we need to get used to the concept that this will become what we call an endemic disease, rather than pandemic disease. 'So it's a disease that is with us all the time, probably transmits seasonally, a bit like influenza where we see winter epidemics.' Advertisement

Asked about whether the UK could follow Germany's move to abolish free tests for asymptomatic people, Professor Hayward told BBC Radio 4's Today: 'I think as we generally move into an endemic rather than pandemic situation the potential harm that a virus can cause at a population level is much less.

'So you can't really justify such broad population-wide control measures and we tend to target the control measures more to those who are most vulnerable.

'And so I think, not only in testing but in all sorts of forms of control, as we move into a situation where we're coming to live with this virus forever, then we target the measures to the most vulnerable rather than having the more disruptive measures.'

It comes as Covid infections begin to rise across Britain once again, after cases fell for more than a fortnight.

Yesterday the UK's daily case load was 8.4 per cent up on the previous week, with 23,510 people testing positive.

But deaths and hospitalisations are still a fraction of the numbers seen in previous waves because of the success of the vaccines.

Professor Hayward's comments chime with a petition signed by more than 12,000 scientists and 115,000 members of the public in October, which called for an end to blanket lockdown restrictions.

The Great Barrington Declaration said young people should be allowed to return to life as normal while the elderly and most vulnerable are given 'focused protection'.

The declaration was written by Dr Martin Kulldorff from Harvard University, Dr Sunetra Gupta at Oxford University and Dr Jay Bhattacharya at Stanford University.

But No10 resisted the calls at the time, which came before life-savings jabs were available.

Ministers said they could not rely on the assumption that the virus would only 'rip' through younger age groups without putting more vulnerable people at risk.

Meanwhile, Sir Andrew, who helped develop the AstraZeneca jab, yesterday told the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus there should be a change to the testing regime.

He insisted herd immunity is 'not a possibility' because fully vaccinated people can still get infected and instead Britain must establish a strategy for 'living with Covid'.

Sir Andrew said: 'Over time we need to be moving to clinically-driven testing... where it’s people who are unwell who get tested and treated and managed, rather than lots of community testing in people who have very mild disease.'

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the "living with Covid".'

He added: 'What does that mean in terms of the surveillance that we're doing, the testing that we're doing, and also how we should manage patients in hospital or even before hospital in their treatment to try and stop them getting into hospital?

'I think this next six months is a really important consolidation phase and in that shift from the epidemic to the endemic, which is the 'living with Covid'.

'That doesn't mean that we live with it and put up with it, we still have to manage those cases of patients who become unwell with it.'

Meanwhile, it was claimed today that Britain has bought another 35million doses of Pfizer's Covid vaccine for next autumn's booster jab drive.

Whitehall sources told The Times the deal will cost in the region of £1billion, after the drug giant hiked its prices by a fifth in response to demand.

Ministers already ordered an extra 60million doses for this year's campaign to give out third doses, which would be enough to give top-ups to all 54million British adults and fully vaccinate the 1.4million 16- and 17-year-olds who are now eligible.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid yesterday confirmed preparations were in place for the booster campaign to start next month.

But experts have repeatedly questioned whether they are even necessary.

One of No10's top scientific advisers today claimed top-ups may only be needed for anyone with a weak immune system, such as cancer patients, the elderly and transplant recipients.

Professor Adam Finn, who sits on the JCVI, said the evidence on whether all over-50s need them remains unclear.

Pfizer has insisted a third dose is necessary and BioNTech — the German firm which produces the vaccine — has said double-jabbed people need a top-up for a 'robust neutralization response'.

It comes after a study claimed Moderna's vaccine is better than Pfizer's at stopping people getting infected with the Delta variant.

One expert behind the research, by the US-based Mayo Clinic, argued Moderna's jab would be better for top-ups.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woman who died when two buses crashed into each other in London has been named.

Melissa Burr, 32, from Rainham in Kent, was killed outside Victoria Railway Station on Tuesday morning.

Ms Burr, who was a pedestrian, died while two others were treated in hospital and a fourth was checked at the scene.

Her heartbroken family said in a statement today: 'We are absolutely devastated by loss and the hole that this incident has left in our lives.

'Melissa was a kind and thoughtful soul, had a quirky charm with such a bright future ahead of her.

'As a family we naturally want to understand how such a tragedy occurred, but for now we just want time and space to mourn our beautiful Melissa and send her to rest with her late father.'

Melissa Burr, 32, from Rainham in Kent, was killed outside Victoria Railway Station on Tuesday

Ms Burr had been in a relationship with James Watson since May 14, 2018, according to her Facebook

Ms Burr, who was a pedestrian, died while two others were treated in hospital and a fourth checked at the scene

The victim's family said in a statement: 'We are absolutely devastated by loss and the hole that this incident has left in our lives'

Ms Burr had been in a relationship with James Watson since May 14, 2018, according to her Facebook.

The couple had only last month visited Mayrhofen in Austria and posed for pictures outside a bar.

Mr Watson has been a Smart Meter engineer at Quinn Infrastructure Services in London since April, his profile says. The Chelsea fan is from Medway in Kent.

Detective Constable Chris May of Met's Serious Collision Investigation Unit said: 'This tragic incident claimed the life of a young woman and our thoughts are with her family at this sad time.

'We are continuing to piece together the circumstances surrounding this collision and I am very keen to hear from any witnesses who have not yet spoken with police. If you have information please don't hesitate to get in touch.'

Witnesses raced to help after the crash involving the 507 bus to Waterloo and another going the other way at 8.25am. Ms Burr was pronounced dead at 9am.

One witness was travelling on another bus when she 'heard a bang' and saw a woman 'underneath' one of the vehicles.

She said: 'She had a dark floral skirt and blonde hair. There were a lot of people around her, one lady was holding her hand and a guy was trying to help.'

The witness said the bus she was travelling on left moments later, adding she and her fellow passengers were left feeling shocked and 'helpless'.

A Met Police spokesman told MailOnline: 'Police were called at 08:25hrs on Tuesday, 10 August to reports of a collision involving two buses and three pedestrians outside Victoria Railway Station'

Big Issue seller Jacob Davidson, 36, described how passers-by 'swarmed' the scene following the crash to try to help.

He said: 'It was just a loud bang, the bus smashed into the back of the one in front. The front of it was all smashed in.

'I didn't think much of it until two cab drivers stepped out of their cabs, jumped over the railing and started looking under the bus.

'There was a sound of panic... people shouting ''can we get help''.' Mr Davidson said commuters rushed to the railing to see what was happening.

He added: 'There was a woman laying outside the bus driver's door being helped by two or three people.

'The I looked under the front of the bus and there was another man stuck under the bus.'

Images from the scene, just by the busy station's coach depot, showed the vehicles on the road, indicating they had not careered off into the pavement.

The scene at Victoria bus station, central London, after a crash involving two buses in which a female pedestrian was killed

Following the crash, commuters said the crossing had been 'a nightmare for years' with 'buses rushing in and out', and the area 'needs desperate improvement now'.

The Underground's Circle and District lines have also suspended sections of their routes this week, causing further chaos for those having the find alternate routes.

The bus had to be hoisted off the ground by a fire engine to free the victim, shocked passers-by said.

Recovery trucks arrived just before 4pm to remove the buses, one of which has a shattered windscreen.

Police cordoned off the area around Terminus Place before later reopening it on Tuesday.

Transport for London's Commissioner Andy Byford said: 'We are extremely saddened that a woman has tragically died after a collision with a bus and our thoughts are with her family and friends.

'We are thinking of everyone affected by this incident and will support everyone however we can.

'We are working urgently with the operator of the two buses, Go Ahead London, and the police to investigate what happened.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A jilted ex-boyfriend branded the 'layby lurker' who murdered his love rival and put his body in a burning car to make it look like suicide has been jailed for life.

Mark Chilman, 52, battered 66-year-old former company director Neil Parkinson over the head with a weapon before burning him alive in his BMW X5.

The victim was discovered in the torched vehicle after police were called to a lay-by near the village of Cotheridge, Worcs.. on December 12 last year.

The 'sex-obsessed' handyman was convicted of murdering dad-of-two Mr Parkinson after finding out he was in a relationship with his ex-partner Juliet Adcock.

Jurors were told jealous Chilman carried out the brutal killing as he remained obsessed with the mum-of-three, who he considered his 'property' and his 'chunk of gold.'

The sinister plot to get rid of Mr Parkinson was said to be part of a wider plan to 'engineer a reconciliation with the woman he could not bear to see rejecting him'.

After being dumped by Ms Adock last June, Chilman placed a tracker on her car and stole knickers from her £800,000 farm which he 'cuddled every night'.

He also left chilling messages written in lipstick on her bathroom mirrors which declared: 'I love you forever'.

Mark Chilman (left), 52, has been found guilty of the murder of Neil Parkinson (right), 66

Chilmon murdered Mr Parkinson after finding out he was in a relationship with his ex-partner Juliet Adcock (pictured), the court was told

His nickname the 'Layby Lurker' was coined by Ms Adcock's family because he parked on the side of the road after dark near to her home in Bromyard, Herefordshire.

Today Chilman, of Pencombe, Herefordshire, was jailed for life, to serve a minimum of 22 years at Worcester Crown Court.

Sentencing, Judge James Burbidge QC, said: 'You lay in wait, it was your intention to do harm to someone who had replaced you in the affections of your previous partner.

'When Mr Parkinson drove away from the farm, in order to go and care for his dementia-suffering 94 year-old mother, when he got out of the vehicle, you struck him at least once with an object to back of his head, which rendered him unconscious.

'You arranged him in the drivers seat and poured petrol over him and the vehicle.

'Mercifully Parkinson would not have known of the immense heat that engulfed him.

'The evidence shows that you had planned this for some days, or even weeks, increasingly appearing near to the farm, staking it out and scoping the area and the situation.

'After Ms Adcock told you to leave the farm, you immediately harboured a desire to cause Parkinson harm.

Police at the scene on Ankerdine Road in Cotheridge, Worcestershire, in December last year

A police van at the scene in Worcestershire last December following Mr Parkinson's murder

Chilman 'committed a senseless act that ended Neil's life prematurely', police said today

'On the day of the killing, you left your own phone on Bromyard Down, so the cell sighting was something you could rely on as an alibi.

'In an interview with police, you told lie after lie and said you we were with Mr Parkinson, but he took his own life.

'It was when forensics came in, you had to change to nature of your defence, as you could not explain the distressed fracture to the rear of his skull.

'So you had to tell different lies, not only did you say Mr Parkinson had told you to dispose of the multiple phones, but he had taken you to the layby where he had hidden the jerry cans telling you that he intended to set fire to his own car as insurance fraud.

'It must have been a strain for you to try and remember all of the lies that you have invented.

'There was an intention to kill and significant pre-planning.

'In personal statements, read out by Neil's son Christopher and his wife, Carol, you took the life of a much loved man.

'The court has heard how central he was to the life of many people

'He was father, son, brother, grandfather and partner, thus many people have been left grieving.'

The judge said Chilman had been 'obsessed' with Ms Adcock who he 'was not able to let go'.

He added: 'You said in interview, 'I love her to bits', 'I adore the ground she walks on', 'I am obsessed with her and I am not able to let her go'.

'On another occasion, you said in interview: 'She was my property as well, my chuck of gold'.'

The trial was told how Mr Parkinson had been on his way home to Clifton upon Teme, Worcs. after spending the evening with Ms Adcock when he was attacked.

Chilman drove his unconscious body to a lay-by and used around 40 litres of petrol from two stolen jerry cans to set him on fire in the driver's seat of the car.

He later sent a 'suicide text' to Ms Adcock, purporting to be from Mr Parkinson in the form of a confession.

It read: 'I lead a double life. I use and abuse woman (sic). It goes like this. I've been taking women of (sic) there (sic) partners and husband's (sic) for a very long time and I get a buss (sic) from it.'

But Ms Adcock said she knew the message had not been written by her partner because of the 'appalling' spelling and grammar.

She also recognised other phrases that Mr Parkinson would never have used because he was 'a gentleman'.

The court was told how Chilman had remained obsessed with his ex and even bought the same perfume as her which he sprayed on clothes he stole from her.

Police found items of her clothing including her underwear which he was said to have 'cuddled' and used as a 'comfort blanket'.

When interviewed by police he claimed Mr Parkinson had set himself on fire and that the decision to end his life was 'his choice' but it meant he was now 'out of the way'.

Chilman was found guilty of murder by a jury of nine men and three women on Thursday (12/8).

After the case, Detective Chief Inspector Dean Jones, from West Mercia Police's Major Investigation Unit, said: 'Chilman committed a senseless act that ended Neil's life prematurely.

'Neil Parkinson's family have understandably been left devastated.

'Neil was simply leaving his partners home to return home to take care of his elderly mother when he was tragically killed in a senseless attack and my thoughts and condolences remain with them.'

Paul Reid, of the Crown Prosecution Service, added: 'Mark Chilman has been held accountable for his actions with a lengthy prison sentence.

'He killed Mr Parkinson out of jealousy after subjecting his ex, who was dating Mr Parkinson, to a stalking campaign.

'Chilman just couldn't accept that his relationship had ended and had even threatened to kill himself, claiming he couldn't live without her.

'His selfish, deliberate actions cost Mr Parkinson his life and have now left Mr Parkinson's loved ones with the devastation of this tragic loss.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Families in Kabul are hiding in terror as armed taliban militants patrol the streets and go door-to-door in search of anyone who worked in Afghanistan for Western governments and NGOs.

Afghanistan's representative to the UN's security council Ghulam M. Isaczai said today 'there are already reports of target killings and looting in the city,' at a meeting of the council on Monday.

'Kabul residents are living in absolute fear right now,' he added, before warning of Taliban's previous broken promises.

'Kabul residents are reported that the Taliban have already started house-to-house searches in some neighbourhoods, registering names and looking for people in their target list,' he added.

The alleged aggression from the Taliban comes despite the militant group's leaders claiming civilians and foreigners have nothing to fear from them as they swept to full control of the country in a little over a week. Thousands of desperate civilians have gone to Kabul's airport with hundreds then trying to climb on to US military jets as they take off.

One Afghan father who worked for the British government said he is in hiding in Kabul with his wife and five young children from the Taliban in fear for their lives after the militant group took control of the capital.

Sporadic shooting outside his home and Taliban militants closing on nearby houses, looting and capturing opponents, has caused him and his family to go into hiding. Taliban leaders had promised civilians and foreigners would be safe.

Mohammed, 40, told the MailOnline in Kabul: 'The Taliban are outside in the streets, looting houses and stealing our neighbours' vehicles. We can hear gunfire and shouting. They are patrolling on scooters with their guns and going to houses.'

Sayed Mustafa Kazemi, a Radio Free Europe journalist trapped in Kabul with his wife and child, tweeted that the Taliban were searching for people with associations with the fallen government and NGOs in the city.

'Taliban started door to door search looking for govt officials, former police & security forces members & those who worked for foreign countries NGOs or infrastructures in Afghanistan.

'At least three journalists' houses were searched in the last hour. Kabul is now becoming deadly,' he warned. 'This is a game changer for us all. Many have started counting their final hours of life in Kabul. Nobody knows what happens next. Pray for us,' he added in a second message.

Zarifa Ghafari, Kabul's first female mayor, told The i Newspaper on Monday that she was waiting for the Taliban to find and kill her and her husband.

'I'm sitting here waiting for them to come,' the 27-year-old told the newspaper. 'There is no one to help me or my family. I'm just sitting with them and my husband. And they will come for people like me and kill me. I can't leave my family. And anyway, where would I go?' The newspaper reported she was unable to speak further.

According to local reports, amilies in Kabul are hiding in terror as armed Taliban militants patrol the streets and go door-to-door in search of anyone who worked for the US, UK and Western governments and NGOs. Pictured: Taliban fighters are seen on the back of an armoured vehicle in Kabul, Afghanistan, 16 August 2021

Pictured: People with Taliban's flags gather to welcome a man (not pictured) who was released from prison in Afghanistan, upon his arrival at the Friendship Gate crossing point at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border town of Chaman, Pakistan August 16, 2021

Taliban fighters are seen on the back of a vehicle in Kabul, Afghanistan, 16 August 2021, holding up a Taliban flag

Thousands of Afghans rushed to the Hamid Karzai International Airport as they try to flee the Afghan capital of Kabul, Afghanistan, on August 16, 2021

Mohammed, a business graduate, helped the British Council develop a scheme until 2016, helping promote the empowerment of women and youth schemes.

He is terrified the Taliban, who have seized control of the country's capital after sweeping through the rest of the country, will seek revenge on those who worked for the government or its agencies.

The business graduate is one of 15 Afghans who have applied for fast track resettlement in Britain, but who were rejected last month and now live in fear of Taliban retribution.

He told MailOnline that he feels 'abandoned and alone' after being turned down with his family for relocation to Britain six weeks ago despite the Taliban threat.

Mohammed said: 'We are scared. We fear if the Taliban find us, they will kill us. I am locked down with my wife and my children and the youngest is only two-and-a-half months old.

'My son asked me "Are the Taliban going to kill us?". He cannot go to school now and everything has changed.

'We were very scared when somebody came to my door, but it was a neighbour. But I could see the fright in my children's eyes.

Mohammed, whose real identity is being withheld for his safety, said he wasn't sure who among his neighbourhood were his friends or his foe.

'People are scared and some are turning towards the Taliban and those who know us may inform on my family and I that I worked for the British,' he said. 'We could be killed by the Taliban for the work that I have done for the UK. It is a very bad situation for us here.'

He said he, along with others who would work for the British Council, had been told that the resettlement scheme called Afghanistan Relocation and Assistance Policy, did not protect those who had not worked for the armed forces.

But he added: 'We worked for six years for the British Council and the Taliban hate us just as much as they do the others who may have been interpreters or provided other assistance.

'We were the same allies of the UK as the others. We are regarded by the Taliban as the same enemies. We really need urgent help from the UK government to save our lives.'

The British Council introduced the Tawanmandi Project after the initial fall of the Taliban and it ran between 2010 and 2016.

It was designed to introduce an inclusive civil society with focus on issues related to access to justice, anti-corruption, human rights, a free media and conflict resolution.

Through the Tawanmandi project more than £18 million was laid out in grants to 107 projects across 31 out of 34 provinces in Afghanistan.

The British Council website states: 'Through the Tawanmandi programme our project team is working to give civil society organisations in Afghanistan greater capacity to influence the government in being more accountable and responsive to the needs of Afghan citizens.

'Funded projects have directly benefited close to 150,000 Afghan citizens ...a total of 1,874 workshops.

'Over 400 'peace councils 'have been established at a local level in nine provinces to address and resolve local conflicts relating to land, irrigation, inheritance and family-based issues.

'This includes 80 female peace councils and 160 peace councils dealing specifically with young people.'

Mohammed added: 'I plead with the UK Government to save our lives. We are likely to be taken away and killed by the Taliban.

'We cannot sleep and are just waiting for the Taliban. We hope they do not find us as they could kill us. We need help urgently and ask for us to be made a priority.'

A senior former official of the Tawanmandi project said: 'The UK government decided to close it down in 2016 and I have had no contact with the people there since.'

Mail Online has approached the Foreign Office for comment.

Pictured: Taliban fighters stand guard along a roadside near the Zanbaq Square in Kabul on August 16, 2021. Victorious Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands of people mobbed the city's airport trying to flee the group's feared hardline brand of Islamist rule

Pictured: Taliban fighters stand guard on top of an armoured vehicle that appears to be a US military Humvee, in front of the Hamid Karzai International Airport, in Kabul, Afghanistan, Monday, Aug. 16, 2021

Pictured: Three taliban fighters, one of which is shown holding an AK47 - stand on a vehicle along the roadside in Kabul on August 16, 2021

Timeline of Afghanistan's provincial capitals falling to the Taliban Aug. 6 - ZARANJ - The Taliban take over the city in Nimroz province in the south, the first provincial capital to fall to the insurgents since they stepped up attacks on Afghan forces in early May. Aug. 7 - SHEBERGHAN - The Taliban declare they have captured the entire northern province of Jawzjan, including its capital Sheberghan. Heavy fighting is reported in the city, and government buildings are taken over by the insurgents. Afghan security forces say they are still fighting there. Aug. 8 - SAR-E-PUL - The insurgents take control of Sar-e-Pul, capital of the northern province of the same name. It is the first of three provincial centres to fall on the same day. Aug. 8 - KUNDUZ - Taliban fighters seize control of the northern city of 270,000 people, regarded as a strategic prize as it lies at the gateway to mineral-rich northern provinces and Central Asia. Government forces say they are resisting the insurgents from an army base and the airport. Aug. 8 - TALOQAN - The capital of Takhar province, also in the north, falls to the Taliban in the evening. They free prisoners and force government officials to flee. Aug. 9 - AYBAK - The capital of the northern province of Samangan is overrun by Taliban fighters. Aug. 10 - PUL-E-KHUMRI - The capital of the central province of Baghlan falls to the Taliban, according to residents. Aug. 11 - FAIZABAD - The capital of the northeastern province of Badakhshan is under Taliban control, a provincial council member says. Aug. 12 - GHAZNI - The insurgents take over the city, capital of the province of the same name, a senior security officer says. Aug 12 - FIRUS KOH - The capital of Ghor province, was handed over to the Taliban on Thursday night without a fight, security officials said. AUG 13 - QALA-E-NAW - The Taliban have captured the capital of the northwestern province of Badghis, a security official and the Taliban said. Aug 13 - KANDAHAR - The Taliban have captured Afghanistan's second biggest city of Kandahar, government officials and the Taliban said. Aug 13 - LASHKAR GAH - The Taliban have captured the capital of the southern province of Helmand, police said. Aug 13 - HERAT - Capital of Herat province in the west was under Taliban control after days of clashes, a provincial council member said. Aug 13 - POL-E ALAM - Taliban capture provincial capital of Logar, 40 miles south of Kabul Aug 15 - KABUL - The capital of Afghanistan falls to the Taliban barely a week after the group began its lightning offensive across the country, all but giving the extremist group full control of the country Advertisement

Victorious Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands of people mobbed the city's airport trying to flee the group's feared hardline brand of Islamist rule.

It took the Taliban just over a week to seize control of the country after a lightning sweep that ended in Kabul as government forces trained for years and equipped by Britain, the United States and other Western nations at a cost of billions of dollars, melted away.

As the militants declared victory and claimed peace had been brought to the country, at least five people were killed in Kabul airport and another three reportedly died falling from a plane, while hundreds tried to forcibly enter aircraft leaving the Afghan capital, witnesses said.

After police and other government forces gave up their posts in Kabul on Sunday, Taliban fighters took over checkpoints across the city and entered the presidential palace and the Afghan parliament building.

Videos from the city on Monday showed Taliban fighters driving armoured vehicles and pickup trucks through the streets, with armed militiamen standing on the rear - some with mounted heavy machine guns.

Militants with rifles slung over their shoulders were also seen walking Monday through the streets of the Green Zone, the formerly heavily fortified district that houses most embassies and international organisations - the staff from which that are in the process of being evacuated at the city's airport.

The Taliban sought to reassure the international community that Afghans should not fear them, and they will not take revenge against those who supported the US-backed alliance.

In a message posted to social media, Taliban co-founder Abdul Ghani Baradar called on his fighters to remain disciplined after taking control of the city. 'Now it's time to test and prove, now we have to show that we can serve our nation and ensure security and comfort of life,' he said.

The Taliban's capture of the capital had occurred, as in many other cities, without the bloodshed that many had feared, but there were desperate scenes at Kabul's airport as people tried to board the few flights available.

People were pictured scaling the barbed wire-lined walls around the airport's perimeter as people frantically tried to board flights and escape the city now under the militant's control. On the tarmac, people were seen trying to climb a moving US military evacuation plane, while others were shown sitting on top of a commercial jet.

One witness said he had seen the bodies of five people being taken to a vehicle. Another witness said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede.

'We are afraid to live in this city,' a 25-year-old ex-soldier said as he stood among huge crowds on the tarmac. 'Since I served in the army, the Taliban would definitely target me.

U.S. troops, who are in charge of the airport, earlier fired in the air to scatter the crowd, a U.S. official said, but officials were not immediately available to comment on the deaths.

Meanwhile, refugees have been massing at the borders as people desperately try to flee Afghanistan before the Taliban's brutal rules are implemented, with pictures from the country's border with Pakistan showing hundreds of people queuing in an attempt to leave.

Pictured: People struggle to cross the boundary wall of Hamid Karzai International Airport to flee the country after rumors that foreign countries are evacuating people even without visas, after Taliban took control of Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16

Pictured: Afghan people climb atop a plane as they wait at the Kabul airport in Kabul on August 16, 2021

Pictured: Afghans crowd at the tarmac of the Kabul airport on August 16, 2021, to flee the country as the Taliban were in control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country and conceded the insurgents had won the 20-year war

Pictured: US soldiers take up their positions as they secure the airport in Kabul on August 16, 2021

British Forces from 16 Air Assault Brigade arrive in Kabul, Afghanistan, to provide support to British nationals leaving the country, as part of Operation PITTING after Taliban insurgents took control of the presidential palace in Kabul, August 15

Pictured: A map showing the Afghan districts taken by the Taliban (green), those being contested (red) and those still under the control of the government (blue). Cities captured by the Taliban are also shown

Pictured: A map of Kabul showing the locations of the Afghan Presidential Palace, the British Embassy and the airport

The chaos in Afghanistan's capital comes as:

Britain's ambassador to Afghanistan remains in Kabul, despite an SAS-backed operation to evacuate embassy staff amid a Taliban takeover of the city;

The US ambassador and embassy staff fled Afghanistan after Taliban forces stormed Kabul;

President Biden ordered about 5,000 troops to help evacuate US staff 'and other allied personnel';

PM Boris Johnson said said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the crisis;

British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was forced to return to the UK from his holiday abroad;

Tory MPs called fallout from Anglo-US withdrawal 'Britain's worst foreign policy disaster since Suez';

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis;

President Biden defended the withdrawal of US troops and blamed his predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001';

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken insisted the scene in Afghanistan is not comparable to the fall of Saigon as he diverted blame for the Taliban takeover on Republicans;

German Chancellor Angela Merkel said troops would be deployed to Afghanistan to evacuate German citizens and Afghans in danger from the Taliban;

Several dozen French citizens are to be repatriated by plane from Afghanistan, French Armed Forces minister Florence Parly told France Info radio;

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called for the Taliban to uphold human rights and said the world was watching: 'It's going to be all about the actions, not the words';

Russia said it saw no need to evacuate its embassy for the time being and said it would meet on Tuesday to decide whether to recognise the new government, while Turkey said its embassy would continue operations.

President Ashraf Ghani fled the country on Sunday night as the insurgents encircled the capital - saying he wanted to avoid bloodshed - capping a military victory that saw them capture all cities in just 10 days.

In a Facebook post, Ghani said he had left the country to avoid clashes with the Taliban that would endanger millions of Kabul residents. Some social media users branded Ghani, who did not disclose his location, a coward for leaving them in chaos. Al Jazeera reported he had flown to Uzbekistan, citing his personal bodyguard.

'The Taliban have won with the judgement of their swords and guns, and are now responsible for the honour, property and self-preservation of their countrymen,' Ghani said after fleeing.



Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country: 'The situation is peaceful,' one official said. The Taliban controlled 90 percent of state buildings and fighters had been told to prevent any damage, the official added.

'Today is a great day for the Afghan people and the mujahideen. They have witnessed the fruits of their efforts and their sacrifices for 20 years,' Mohammad Naeem, the spokesman for the Taliban's political office, told Al Jazeera TV. 'Thanks to God, the war is over in the country.'

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, has already been installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

Video from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber today. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs.

Government forces collapsed without the support of the US military, which invaded in 2001 after the September 11 attacks and toppled the Taliban for its support of Al-Qaeda.

But the United States ultimately failed to build a democratic government capable of withstanding the Taliban, despite spending billions of dollars and providing two decades of military support.

Russia said its ambassador to Afghanistan will meet with the Taliban in Kabul on Tuesday and that it will decide on whether to officially recognise the new government.

China on Monday said it is willing to develop 'friendly relations' with the Taliban after the Islamist hardliners seized control of Afghanistan.

'China respects the right of the Afghan people to independently determine their own destiny and is willing to continue to develop... friendly and cooperative relations with Afghanistan,' foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters.

Pashtana Durrani from non-profit organisation Learn Afghanistan told BBC Breakfast on Monday that the Taliban have so far been unclear about how they intend to rule Afghanistan now they are in power.

'In some places they are very nice to people and then there are places where they have been slitting throats,' she told the morning show. 'So I don't want to trust them and I'm not trusting them for their word.

'But at the same time, the first thing that they did yesterday – they stripped us of our flag. They brought down the flag. The second thing that they did, is they are in the process of changing the name of Afghanistan.

'And at the same time we are being stripped of our political rights, our mobility rights, our social rights. So these are some immediate things that we know are going to happen, or are in the process of happening,' she said.

Pictured: Mullah Baradar Akhund, a senior official of the Taliban, seated with a group of men, makes a video statement, in this still image taken from a video recorded in an unidentified location and released on August 16, 2021

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

Video (pictured) from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber today. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs

Russian ambassador to meet Taliban in Kabul Tuesday Russia said its ambassador to Afghanistan will meet with the Taliban in Kabul on Tuesday and that it will decide on whether to recognise the new government based on its conduct. 'Our ambassador is in contact with the Taliban leadership, tomorrow he will meet with the Taliban security coordinator,' foreign ministry official Zamir Kabulov said in an interview with the Ekho Moskvy radio station on Monday. He said the talks between Moscow's ambassador, Dmitry Zhirnov, and the Taliban would centre on how the group plans to provide security for the Russian embassy in the Afghan capital. On Sunday, as the Taliban completed its military takeover of Afghanistan, Kabulov said that Russia had no plans on evacuating its embassy - though on Monday he said that 'part' of its staff would be 'evacuated'. Kabulov also said that Moscow will decide on recognising the new Taliban government based 'on the conduct of the new authorities'. 'We will carefully see how responsibly they govern the country in the near future. And based on the results, the Russian leadership will draw the necessary conclusions,' Kabulov said. In recent years, Russia has sought to reach out to the Taliban and has hosted Taliban representatives in Moscow several times, most recently last month. Moscow is closely watching for a potential spillover of the instability into neighbouring ex-Soviet Central Asian countries where Russia maintains military bases. Reporting by AFP Advertisement

The United States had sent 6,000 troops to the airport to ensure the safe evacuation of embassy staff, as well as Afghans who worked as interpreters or in other support roles.

Other governments had also organised charter flights.

The US government said Monday it had secured the airport, but there was still chaos with witnesses reporting American soldiers firing in the air to warn off crowds.

Authorities then cancelled all remaining commercial flights because of the chaos.

'There will be no commercial flights from Hamid Karzai Airport to prevent looting and plundering. Please do not rush to the airport,' the Kabul airport authority said in a message sent to reporters.

The United States had earlier released a statement with more than 65 nations urging the Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres urged the Taliban and all parties to 'exercise restraint' and said the rights of women and girls, who suffered under the previous Taliban regime, must be protected.

The Taliban imposed an ultra-strict interpretation of sharia law during their 1996-2001 rule.

This included banning girls from schools and women from working, while people were publicly stoned to death for adultery.

As people scrambled to escape Afghanistan, neighbouring Pakistan's state-run airline said on Monday it has halted all flights to Afghanistan's capital of Kabul because of the 'uncertain security situation' there.

Spokesman Abdullah Hafeez said Monday that Pakistan International Airlines decided to protect passengers, the crew and the planes after consulting the Afghan civil aviation authorities.

Pakistan's interior minister said on Sunday the country had closed the Torkham border point with Afghanistan after the Taliban took control of the Afghan border facility.

Sheikh Rashid Ahmed said the decision to close the Torkhan border was taken due to due to an extraordinary situation on the other side. Ahmed told the local Geo television that the border was closed when Afghan police surrendered to the Taliban.

Ahmed said the Chaman border point with Afghanistan remains open.

Pakistan has already said that it cannot bear any load of new Afghan refugees in the wake of crisis in the war-torn country. Pakistan is about to complete fencing along the long, porous border, saying the step has been taken to check the militants' movement across the border.

Pictured: Taliban forces patrol in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16, 2021. Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country as they took control in little over a week

After police and other government forces gave up their posts in Kabul on Sunday, Taliban fighters took over checkpoints across the city and entered the presidential palace. Pictured: Taliban fighters in Kabul, August 16, 2021

Taliban fighters ride on a police vehicle outside Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16, 2021

Taliban stands guard outside the Hamid Karzai International Airport as people walk to the airport to flee the country after rumors that foreign countries are evacuating people even without visas, in Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16, 2021

Taliban members patrol the streets of Afghan capital Kabul on August 16, 2021, as the Taliban takes control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

A Taliban fighter sits on his motorcycle along a roadside at Shahr-e Naw in Kabul on August 16, 2021

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital, August 15

Pictured: Vehicles are seen on a congested street in Kabul, Afghanistan, in these still images taken from a video uploaded to social media on August 15, 2021

Al Jazeera broadcast footage of what it said were Taliban commanders in the presidential palace with dozens of armed fighters.

Taliban spokesman Mohammad Naeem said the form of the new regime in Afghanistan would be made clear soon, adding the Taliban did not want to live in isolation and calling for peaceful international relations.

'We have reached what we were seeking, which is the freedom of our country and the independence of our people,' he said. 'We will not allow anyone to use our lands to target anyone, and we do not want to harm others.'

Many Afghans fear the Taliban will return to past harsh practices in their imposition of sharia religious law. During their 1996-2001 rule, women could not work and punishments such as stoning, whipping and hanging were administered.

Both the United Nations and the United States said last week they had received reports that Taliban fighters were executing surrendering government soldiers.

A Taliban leader said the insurgents were regrouping from different provinces, and would wait until foreign forces had left before creating a new governance structure.

The leader, who requested anonymity, said Taliban fighters had been 'ordered to allow Afghans to resume daily activities and do nothing to scare civilians'.

Central Kabul streets were largely deserted early on a sunny Monday as waking residents pondered their future.

'I'm in a complete state of shock,' said Sherzad Karim Stanekzai, who spent the night in his carpet shop to guard it. 'I know there will be no foreigners, no international people who will now come to Kabul.'

The militants sought to project a more moderate face, promising to respect women's rights and protect both foreigners and Afghans.

In a video message on Monday, former President of Afghanistan Hamid Karzai pleaded with the Taliban to spare the people of the country and give them safe passage.

'To the people of Kabul, I, my daughters and my family are here with you,' he said. 'My wish is that the problems of our country and capital could be solved with peaceful dialogue and negotiations. I want the Taliban forces, wherever you are, to provide safety to the people and pay attention to preserve people's lives.

'I advise all the people to stay in your homes. We are trying to talk with the leadership of Taliban to solve the problems of the people of Afghanistan through dialogue and brotherhood, for the sake of our nation. That's why I am talking to you again. I say to the Taliban, wherever you are, save the lives of the people. And to the (Afghan) forces, make sure their lives are out of danger. Take good care of yourselves, so that I can talk to you again.'

Pictured: Pakistan's soldiers check the documents of stranded Afghan nationals wanting to return to Afghanistan at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border crossing point in Chaman on August 16, 2021

Pictured: A Pakistan's army soldier stands guard as people arriving from Afghanistan make their way at the Friendship Gate crossing point at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border town of Chaman, Pakistan August 16, 2021

Pictured: People arriving from Afghanistan make their way at the Friendship Gate crossing point at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border town of Chaman, Pakistan August 16, 2021

Travelers enter in Pakistan through a border crossing point in Chaman, Pakistan, Monday, Aug. 16, 2021. A special flight of Pakistan's national airline PIA has arrived in Islamabad carrying 329 passengers from Kabul, and another carrying 170 people will arrive later today

Pakistan's newspapers are pictured displaying front page news about Afghanistan, at a stall in Islamabad on August 16, 2021 after the Taliban were in control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country and conceded the insurgents had won the 20-year war

Boris Johnson urges the West NOT to recognise Taliban government Boris Johnson is urging western countries to not recognise the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan and says the country must not become a 'breeding ground for terror', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Following an emergency meeting of Cobra yesterday, Mr Johnson called for a 'united position among the like-minded' and said it was 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' He told Sky News: 'We don't want anybody bilaterally recognising the Taliban, we want a united position amongst all the like-minded, in as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into being a breeding ground for terror.' Advertisement

Western nations, including the UK, France, Germany and New Zealand said they were working to get citizens as well as some Afghan employees out. Russia said it saw no need to evacuate its embassy for the time being while Turkey said its embassy would continue operations.

Britain's Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said the military side of Kabul airport was secure and that Britain was doing everything it could to evacuate British citizens and Afghans with links to Britain.

'Our target is... about 1200 to 1500 exit a day in the capacity of our airplanes, and we'll keep that flow,' he said.

Britain has relocated its embassy to Kabul airport from the city. Asked what he would feel to see the Taliban flag flying over the former British embassy building in Kabul, Wallace said:

'Symbolically, it's not what any of us wanted.'

MP Tobias Ellwood, former captain in the British Army and chairman of the defence select committee, criticised the West for pulling out of Afghanistan.

Appearing on Sky News, he said: 'The world is now a little bit more dangerous because they've now taken control of the country, and the West should really hang its head in shame after abruptly abandoning Afghanistan to a civil war after two decades of effort.'

He added: 'This is not a good day for the West at all, and China will be observing things very, very closely indeed. They are already making alliances with the Taliban and glossing over the human rights atrocities that are likely to unfold.'

The European Union said it is working with member states to find quick solutions for the relocation of local Afghan staff and their families to a safe place, a spokesperson said.

'The matter is extremely urgent, we take it very seriously and continue to work hard, together with EU member states, on implementing rapid solutions for them and ensure their safety,' the spokesperson for the bloc's executive Commission told Reuters.

The Commission does not give figures for their local Afghan staff for security reasons.

German parliamentary sources said on Monday that chancellor Angela Merkel's government is planning to deploy soldiers to Afghanistan to help with the evacuation of German nationals and Afghans in danger from the Taliban.

The government is planning to seek a mandate from parliament to allow the deployment of as many as 'several hundred soldiers', the sources told AFP, citing a briefing by Merkel to leaders of parliamentary groups late Sunday.

Several dozen French citizens are to be repatriated by plane from Afghanistan, French Armed Forces minister Florence Parly told France Info radio.

Sweden said it had completed the evacuation of all its Swedish embassy staff from Kabul on Monday, and is now working on plans to get local employees and those who have supported its activities out of the country.

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called for the Taliban to uphold human rights and said the world was watching: 'It's going to be all about the actions, not the words.'

U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres urged all parties to exercise the utmost restraint, and expressed particular concern about the future of women and girls.

In Washington, opponents of President Joe Biden's decision to end America's longest war, launched after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, said the chaos was caused by a failure of leadership.

Biden has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to a plan, initiated by his Republican predecessor, Donald Trump, to end the U.S. military mission by Aug. 31.

Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell blamed Biden for what he called a 'shameful failure of American leadership'.

Naeem said the Taliban would adopt an international policy of two-way non-interference. 'We do not think that foreign forces will repeat their failed experience.'

The US government has insisted in recent days that its two decades of war in Afghanistan was a success, defined by quashing the Al-Qaeda threat.

President Joe Biden also said he was determined there was no choice but to withdraw American troops, as he would not 'pass this war' onto another president.

But Washington was left shocked by the rapid collapse of the Afghan government, and critics have said the United States' reputation as a global power has been badly tarnished.

'America's credibility as an ally is diminished,' said Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's former ambassador to the United States.

A U.S. State Department spokesperson said early on Monday that all embassy personnel, including Ambassador Ross Wilson, had been transferred to Kabul airport, mostly by helicopter, to await evacuation and the American flag had been lowered and removed from the embassy compound.

Hundreds of Afghans invaded the airport's runways in the dark, pulling luggage and jostling for a place on one of the last commercial flights to leave before U.S. forces took over air traffic control on Sunday.

'This is our airport but we are seeing diplomats being evacuated while we wait in complete uncertainty,' said Rakhshanda Jilali, a human rights activist who was trying to get to Pakistan, told Reuters in a message from the airport.

Crowds thronged into the airport as morning broke and U.S. forces fired into the air to stop people surging onto the tarmac to try to board a military flight, a U.S. official said.

Dozens of men tried to clamber onto an overhead departure gangway to board a plane while hundreds of others milled about, a video posted on social media showed.

There was the prospect of chaos in the skies over Afghanistan too. Its civil aviation authority advised transit aircraft to reroute saying its airspace was uncontrolled.

The Pentagon on Sunday authorized another 1,000 troops to help evacuate U.S. citizens and Afghans who worked for them, expanding its security presence on the ground to almost 6,000 troops within the next 48 hours.

Terror at Kabul airport: At least five killed amid chaotic scenes as US troops fire shots into the air to quell crowd of thousands trying to flee Afghanistan with some desperate Afghans climbing up airbridges to get on to planes out of capital

By Lauren Lews for MailOnline

Three stowaways are reported to have fallen to have fallen to their deaths from one airborne plane and a further five people have been killed at Kabul airport as thousands of Afghans try desperately to get on flights out of the country amid increasingly chaotic scenes.

US troops fired shots in the air at Hamad Karzai airport to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac after they took over Afghanistan's air traffic control. Witnesses said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede.

Footage published by Aśvaka showed three stowaways falling to the deaths after clinging on to the wheels of a military plane as it took off from Kabul airport.

Panicked Afghans were also seen climbing up the outside of an airbridge in a bid to get onboard planes and chasing a US military C-17 down the runway. Video also showed hundreds of people running alongside - and in front of - a US Air Force plane preparing to take off.

At least five people have been killed at Kabul airport as thousands of people tried desperately to get on flights out of Afghanistan amid increasingly chaotic scenes. Witnesses said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede

All commercial services have been suspended, with only military flights leaving the country as the UK, US and other western countries repatriate their citizens.

It comes as the Ministry of Defence confirmed the first British nationals had landed at RAF base Brize Norton after being evacuated from Kabul.

The Taliban swept into the capital on Sunday after the Western-backed government collapsed and President Ashraf Ghani fled the country, bringing a stunning end to a two-decade campaign in which the US and its allies had tried to transform the country.

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians.

Almost all major checkpoints in Kabul were under Taliban control by Monday morning and Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority issued an advisory saying the 'civilian side' of the airport had been 'closed until further notice' and that the military controlled the airspace.

Taliban officials said everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decide to stay in the country and promised civilians would not be harmed. The group previously said westerners would be allowed to leave the country but that Afghans would be barred from departing.

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country.

Video posted social media showed hundreds of people scampering with their luggage toward the safety of the airport terminal with the sound of gunfire breaking out.

US troops fired shots into the air at Kabul airport today as desperate Afghans climbed up the outside of airbridges trying to flee as the Taliban took control of Afghanistan. Pictured: People climb the outside on an airbridge, August 16, 2021

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Soldiers fired warning shots in the air to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac, a US official said

The Taliban swept into the capital on Sunday after the Western-backed government collapsed and President Ashraf Ghani fled the country, bringing a stunning end to a two-decade campaign in which the US and its allies had tried to transform the country.

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians.

Almost all major checkpoints in Kabul were under Taliban control by Monday morning and Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority issued an advisory saying the 'civilian side' of the airport had been 'closed until further notice' and that the military controlled the airspace.

Taliban officials said everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decide to stay in the country and promised civilians would not be harmed. The group previously said westerners would be allowed to leave the country but that Afghans would be barred from departing.

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country.

Video posted social media showed hundreds of people scampering with their luggage toward the safety of the airport terminal with the sound of gunfire breaking out.

American soldiers fired warning shots in the air to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac, a US official said.

The crowd was out of control,' the official told Reuters by phone. 'The firing was only done to defuse the chaos.'

How long will this last? Afghan girls go to school on the first day under Taliban rule but fears grow of a dark future for women as UN Secretary General speaks of his concern at ‘mounting human rights violations’ against them

Girls have been pictured walking to school in Kabul wearing traditional Islamic dress, the day after the Taliban seized the city and amid fears that women's rights in the country will be greatly eroded under the new regime.

Walking in pairs down a dusty road, the girls were seen in white head scarfs and traditional black Shalwar Kameez as they went to school on Monday, as young women - uncertain of their future - described the nightmare of 'watching everything collapse in a blink of an eye'.

Kabul's first female mayor admitted she was simply waiting for the Taliban to find and kill her and her husband.

Zarifa Ghafari, 27, told the i newspaper on Monday: 'I'm sitting here waiting for them to come,is no one to help me or my family. I'm just sitting with them and my husband. And they will come for people like me and kill me. I can't leave my family. And anyway, where would I go?'

Speaking to the United Nations Security Council on Monday, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres issued a dire warning on the events unfolding in the country, telling the meeting: 'We are receiving chilling reports of severe restrictions on human rights throughout the country.

'I am particularly concerned by accounts of mounting human rights violations against the women and girls of Afghanistan,' he told the 15-member council.

Many fear that such scenes will become the norm in Afghanistan under the Taliban, known for its shocking misogyny and barbaric acts against women, and for enforcing rules designed to restrict their everyday lives.

In the weeks leading up to their return to power, the Taliban's leadership strived to portray a softer image than when they last ruled Afghanistan between 1996 and 2001, but women are struggling to believe such assurances.

There are already local reports saying Taliban fighters are going door-to-door and forcibly marrying girls as young as 12 as Jihadist commanders order imams to create 'marriage lists' and offer girls for sexual servitude.

Taliban soldiers are to marry the women aged from 12 to 45 for their because they view them as 'qhanimat' or 'spoils of war' - to be divided up among the victors.

Other reports say women are being forced to wear face coverings and Burqas, while Al Jazeera reported on Monday that the extremist group told female employees at some banks to not return to their jobs.

Earlier in the week, a beauty salon owner was pictured painting over pictures of female models on the outside of his shop, and a video of a young girl crying about the loss of her future went viral, reaching over 1.6 million people.

Pictured: A street in Kabul on Monday morning reportedly showing girls walking to school in pairs, wearing white head scarfs and black traditional clothing after the Taliban takeover, which has raised fears of a return to the brutal laws last seen under Taliban rule before 2001

Pictured: International Women of Courage (IWOC) Award recipient Zarifa Ghafari of Afghanistan poses with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo (R) and First Lady Melania Trump at the State Department in Washington, DC on March 4, 2020. On Monday Ms Ghafari - Kabul's first female mayor - admitted she was simply waiting for the Taliban to find and kill her

Under the hardline version of sharia law that the Taliban imposed the last time they controlled the capital, women and girls were mostly denied education or employment.

Burqas - full body and face coverings - became mandatory in public, women could not leave home without a male companion, and public floggings and executions, including stoning for adultery, were carried out in city squares and stadiums.

Under threat of execution, girls were banned from mainstream education after the age of 8 - forcing those who wanted to learn to do so in secret schools.

The Taliban's ousting in 2001 did not spell the end of abuses. Women often remained marginalised, especially in rural areas.

But over the last two decades, significant progress was made in cities with women filling universities and entering the workforce in ambitious positions in the media, politics, the judiciary and even the security forces.

In the last 24 hours, prominent women in Kabul and activists for women's rights in the region with have taken to social media to express their pain for both a country and a way of life now that the Taliban are back in control.

Pashtana Durrani from non-profit organisation Learn Afghanistan told BBC Breakfast on Monday that the Taliban have so far been unclear about how they intend to rule Afghanistan now they are in power.

'In some places they are very nice to people and then there are places where they have been slitting throats,' she told the morning show. 'So I don't want to trust them and I'm not trusting them for their word.

'But at the same time, the first thing that they did yesterday – they stripped us of our flag. They brought down the flag. The second thing that they did, is they are in the process of changing the name of Afghanistan.

'And at the same time we are being stripped of our political rights, our mobility rights, our social rights. So these are some immediate things that we know are going to happen, or are in the process of happening,' she said.

Aisha Khurram said she spent a sleepless first night under Taliban rule, the sound of gunfire and evacuation planes puncturing the silence as she reflected on a day that 'shattered our souls and spirits to the core.'

Aisha Khurram - a 22-year-old former youth representative to the UN - said she spent a sleepless first night under Taliban rule, the sound of gunfire and evacuation planes puncturing the silence as she reflected on a day that 'shattered our souls and spirits to the core'

Pictured: A beauty salon owner painting over the image of a female model in Kabul amid fears that women's rights could be torn up by the misogynistic Taliban

Malala Yousafzai, an activist for female education and the youngest Nobel Prize laureate, who survived being shot in the head by a member of the Taliban, Tweeted on Sunday expressing her concern for women, minorities and human rights advocates under the Taliban's rule

'It was like a doomsday for the entire nation to see everything collapse in (the) blink of an eye,' she told AFP news agency in a series of messages via Twitter on Monday after Taliban fighters swept into Kabul, and her neighbourhood, uncontested.

Khurram, a 22-year-old former youth representative to the United Nations, is just months away from graduating from Kabul University, but she and fellow female students now face an uncertain future.

'The world and Afghan leaders failed the younger generation of Afghanistan in the cruellest way imaginable,' she said. 'It is a nightmare for educated women who envisioned a brighter future for themselves and generations to come.'

Malala Yousafzai, an activist for female education and the youngest Nobel Prize laureate, who survived being shot in the head by a member of the Taliban in Pakistan when she was just 15-years-old after the group voted to assasinated her.

Taking to Twitter, Malala called on countries to act to protect the people of Afghanistan: 'We watch in complete shock as Taliban takes control of Afghanistan. I am deeply worried about women, minorities and human rights advocates.

'Global, regional and local powers must call for an immediate ceasefire, provide urgent humanitarian aid and protect refugees and civilians.'

'History repeats itself'

'I start my day looking at empty streets of Kabul, horrified (for) its people,' wrote Fawzia Koofi, a rights activist and politician, and Afghanistan's former deputy speaker of parliament. 'History repeats itself so quickly.'

'The fear just sits inside your chest like a black bird,' added Muska Dastageer, a lecturer at the American University of Afghanistan, which opened its doors five years after the Taliban were ousted.

'It opens its wings and you can't breathe.'

Pictured: Fawzia Koofi, a rights activist and politician, and Afghanistan's former deputy speaker of parliament, said that she spent her day horrified for the people of Kabul

History repeats itself: An Afghan woman wearing a traditional burqa walks on the side of a road as a Northern Alliance military vehicle carrying fighters and the Afghan flag, drives in the outskirts of Jabal us Seraj, some 60kms north of the Afghan capital Kabul November 4, 2001

The Twitter timeline of Rada Akbar, a 33-year-old photographer, was littered with broken heart emojis.

'My beloved Afghanistan collapsed before my eyes,' one post read.

Another entry shared a now viral photograph of a man painting over pictures of smiling brides on the front of a hairdresser.

'Erasing women from the public space,' she wrote.

Akbar is known for her striking self-portraits that were both a declaration of her independence and heritage.

An exhibition she held earlier this year was forced online after she faced threats for her work showcasing some of the nation's powerful female figures.

On Monday morning, her fear was palpable.

'I want to become invisible and hide from the world,' read her latest tweet.

The Twitter timeline of Rada Akbar (pictured in Kabul in June), a 33-year-old photographer, was littered with broken heart emojis. 'My beloved Afghanistan collapsed before my eyes.'

Sahraa Karimi, one of Afghanistan's most prominent women filmmakers, said she had no plans to leave. 'I will not abandon my country until the last moment,' she said in a video

Two days before the Taliban took power, the UN refugee agency was already warning that 80 percent of the nearly a quarter of a million Afghans forced to flee since the end of May are women and children.

On Saturday, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said the rights of Afghan girls and women were being 'ripped away' in areas that the Taliban had already seized.

Sahraa Karimi, one of Afghanistan's most prominent women filmmakers, said she had no plans to leave.

'I will not abandon my country until the last moment,' she said in a video posted on Twitter, wiping away tears.

'Perhaps, many will think this is foolishness. But foolishness is what was done by those who abused our homeland... Foolishness is what the world showed by turning its back on us.'

Divorced women too face scorn or much worse from the Taliban. One woman, speaking of her experience of divorce in Afghanistan, told the Guardian: 'When I turned 20, my family married me to a man we didn't know very well. But it wasn't a good match, and we divorced seven years later.'

She said she was subsequently rejected by her family and community: 'I had nothing and nowhere to go,' she added.

Another woman told they feared the return of practice of forced marriages of young girls and widows to Taliban fighters.

She said: 'We are very worried about the forced marriages by the Taliban. If they come for us like this, then we will end our lives. It will be the only option for us.'

Female journalists also face an uncertain life under the Taliban. Zahara Joya, a journalist who set up her own news website named Rukhshana Media last year, said she feared returning to a life previously lived under the Taliban.

Ms Joya was forced to dress up as a boy in order to go to school and become educated. She told the Guardian: 'The Taliban had closed down all the girls' schools and only boys were allowed to go. I was adamant I wanted to study, so I would dress up as a boy and took on the name 'Mohammad' and enrolled at the school.

'I do not want us to return to those days.'

And she fears it will get worse for journalists like herself, saying: 'Security is worsening and my reporters struggle with the challenges of reporting from the quickly changing frontlines.'

Pictured: Burqa clad women walks past a billboard on the wall of a beauty salon in Kabul on August 7, 2021, ahead of the Taliban takeover of the city

Meanwhile, the United Nations chief called for an immediate end to violence in Afghanistan and urging the international community to unite to ensure that the human rights of all people, especially women and girls, are respected.

Secretary-General Antonio Guterres appealed to the U.N. Security Council at an emergency meeting on Monday 'and the international community as a whole to stand together, work together and act together.'

He said he is 'particularly concerned by accounts of mounting human rights violations against the women and girls of Afghanistan who fear a return to the darkest days' in the 1990s when the Taliban ruled and barred girls for getting an education and imposed draconian measures on women.

Guterres said 'the world is following events in Afghanistan with a heavy heart and deep disquiet about what lies ahead' and with the country's future and the hopes and dreams of a generation of young Afghans in the balance, the coming days 'will be pivotal.'

At this 'grave hour,' the secretary-general urged all parties, especially the Taliban, 'to exercise utmost restraint to protect lives and to ensure that humanitarian needs can be met.'

Guterres said the U.N continues to have staff and offices in areas now under Taliban control, and which so far have been respected. 'Above all, we will stay and deliver in support of the Afghan people in their hour of need.'

'We cannot and must not abandon the people of Afghanistan,' he said.

A heartbreaking video of an Afghan girl voicing her anguish at the world's treatment of her country has gone viral, days before the Taliban successfully established their control of Afghanistan on Sunday

A heartbreaking video of an Afghan girl voicing her anguish at the world's treatment of her country has gone viral - amassing 1.6 million views - days before the Taliban successfully established their control on Sunday.

The emotional video has already garnered millions of views after being posted to Twitter by human rights activist Masih Alinejad, and features a crying girl whose identity remains unknown.

'We don't count because we were born in Afghanistan,' the tearful girl explains in the 45-second clip.

'I cannot help crying,' she adds. 'No one cares about us. We'll die slowly in history.'

In a statement of Monday, Doctors Without Borders said its operations across Afghanistan have not been affected by the seizure of Kabul.

While many foreigners have fled the country, the group, known by its French initials, MSF, continues to have some international staff on the ground.

It also has more than 2,300 Afghan colleagues spread out across five Taliban-held provinces: Kandahar, Herat, Kunduz, Khost and Helmand.

Pictured: Taliban fighters stand guard along a roadside near the Zanbaq Square in Kabul on August 16, 2021. Victorious Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war. Women now fear for their rights under the extremist group

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country. In the weeks leading up to their return to power, the Taliban's leadership have strived to portray a softer image than when they last ruled Afghanistan between 1996 and 2001, but women are struggling to take comfort from such assurances

Filipe Ribeiro, MSF's country representative in Afghanistan, said the group's female medical practitioners in these provinces have resumed work and were already veiled or in the sky-blue burkas before the Taliban takeover, in line with local norms and customs.

'We do not face any impediments with regards to female staff coming to work,' he said, referring to MSF-run projects in those provinces.

As the Taliban pushed to takeover Helmand and Kunduz, MSF staff tended to large numbers of people wounded in the fighting, he said.

Speaking from his base in Kabul, Mr Ribeiro said the capital's streets were quiet and calm on Monday, despite scenes of chaos unfolding at the airport.

The group halted its main operation in Kabul after May 2020 following an attack on a maternity ward that was blamed on the so-called Islamic State group.

Mr Ribeiro said the focus remains on supporting Afghanistan's welfare.

'We have to keep in mind the health system was already dysfunctional beforehand, and nowadays it's important to keep supporting the Afghan population and to guarantee that the medical services will continue,' he said.

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern begged the Taliban to uphold women's rights after the Islamists.

'I would just again implore those who made these moves in recent days to acknowledge what the international community has called for - human rights and the safety of their people,' she said at a news conference in the capital Wellington.

'What we want to see is women and girls being able to access work and education. These are things that have traditionally not been available to them where there has been governance by Taliban.'

Ardern's mediation comes as China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise Taliban rule, while others like British Prime Minister Boris Johnson have warned that no state should recognise the new government.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A teacher who was sacked by Eton over an anti-feminist video has been cleared of professional misconduct.

Will Knowland, 35, was removed from his role at the prestigious Berkshire school and referred to the Teaching Regulation Agency (TRA) after refusing to take down a lecture challenging the theory of 'toxic masculinity' from YouTube.

The lecture, in which the English teacher quoted a Marie Claire article which quoted a woman as saying she to be overwhelmed by the 'sheer power of her husband's masculinity in the bedroom but wasn't because she felt like the man in the relationship,' was prepared for older pupils at the £42,500-a-year school.

Mr Knowland was sacked after he repeatedly refused requests from the college's headmaster Simon Henderson to take the video down.

The TRA, part of the Department for Education, has the power to impose lifetime classroom bans on teachers, and ruled that Knowland's case 'should be closed with no further action'.

The watchdog's judgement dismissed all charges over the 30-minute video entitled The Patriarchy Paradox, according to The Sunday Times.

Will Knowland, 35, was removed from his role at the prestigious Berkshire school and referred to the Teaching Regulation Agency (TRA) after posting a lecture on Youtube challenging the theory of 'toxic masculinity'

Eton, where Mr Knowland had taught for eight years, alleged that he had committed serious misconduct over his lecture entitled The Patriarchy Paradox

The TRA said it had 'considered the comments made by Mr Knowland throughout the 30-minute video. The decision-maker did not consider that, at its highest, the comments... could amount to unacceptable professional conduct; conduct that may bring the profession into disrepute and/or a conviction of a relevant offence, which could result in a prohibition order being appropriate.'

Eton, where Mr Knowland had taught for eight years, alleged that he had committed serious misconduct.

The video was claimed to be offensive to women and the LGBTQ+ community, and in breach of fundamental values of tolerance and respect.

Mr Knowland, who now works as a private tutor, told The Sunday Times this weekend that he was 'naturally delighted' to have been cleared of any wrongdoing by the TSA.

'This has upheld my view that both Eton's ethos and fundamental British values are best served by pursuing a robust approach to debate within the curriculum.'

'The decision marks a victory for freedom of speech in schools,' Mr Knowland's lawyer Simon Henthorn told the paper.

The TRA did not comment on the ruling but Eton told The Sunday Times: 'The Teaching Regulation Agency considers only whether Mr Knowland should be barred from teaching, not whether he was properly dismissed. That dismissal met the criteria which required Eton to refer the matter to the TRA. The TRA has agreed with the School’s submission that barring him from teaching would not be appropriate.'

Mr Knowland is now taking Eton to an employment tribunal.

Speaking to Times Radio earlier this year, he claimed the lecture was a 'counter argument' to lessons about 'toxic masculinity' at the college.

'To help you understand what that orthodox narrative is, the boys are given half-day training sessions by an external organisation called the Good Lad Initiative and that has been described by one of its former members as "encouraging boys to see themselves through a prism of toxic masculinity and dysfunction".

'Now I don't think it is fair and responsible to encourage boys to see themselves in this way exclusively.

'I think it's fair for them to consider the arguments regarding toxic masculinity but they should also be given counter arguments.

'The aim (of my video) was to provide a counter weight to what they are normally taught on this topic.'

Mr Knowland, a father-of-five, was asked if the lecture was worth losing his job over, prompting him to reply: 'Controversy is essential to any form of education, it is the clash of ideas that education really depends upon. It's something that, if you take away, fundamentally leaves education lacking in the most important respect.'

But he was also forced to defend himself over claims in his video that male-on-male rape in prisons outnumbered male-to-female rape outside of jails.

The claims were criticised as incorrect by charities and led some people who initially backed Mr Knowland to pull back their support.

'I don't think those figures belittle female rape, it doesn't belittle rape at all, if anything it draws greater attention to the problem that rape is, whether male on male or male on female rape, is a real issue.'

He had earlier said his sacking put the exclusive school's 'soul at risk'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Despite reports claiming they were back together, it seems Khloe Kardashian and Tristan Thompson are still just co-parenting.

Rumors had been rife that the two were set to reconcile after making a number of appearances together lately, despite his alleged cheating scandals.

However, a source tells PageSix: 'They have a healthy co-parenting relationship - and they will be seen together with True. Not the first time, nor will it be the last. They are on the same page when it comes to their daughter.'

Not so fast! Khloe Kardashian NOT getting back with serial cheater Tristan Thompson for now... as sources say they have a 'healthy co-parenting relationship'

The source added that it's important for Khloé that 'True has a relationship with Tristan and that she sees her parents getting along.'

News of them getting back together had been reported by In Touch Weekly, amid Tristan's note about working on his growth and change, something which Khloe's sister Kim Kardashian gave her stamp of approval.

The duo most recently split in June 2021 amid allegations that he cheated on her again.

The outlet's source said: 'It may not be the most ideal situation because of her trust issues, but she's desperate to make it work and he's once again promised to do better.'

Adding that 'Khloe wants Tristan in True's life and she's still holding out hope for that second child. They are far from over.'

The insider noted: 'He also promised Khloe that things will be different this time around and that he signed with the Sacramento Kings to be closer to her and True, and be a proper family and she believes him.'

Back on? The on/off lovebirds are seemingly back on, according to In Touch Weekly

Dailymail.com reached out to her rep for comment.

On Saturday, Tristan sent out a cryptic message on the caption of his latest Instagram post: 'Some people will judge you for changing. Some people will celebrate you for growing. Choose your circle wisely.'

His talk of 'changing' and 'growing'' comes just one day after Kim liked the post and jokingly wrote that he is a 'Jamaican Canadian prophet.'

Tristan was born and raised in Canada, with both of his parents of Jamaican descent.

Time for change: On Saturday, Tristan sent out a cryptic message on the caption of his latest Instagram post: 'Some people will judge you for changing. Some people will celebrate you for growing. Choose your circle wisely.

Stamp of approval: Kim liked the post and jokingly wrote that he is a 'Jamaican Canadian prophet'

Last week, Khloe Khloe shared a snap of herself rocking natural curls; she said she had been straightening her hair for the past 20 years but when COVID hit, she stopped doing it.

Tristan added several heart emojis in the comments.

On Thursday, Khloe and Tristan were pictured leaving a special screening of Paw Patrol, which Kim Kardashian has a voice role in.

Khloe carried their daughter in her arms as Tristan walked besides her, holding goodies.

Looking good: His talk of 'changing' and 'growing'' comes just one day after Khloe shared a snap of herself rocking natural curls

Flirty: Tristan was quick to add several heart emojis in the comment box, revealing he still likes to flirt with his pretty ex

On Thursday, it was announced that Tristan was traded to the Sacramento Kings from the Boston Celtics.

Interestingly enough, at the same time, Khloe shared a quote that read: ''Every situation in life is temporary. So, when life is good, make sure you enjoy and receive it fully.'

Tristan is moving to the West coast after one season playing for the Boston Celtics.

Instead of being across the country, Thompson will now be in Sacramento, California, about a six-hour drive from Kardashian's native Calabasas.

Last year Kardashian had to contend with the distance.

'I'm not opposed to Boston, but once you have kids, it's different,' Kardashian explained in an episode of Keeping Up With the Kardashians, which aired in June.

'True has her whole life in L.A. — her cousins, I have preschool class at my house,' she said.

Coast to coast: Thompson has been traded to the Sacramento Kings from the Boston Celtics

'It's COVID, so I can't just take her to Boston and go find classes there. Everything's shut down.

'I think if it was a different year, maybe I'd be more open to uprooting her. But what am I going to do? Take her there to be in a condo there and stay inside some walls?'

The Sacramento Kings reportedly acquired Thompson from the Boston Celtics on Friday in a three-team trade that also included the Atlanta Hawks.

In addition to True, Thompson is father to Prince, four, whom he shares with his ex-girlfriend, model Jordan Craig.

Kardashian and the professional basketball player were first linked in 2016 when they were spotted spending time together at a nightclub, and they later took a vacation in Mexico.

Advice: On her Instagram Story, Khloe got more personal with several seemingly pointed quotes

The two confirmed that they were dating that same year and remained very close through much of 2017.

The reality television personality eventually confirmed that she was pregnant with the athlete's child that December through a post made to her Instagram account.

Kardashian revealed that she was expecting a girl during an episode of Keeping Up With The Kardashians that aired the following year.

In 2018, it was reported that Thompson was spotted kissing multiple women in several locations.

That year, she gave birth to True, and the parents later reconciled following the child's birth.

They reconciled soon after, confirming rumors they were back on in January 2019 while holding hands on a night out.

They split the following months after he allegedly cheated on her with Kylie Jenner's best friend Jordyn Woods.

In July 2020, they were reportedly trying to work on their relationship again, becoming official the following month.

They reportedly split again in June 2021 amid rumors that he allegedly cheated on her.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Billie Faiers showed off her slender physique as she continued to soak up the sun on her family getaway to Greece.

Taking to Instagram to post a slew of sunny snaps to her Instagram, the former TOWIE star, 31, cosied up to her husband Greg Shepherd as they enjoyed some time on a boat.

Billie looked amazing as she posed in a 60s style high waisted white bikini which complemented her freshly tanned body.

Sweet: Billie Faiers, 31, showed off her slender physique as she continued to soak up the rays in a while bikini on her family getaway to Greece on Instagram on Monday

Holiday: She shared the images alongside a caption which read: 'Special days like this' with a blue love heart, anchor and wave emojis

The two-piece matched with her 35-year-old husband's trunks, as they smiled for the camera.

The couple kept the Greek sun at bay by both donning oversized aviator style sunglasses.

She shared the images alongside a caption which read: 'Special days like this' with a blue love heart, anchor and wave emojis.

In other images, the family can be seen doing various holiday activities, including a snap of her six year old daughter Nelly chilling on the boat.

Cute: Taking to Instagram to post a slew of sunny snaps to her Instagram, the former TOWIE star cosied up to her husband Greg Shepherd as they enjoyed their time on a boat

Arthur, three, also appeared in the post, looking cheeky as he sat at the back of the vessel.

In later snaps, Nelly and Greg can be seen having a ball on a paddle board with the idyllic Greek landscape as a backdrop.

Arthur and Suzanne also posed for a sweet snap of them cuddling on the boat as they lapped up rays in the sunny location.

The last photo on the post was a shot of the group, they looked in high spirits smiling in the image with friends Johnny and Sian Glover.

Chilled: The family seem to be making the most of the sunny getaway and Billie's six-year-old daughter Nelly sat on the back of the boat

How sweet! Three year old Arthur also appeared in the post, looking cheeky as he sat at the back of the vessel

The holiday comes a month after it was announced Billie's sister Sam, 30, has quit their joint reality show Mummy Diaries after seven years.

After the news was revealed, Billie posted on Instagram to confirm the show's new title The Family Diaries and thanked her fans for their support after Sam said she 'needed a break' from the show.

Billie wrote: 'As one journey ends another begins …. And What an incredible journey it has been ❤️ filming with my sister and family for the past 7 years has been the most wonderful experience and we truly have made the BEST memories all together Filming @mummydiariesoffical.'

Fun times: In later snaps, Nelly and Greg can be seen having a ball on a paddle board with the idyllic Greek landscape as a backdrop

Adorable: Arthur and Suzanne also posed for a sweet snap on the boat as they lapped up the rays in the sunny location

Alongside the post, Billie shared several snaps of herself with husband Greg Shepherd along with Mummy Diaries shots with Sam and her partner Paul Knightley.

Billie and her husband Greg have landed their very own series, Billie & Greg: The Family Diaries.

After an eventful year, which saw Billie take part in Dancing On Ice, the episodes will capture milestone moments for the family as they continue to make new memories.

Sam & Billie: The Mummy Diaries is currently available on BritBox.

Family time: The last photo on the post was a shot of the group, they looked in high spirits smiling in the image
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eight-time Grammy nominee Avril Lavigne rocked a red cut-out bikini top to enjoy Malibu beach with her boyfriend Mod Sun on Sunday.

The Canadian 36-year-old passionately kissed the 34-year-old Minnesota native after 'jumping in the ocean' together.

'We did it. Summertime!' Mod Sun (born Derek Ryan Smith) gushed.

Still going strong! Eight-time Grammy nominee Avril Lavigne rocked a red cut-out bikini top to enjoy Malibu beach with her boyfriend Mod Sun on Sunday

'You look so pretty.'

Avril made sure to share all the PDA and fun from her afternoon with her captive, combined 93.5M social media followers.

'Summer in Malibu,' Lavigne captioned a video of her frolicking in the surf with a white crop-top and black shorts.

'Summertime with my love!' The Canadian 36-year-old (R) passionately kissed the 34-year-old Minnesota native (L) after 'jumping in the ocean' together

Mod Sun (born Derek Ryan Smith) gushed: 'We did it. Summertime! You look so pretty.'

Beaming: Avril made sure to share all the PDA and fun from her afternoon with her captive, combined 93.5M social media followers

Lavigne captioned a video of her frolicking in the surf with a white crop-top and black shorts: 'Summer in Malibu'

'His and hers': Later, the pop-punk couple bought 'new sk8boards' in camouflage print

'Sk8er' girl: Avril then coasted towards the camera, flashing the middle finger salute, as she skateboarded on the patio of her $7.8M Malibu mansion

Later, the pop-punk couple bought 'new sk8boards' in 'his and hers' camouflage print.

Avril then coasted towards the camera, flashing the middle finger salute, as she skateboarded on the patio of her $7.8M Malibu mansion.

Lavigne and Mod Sun began dating around the time they recorded their duet Flames back in December with producer and Goldfinger frontman John Feldmann.

Started in the studio: Lavigne and Mod Sun began dating around the time they recorded their duet Flames back in December with producer and Goldfinger frontman John Feldmann (R, pictured December 11)

Twice divorced: The Sk8er Boi rocker divorced Nickelback frontman Chad Kroeger (L) in 2015 after two years of marriage, and she divorced Sum 41 frontman Deryck Whibley (R) in 2010 after three years of marriage

'I will always love you!' Meanwhile, the No Escape rocker was previously in an open 19-month relationship with Bella Thorne, which ended in 2019 (pictured in 2019)

The Sk8er Boi rocker divorced Nickelback frontman Chad Kroeger in 2015 after two years of marriage, and she divorced Sum 41 frontman Deryck Whibley in 2010 after three years of marriage.

Meanwhile, the No Escape rocker was previously in an open 19-month relationship with Bella Thorne, which ended in 2019.

Mod Sun will kick off his 17-date Internet Killed the Rockstar Tour on September 5 at the Bottle Rock Festival in Napa alongside openers Girlfriends and Tyler Posey.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Only recently back from her extended stay in her native country of Brazil, Alessandra Ambrosio enjoyed a little rest and relaxation on Sunday.

The longtime supermodel was spotted heading into the Little Beach House Malibu social club that's situated along the world famous Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu.

And along the way, the 40-year-old turned more than a few heads dressed, casually but stylish, in striped legging pants and a red hot blouse that she left unbuttoned just enough to showcase her ample cleavage.

R&R: Alessandra Ambrosio, 40, stepped out to a beachfront social club in Malibu on Sunday

In keeping with the theme of her ensemble, the model turned entrepreneur also wore a pair of flip flops and her long brown tresses were pulled back into a ponytail with a center part.

She also had a small blue box purse that hung over her right shoulder as she carried her phone that was attached to a crossbody lanyard.

The Little Beach House Malibu is a small private members' club for the creative community in Malibu and the surrounding coastal areas.

Turning heads: The longtime supermodel gave more than a hint of her cleavage dressed in a red hot blouse that was paired with striped legging pants

It's located in a stand-alone building that features outdoor terraces, a bar and a restaurant, all with ocean views.

The idea of the club is to make it as comfortable and relaxing as possible to help stimulate the creative juices of its members.

Earlier, the mother of two took to her Instagram Stories and offered a 'good morning' to her 10.4 million fans and followers with a photo of the waves crashing waves of the Pacific Ocean. The selfie also captured the side of her head.

She followed up with a sweet snap of herself giving her nine-year-old son Noah a kiss on the forehead.

There's also a black-and-white silhouette image of the Gal Floripa co-founder from behind as she soaked in the view of the ocean from the very same balcony.

In both pictures Ambrosio is dressed in a black, skin-tight bodysuit, with her hair styled long, straight, and flowing well past the middle of her back.

Ambrosio also has a 12-year-old daughter, Anja, with whom she also shares with ex-fiance Jamie Mazur.

Lovely: Ambrosio shared a sweet snap of herself giving her son Noah, nine, a kiss
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liam Hemsworth and his sister-in-law Elsa Pataky recently signed on to star in Poker Face, a new thriller directed by and starring Russell Crowe.

And last Wednesday, Liam, 31, was pictured on the Kiama set of the movie for the very first time.

The Hollywood hunk cut a casual figure as he strolled around the sprawling beachside mansion that is being used for filming.

On set: Liam Hemsworth was spotted on-set of Russell Crowe's new thriller Poker Face for the first time last Wednesday in Kiama on the South Coast of NSW

Liam, who is the youngest Hemsworth brother, wore a white T-shirt with a light washed pair of jeans and a green puffer jacket.

He teamed the outfit with white sneakers and sported a shaggy beard and hairstyle.

At one point, Liam was seen having a rather animated conversation with a crew member.

Kiama is located on the South Coast of NSW.

New role: Liam and sister-in-law Elsa Pataky recently signed up to star in the movie

Lively: At one point, Liam was seen having a rather animated conversation with a crew member outside

Relaxed: Liam, who is the youngest Hemsworth brother, wore a white T-shirt with a light washed pair of jeans and a green puffer jacket

Liam, who resides in Byron Bay like the rest of the Hemsworth clan, has been cast in Poker Face alongside his sister-in-law Elsa.

According to The Daily Telegraph, 'both the youngest Hemsworth and Pataky were quietly added to the cast of the flick with Crowe'.

Earlier last week, Russell was also seen milling around the Kiama set.

It was reported at the end of last month that the Gladiator star had been upgraded to director of the film.

Last week, Liam thrilled shoppers when he paid a visit to a Woolworths store in the area.

Ready to film: Earlier last week, Russell was also seen milling around the Kiama set. It was reported at the end of last month that the Gladiator star had been upgraded to director of the film

Fancy seeing you here! Last week, Liam thrilled shoppers when he paid a visit to a Woolworths store in the area

Careful, Liam! It's since been revealed that the Hollywood hunk visited the store after it had been listed as a Covid-19 exposure site

It's since been revealed that the Hollywood hunk visited the store after it had been listed as a Covid-19 exposure site.

He picked up some groceries on Friday after a confirmed case visited the store on July 30, The Daily Telegraph reports.

Supermarket worker Jamee Louise Burazin, 23, recalled her encounter with The Hunger Games star in the store after she asked him for a fan photo.

Exposure site: The 31-year-old picked up some groceries on Friday after a confirmed case visited the store on July 30, The Daily Telegraph reports

'He's got to be one of my favourite actors of all time so when I saw him in Woolies, I was almost like jelly,' she told The Daily Telegraph.

She said the staffers weren't sure at first if it was indeed Liam as he was dressed so causally and had a face mask on.

She said when she asked him for a photo, he was 'very polite, really nice'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was declared to officially be a billionaire and the world's wealthiest female musician earlier this month by Forbes.

But Rihanna tried to prove she still enjoys the simple pleasures like a relaxed late-night stop at the grocery store when she dropped by a Whole Foods location in Manhattan's Tribeca neighborhood on Sunday.

The 33-year-old hitmaker certainly looked like a member of the ultra-wealthy with strands of thick pearls and gold jewelry draped from her throat for the otherwise-casual outing.

The personal touch: She may be a newly minted billionaire, but that didn't stop Rihanna, 33, from buying her own groceries late at night at a Whole Foods in Manhattan on Sunday

A small golden cross was appended to the pearls, and other gold necklaces hung down to her midriff.

Rihanna put on a busty display in a simple black top, which she wore under her black jacket, which featured thick gold buttons.

She dressed down the rest of her ensemble with a set of high-waisted acid-wash jeans with blown-out knees and other shredded patches.

The 5ft8in Work singer wore a rare black-and-gold striped Chanel no. 5 belt with a thick dangling gold pendant.

Luxurious: The hitmaker wore a stunning thick string of pearls around her throat with dangling gold necklaces and a rare black-and-gold Chanel no. 5 belt

Showing off: Rihanna put on a busty display in a simple black top, which she wore under her black jacket, which featured thick gold buttons

Low key: She kept the rest of her ensemble casual with torn acid-wash jeans, white Adidas trainers and a green New York Yankees baseball cap

Rihanna kept up her low-key theme with white Adidas trainers and a green New York Yankees baseball cap.

She appeared to be rocking short hair and covered up despite the late hour with chunky black sunglasses.

Earlier this week, the singer–songwriter was spotted with her rapper boyfriend A$AP Rocky as they left a nightclub at 5 a.m.

On Tuesday, she posted a joking photo of herself in bed with a massive tin of caviar on ice to celebrate that astounding financial landmark.

'how I woke up after #FENTYPARFUM sold out this morning!!!' she joked, referencing her line of scents.

Produce section: The Umbrella singer shopped in the produce section

Mask on: Rihanna masked up while pushing a grocery cart

Stylish star: The singer looked runway ready while running errands

Celebration: Earlier this week, the singer–songwriter was spotted with her rapper boyfriend A$AP Rocky as they left a nightclub at 5 a.m.

Lap of luxury! On Tuesday, she posted a joking photo of herself in bed with a massive tin of caviar on ice to celebrate that astounding financial landmark

Rihanna is now worth well over $1 billion, with Forbes estimating she's worth closer to $1.7 billion.

However, that vast majority of that worth is unrelated to the music that made her a household name.

Most of her wealth is related to her cosmetics company Fenty Beauty, which the publication confirmed she owns 50 percent of.

Her lingerie company Savage x Fenty reportedly makes up another $270 million of her wealth, and the rest of her fortune comes from her music career, as well as occasional forays into acting.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her most famous role was as office manager-turned-director of agency operations Joan Holloway in Mad Men.

So it comes as no surprise that Christina Hendricks was all business on her latest outing.

The 46-year-old actress was seen rocking a floral blazer as she arrived for the star-studded Day of Indulgence party thrown by Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday afternoon.

All business: Christina Hendricks was seen rocking a floral blazer as she arrived for the star-studded Day of Indulgence party thrown by Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday afternoon

She commanded attention in the business casual look featuring a white T-shirt, skinny black jeans an intricately weaved sandals.

Christina completed the look with black accessories including wayfarer shades, designer bag, and polka dot protective face mask.

Her signature fiery red locks were worn down in waves which blew in the wind.

The star-studded affair was held at the Brentwood home of film producer Jennifer Klein.

Rocking it: The 46-year-old actress commanded attention in the business casual look featuring a white T-shirt, skinny black jeans an intricately weaved sandals

On the move: Christina completed the look with black accessories including wayfarer shades, designer bag, and polka dot protective face mask

The women's-only party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Strictly Come Dancing bosses are reportedly desperate to pair former Corrie actress Katie McGlynn with pro ­Giovanni ­Pernice.

However the dancer, 30, was previously romantically linked to the actress, 28, and there are fears it could create tension with his new girlfriend Maura Higgins.

A TV insider said they pair would have the most chemistry and they are an obvious choice.

'It'd be the dream ticket': Strictly Come Dancing bosses are reportedly desperate to pair Corrie star Katie McGlynn with pro dancer ­Giovanni ­Pernice - but are worried it cause a 'nightmare' with his girlfriend Maura Higgins

The source told The Sun: 'This would be a dream ticket for Strictly producers, but a potential nightmare for the trio concerned.

'The show's bosses always strive to pair up pros and celebrities likely to have the most chemistry. In that respect, Giovanni and Katie are an obvious choice.

'But they have to consider if that could have the knock-on effect of making life so difficult outside of the rehearsal studio that it might impact on their performances.'

MailOnline has contacted a Strictly representative for further comment.

Contestant: Giovanni ­was previously romantically linked to the actress (pictured) and there are fears it could create tension with his Maura

Katie and Giovanni were linked back in 2017 when it was reported that they'd enjoyed a night out with pals and 'dinner and the cinema' date.

However the Coronation Street actress, who played Sinead Tinker on the ITV soap, later shut down speculation and denied they were dating.

Maura and Giovanni first went public with their relationship at Sapphires, Blackpool's Premier Drag Cabaret Show Bar at the beginning of July.

And he's already introduced her to the cast and crew of the Him And Me show he's starring in with new Strictly judge, Anton Du Beke.

Happy couple: Maura and Giovanni first went public with their relationship at Sapphires, Blackpool's Premier Drag Cabaret Show Bar at the beginning of July

A source told MailOnline: 'Gio and Maura are very much a couple. Everyone know he's played the field in the past but he is serious about Maura.

'He's smitten with her, they've become close really quickly and are spending a lot of time together in Blackpool.

'She's become pals with all of the cast and crew of Him and Me too and they think she's great. Maura has also met Anton and they got on brilliantly.'

Romance? The Italian hunk was linked to Katie when they were seen at an awards party five years ago however Katie denied the dating rumours

The dancer dated Corrie actress, Georgia May Foote, 30, when he partnered her on Strictly in 2015.

He also dated Pussycat Dolls singer Ashley Roberts when she was on Strictly in 2018.

The Strictly 2021 pairings won’t be unveiled until next month’s launch show. However the full celebrity line-up is now complete.

Ugo Monye, Tom Fletcher, AJ Odudu, Robert Webb, Judi Love, Adam Peaty, Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay, Greg Wise, Nina Wadia, Sara Davies, Rhys Stephenson, Rose Ayling-Ellis, John Whaite and Dan Walker will all be trying to win the Glitterball trophy.

Worth the wait: The pairings won’t be unveiled until next month’s launch show
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B.

'People say s*** about me that doesn’t even make sense,' the 33-year-old singer said in the candid social media clip, in which she used a tissue to wipe away her tears. 'It’s fatphobic, it’s racist and it’s hurtful - if you don’t like my music cool, if you don’t like Rumors the song, cool but a lot of people don’t like me because of the way I look.'

The Grammy Award-winning performer said she feels the loving energy she tries to put out isn't reciprocated.

The latest: Lizzo, 33, on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B

'I’m putting so much loving energy into the world ... and sometimes I feel like the world don't love me back,' said the recording artist, whose real name is Melissa Viviane Jefferson. 'It doesn’t matter how much positive energy you put into the world, you’re still going to have people that have something mean to say about you.'

The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling schedule of writing, performing and promoting, but the reaction to Rumors has been an exception.

'I’m more sensitive and it gets to me ... I feel so down, I'm hurt so hard,' the Detroit native said, adding that she's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure.'

In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers.

Emotional: The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling work schedule

Busy: The Detroit native said he's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure

Moving forward: The lauded artist was seen on the social media site with awards in the background

Cardi B took to her defense in a tweet, imparting her own wisdom on the topic of how to mentally deal with the haters.

'When you stand up for yourself they claim [you're] problematic & sensitive,' she said. 'When you don’t they tear you apart until you crying like this. Whether you skinny, big, plastic, they going to always try to put their insecurities on you. Remember these are nerds looking at the popular table.'

Cardi B also shared screen grabs documenting the early success of Rumors while adding that 'body shaming and callin her mammy is mean & racist as f***.

Double trouble: In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers

Cardi B took to Twitter to defend her musical peer against the torrent of hateful tweets

'Rumors is doing great,' she said. 'Stop trying to say the song is flopping to dismiss a woman emotions on bullying or acting like they need sympathy. The song is top 10 on all platforms.'

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release.

'Lizzo makes a song about people spending energy trying to bring women down,' Jamil said. 'Twitter erupts in abuse about her talent and mostly her appearance, and then she cries on IG live while addressing how damaging this culture is, and she gets made fun of for crying. This is so f****d up.

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release

Chloe credited Lizzo for inspiring her with her candor

She continued: 'This app has spawned, encouraged and celebrated the most depraved, dehumanized and depressing side of human beings. It’s not FUNNY that you’re hurting some innocent cheerful musician’s mental health. It’s not going to take back the pain of whatever your school bullies did to you.

'When you pile onto and Enjoy the pain of a Black woman who literally only tries to uplift other people, while NOT spending your time piling onto and going after actual abusers and predators… it doesn’t make you cool. It highlights what a useless, irrelevant, vicious pig you are.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Surfing royalty Alana Blanchard and fiancé Jack Freestone have welcomed their second child together - a son named Koda Riley.

Announcing the happy arrival on Saturday, Alana, 29, uploaded a gallery of intimate photos to Instagram, alongside a caption confirming she'd given birth at their home.

'Welcome to the world Koda Riley Freestone. Born at home yesterday weighing 10lb 6oz. I still can't believe I did that!' the American model wrote next to photos of herself and Australian athlete Jack, 27, cuddling newborn Koda in their living room.

Congratulations! Surfing royalty Alana Blanchard and fiancé Jack Freestone have welcomed their second child together - a son named Koda Riley

Revealing that Koda was born beyond his due date, Alana continued: 'Going to almost to 43 weeks was such a mental game for me but I knew Koda would choose his divine timing.'

'Women's bodies are so incredible don't let anyone tell you otherwise. Thank you everyone for messaging me and checking in,' the pro surfer concluded.

Jack also shared the same photos to his own Instagram page, while revealing more details about the birth in his caption.

'Welcome to the world, Koda Riley Freestone': Announcing the happy arrival on Saturday, American model Alana, uploaded a gallery of intimate photos to Instagram, alongside a caption confirming she'd given birth at their home

Fatherhood bliss! Alana uploaded this sweet photo of Jack beaming as he cuddled his newborn son for the fist time

'Nothing short of mind blowing': Jack also shared the same photos to his own Instagram page, while revealing more details about the birth in his caption

'Koda Riley Freestone. Beautiful baby boy. 08/12/2021. 10.6 pounds. Everyone is healthy and happy,' he wrote.

The athlete went on to praise his 'strong' fiancée for enduring such a painful ordeal.

'Watching @alanarblanchard go through such intense pain to create a way to get Koda out yesterday safe and sound was nothing short of mind blowing,' he gushed.

Baby joy! Alana and Jack, who share a three-year-old son named Banks (centre), announced they were expecting their second child in March

Making it official! 'We are so excited to share with you guys that I have a lil bun in the oven due in July,' she captioned an intimate video shared to her 1.8million followers on Instagram at the time

'I'm left speechless at her strength, love and determination. Once again proving that she and all moms are real life superheroes.'

Alana and Jack, who share a three-year-old son named Banks, announced they were expecting their second child in March.

'We are so excited to share with you guys that I have a lil bun in the oven due in July,' she captioned an intimate video shared to her 1.8million followers on Instagram at the time.

Plans: Alana also posted a longer video on YouTube revealing she was keeping the baby's sex a secret and was considering giving birth in Jack's native Australia

Alana also posted a longer video on YouTube revealing she was keeping the baby's sex a secret and was considering giving birth in Jack's native Australia.

In June, the pair announced their engagement after six years of dating.

'So this happened last night, I love you,' Alana captioned a picture of herself flaunting her diamond ring on Instagram at the time.

'Finally did it,' Jack meanwhile wrote on his Instagram page.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Data is expected to fuel the debate over whether Britain should jab youngsters

Doctors in the US said just one of the 15 myocarditis patients was a girl

Boys are much more likely than girls to suffer myocarditis after a Pfizer jab

Pfizer's Covid vaccine may pose more of a risk to boys, a study claimed today amid growing calls for No10 to rethink plans to dish out jabs to children.

New research has suggested boys are 14 times more likely to be struck down with a rare heart complication called myocarditis.

The data, from the US, will likely fuel an already fierce debate over Britain's decision to press ahead with inoculating all 16 and 17-year-olds.

Last week, the Government's advisory panel ruled older teenagers should be given their first dose. Ministers plan to invite them before they head back to schools and colleges in September.

But health officials have yet to make concrete plans for children to get top-ups. They want to wait for more safety data about myocarditis before pressing ahead.

Real-world data from the US, which has been vaccinating children for months, have shown teenage boys to be at a higher risk.

It prompted one member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which green-lighted the move to jab children, to admit different advice for boys was 'theoretically on the cards'.

There is already precedent for just giving vaccinating just one gender, with the HPV jab offered only to girls until 2018.

Doctors at Boston Children's Hospital said 14 of the 15 children admitted with myocarditis after getting a Pfizer jab were boys, suggesting the risk they face is much higher

WHAT IS MYOCARDITIS? Myocarditis is an inflammation of the heart muscle. There are no specific causes of the condition but it is usually triggered by a virus. Some of the most common infections which cause myocarditis, are those called adenovirus and Coxsackie B. It can be caused by the common cold, hepatitis B and C, and herpes simplex virus. The most common symptoms of the condition include chest pain, a fever, a fast heartbeat, tiredness and shortness of breath. If the inflammation damages the heart muscle or the fibres that conduct electrical pulses to the heart, complications can develop. They can develop quickly, and include sudden loss of consciousness, an abnormally fast, slow or irregular heartbeat. In very severe cases the condition is fatal, causing heart failure or sudden death. The inflammation enlarges the heart and creates scar tissue, forcing it to work harder and therefore making it weaker. In most cases of viral myocarditis, the illness goes away and there are no complications. But in rare cases when inflammation is severe, there can be damage to the heart which needs monitoring and possibly a heart transplant. Myocarditis can reoccur, but there is no known way to prevent this. The risk of recurrence is low, around 10 to 15 per cent, according to Myocarditis Foundation. It is difficult to gauge the prevalence of myocarditis because there is no widely available test for it. In 2010, approximately 400,000 people died of heart muscle disease - cardiomyopathy that includes myocarditis - worldwide. Expert consensus opinion estimates that up to 40 per cent of dilated cardiomyopathy results from myocarditis, according to the National Organisation for Rare Disorders. Advertisement

The new research, published in JAMA Cardiology, was based on an analysis of just 15 children struck down with myocarditis after getting Pfizer's vaccine — which will be given to British children. Only one was a girl.

The findings echo data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which suggests the risk is up to nine times higher among teenage boys.

All 15 experienced chest pain, which started a couple of days after being vaccinated and lasted for up to nine days.

None were struck down with a serious bout of myocarditis or required intensive care. All were discharged within five days.

But doctors at Boston Children's Hospital cautioned that the long-term risks of post-vaccination myocarditis 'remain unknown'.

Myocarditis — inflammation of the heart muscle — is usually triggered by a virus. In most cases, the illness goes away and there are no complications.

But in rare cases, there can be damage to the heart which can stop the organ from pumping properly. Some patients may need a heart transplant.

Within two weeks, most of the children studied no longer experienced inflammation symptoms.

Lead researcher Audrey Dionne said the reduced symptoms aligned with measurements that doctors took of patients' hearts.

Troponin, a protein used to detect heart injury, was higher in all of the children when they arrived at the hospital. But it approached normal levels by the time they were discharged.

Readings of patients' left ventricles also suggested the teenagers' hearts returned to normal after a few days of symptoms.

The doctors noted the pattern was distinct from other forms of heart inflammation caused by severe heart disease. In those cases, patients are more likely to require intensive care and have a higher risk of dying.

Overall, this study suggests that post-vaccine inflammation — while a severe side effect for teen boys — is a much lower risk than getting Covid.

But larger and longer term studies will be needed to inform policy on vaccinating younger groups.

The UK's decision last week to offer 16 and 17-year-olds the jab promoted backlash among top experts who claimed it was unethical.

Today, Professor Robert Dingwall, a professor of sociology at Nottingham Trent University and former Government adviser, told MailOnline: 'The myocarditis risk does seem to be higher in boys but these are very small numbers to shape a policy around.

'If anything, it supports the JCVI position of waiting to see what emerges from the US before making any wider recommendations for UK children.'

Professor Helen Bedford, an expert in children's health at University College London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, warned against jabbing children.

She told MailOnline: 'The real issue here is whether we should be vaccinating children at all.

'Children are at very small risk of Covid so the question is who would benefit if they are vaccinated?

'We already have very high vaccine uptake among adults, much higher than the US and Canada.

'Meanwhile, large parts of the world have no access to vaccine at all, even for health care workers, but are at much greater risk from disease.

'Without vaccination, the infection will continue to circulate with the real possibility of emergence of variants which may evade current vaccines and then impact even on highly vaccinated populations.

'This is a global issue and I think there is a strong case for the UK to set an example by giving vaccine to other countries before boosting adults or vaccinating children here.'

The patients arrived at the hospital with elevated troponin levels, an indicator of heart injury - but their hearts recovered significantly during short hospital stays

Dr Ruchi Sinha, consultant paediatric intensivist at Imperial College London, told the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Coronavirus today: 'We have seen a lot of obese children with Covid have ended up in intensive care, so I do think we should be offering [a vaccine to] those children who are vulnerable and likely to suffer.

'But vaccine escape is inevitable and I think that adds to the argument not to blanket vaccinate children aged 12 to 15.

'I don't think that is going to help you minimise that when the risk of transmission is there.

'With kids, they're not going to stop transmission, they're not going to stop escape variants nothing is so actually it's all about the risk to the child themselves.

'So yes we should offer it to vulnerable children but I don't think that currently, the way it stands, vaccine roll-out to all of them is the way forward.'

Professor Paul Hunter, an infectious disease expert at the University of East Anglia, told the APPG up to 90 per cent of 17-year-olds already have Covid antibodies.

It suggests they had previously been infected, or currently had the virus and were developing antibodies.

Regarding the roll-out to 17 year olds, Professor Hunter said: 'My concerns are why are we vaccinating an age group that has already been infected and recovered.

'Is it necessary? Do we know enough about potential side effects in teenagers that have already been infected?'

But other experts were in favour of giving the jab to teens, with scientists saying jabbing children is key to curbing the spread of the virus and minimise the numbers having to take days off school to self-isolate.

Others say it will be impossible to achieve any kind of population immunity without inoculating under-18s.

Professor Lawrence Young, an infectious diseases expert at Warwick Medical School, told MailOnline told the risk of getting myocarditis is 'much higher' from Covid itself compared to the risk from vaccination.

He said: 'Estimates vary, but a recent study from the US estimated that covid causes around 450 cases of myocarditis per million males aged between 12 to 17 and 213 cases per million in females aged 12 to 17.

'This compares with a risk following mRNA vaccination of 76.5 cases per million in males in data from the US and Israel.

'So the overall risk of myocarditis is decreased by being vaccinated.

'The bottom line is that myocarditis is a rare side effect, usually very mild and manageable, and certainly preferable to both the acute and long-term consequences Covid itself.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The ex-partner of a firefighter murdered by London Bridge terror attack hero Steven Gallant said she is struggling to process the news of his release from prison.

Vicky Foster, whose ex-partner Barrie Jackson was beaten to death by Gallant in a 2005 attack in Hull, has previously said his actions on London Bridge were 'not enough proof' of his reform.

It comes as Gallant was given early release from his 17-year murder sentence, after using a narwhal tusk in a bid to take down Fishmonger's Hall jihadist Usman Khan during his deadly 2019 terror attack.

Speaking from her home in Hull, Mrs Foster, who had two children with Mr Jackson, said: "I need a bit more time to think about what has happened here, it is a very strange thing for me and the children to have to process.

'Every time this is in the news it brings it all back for me and the kids and that's obviously difficult.

'It's not something I want to talk about, at the moment I'm trying to let it sink in."

Vicky Foster whose firefighter ex-partner was murdered by London Bridge terror attack hero Steven Gallant (left) said she is struggling to process the news of his release from prison

Pictured: Fishmongers Hall attacker Usman Khan being detained by Steve Gallant and others

Firefighter Barrie Jackson had been enjoying a night of drinking in The Dolphin, in Greenwich Avenue, Hull, on the night of Sunday, April 24, 2005.

But just at 10.30pm, before he could finish his drinks and make his way home, he had been attacked and beaten so severely paramedics who tried to revive him could not find his mouth.

Pictured: Vicky Foster has said she is struggling to process the early release of her ex-partner's killer

Mr Jackson had been sprayed with CS gas and beaten to the ground with a hammer by two men, including Gallant. The pair lay in wait for Mr Jackson outside the Dolphin pub after believing he had attacked Gallant's girlfriend.

After a city-wide police hunt, Jackson's murderers were finally found.

The attack was deemed to have been pre-meditated and co-ordinated, as the men had laid in wait for Jackson, and continued to attack him despite him trying to run away.

A post-mortem revealed every bone in his face had been broken.

Steve Gallant and Daniel Gilligan, both of east Hull, were eventually convicted of murder, and ordered to spend at least 17 years behind bars.

Barrie Jackson was sprayed with CS gas and beaten to the ground with a hammer by two men - including Gallant. He was so badly beaten paramedics struggled to find his mouth

But 15 years after entering prison aged 28, Gallant would find himself back out on the streets, saving the lives of innocent citizens.

Writing in The Hull Story last year, Vicky revealed she had not a clue that the man who confronted Khan with a narwhal tusk was the same one who had killed her partner.

At the time, she said: 'I was drawn in by images of a man on London Bridge tackling an armed terrorist with a narwhal tusk.

'A light in the middle of a tragic event. A video to share on social media, show to your friends and then forget about.

'It appeared to be a clear-cut case of good triumphing over evil; a physical, decisive, spur-of-the-moment act that saved lives.

'But then in January this year word came to me that the hero I'd admired was actually one of the men who murdered the father of my children. I tried to brush it off at first; get on with other things.

Khan is confronted by armed police on London Bridge following attack at Fishmongers' Hall

'The past is the past and there's nothing I can do about it. But it wasn't that simple.

'You see, when extreme violence enters your life, everything you think you know is shattered. Everything becomes harder.'

Ms Foster said that her family had been hugely impacted by the coverage of Steven Gallant in the news.

She said: 'Despite letters from my MP Dame Diana Johnson, explaining this to members of the government - including Boris Johnson - we have had no contact or consideration in their processes whatsoever.

'Gallant no doubt helped save lives on London Bridge last year, but he has also caused lifelong damage to myself and my family.'

Vicky said: 'I find it difficult to understand how one violent man can be held up as an example of what rehabilitation can do, while it's suggested that another deserved to meet with the brutal murder that man committed.

Pictured: terrorist Usman Khan who was killed by police on London Bridge

'Logic alone means those two things cannot both be true. It just makes more distress and trauma that we've had to work through.

'Myself and my boys definitely did not and do not deserve that, or the added trauma that this year of news has caused us.'

Gallant was one of three men who restrained terrorist Khan until armed police arrived at the scene and shot the 28-year-old jihadist dead in November 2019.

Khan, who had two large knives and a fake suicide belt, fatally stabbed Cambridge graduates Jack Merritt, 25, and Saskia Jones, 23, and injured three other people during his frenzied attack at a prisoner rehabilitation event, before running out onto London Bridge.

Giving evidence at the inquest in April this year into the victims' deaths, Mr Gallant said he 'whacked' Khan with a narwhal tusk but was empty-handed by the time of the battle on the bridge.

A spokesperson for the Parole Board said: 'We can confirm that a panel of the Parole Board has directed the release of Steven Gallant following an oral hearing.

'Parole Board decisions are solely focused on what risk a prisoner could represent to the public if released and whether that risk is manageable in the community.

'A panel will carefully examine a huge range of evidence, including details of the original crime, and any evidence of behaviour change, as well as explore the harm done and impact the crime has had on the victims.'

The decision on release is provisional for 21 days subject to any appeal by the Justice Secretary.

Mr Gallant had been on day release at the event for reformed prisoners in Fishmongers' Hall when he helped end Khan's rampage. His actions on the day later saw his sentence cut following an intervention by the Queen.

Narwhal tusk, which was used by members of the public as they tackled terrorist Usman Khan

The Ministry of Justice revealed in October that the monarch had employed the little-used 'Royal Prerogative of Mercy' to bring Mr Gallant's case before the Parole Board 10 months early.

It was considered at a remote oral hearing on June 21, during which Mr Gallant gave evidence.

In a summary of the Parole Board's decision, it said the panel had recognised his conduct during the Fishmongers' Hall incident but 'was clear that it was not a reason to direct his release'.

The board said professional witnesses had recommended Mr Gallant be released on licence, telling the panel he had 'worked hard to understand and address his risk factors and to bring about a change to his life'.

Of its decision, the board said: 'After considering the circumstances of his index offending, his pattern of previous offending, the progress made while in custody, the details of the release plan and all the evidence presented at the hearing, the panel was satisfied that Mr Gallant was suitable for release.'

Conditions of his release on licence would include a curfew, staying at a designated address and to comply with an exclusion zone to avoid contact with his victim's family.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than 30 firefighters are tackling a blaze at one of the nation's most powerful TV transmitters as thousands of viewers complain of a loss of signal across parts of the country.

North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service said six appliances have been sent to tackle the blaze at the 1000ft-tall Bilsdale transmitting centre, high on the North York Moors, north of Helmsley.

Firefighters said the blaze included the tower mast itself, which is 315 metres (1,032 ft) tall.

Eyewitnesses in the area described a scene of chaos, with plumes of black smoke billowing from atop the hills and spreading throughout the Yorkshire valleys.

North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service said six appliances have been sent to tackle the blaze at the Bilsdale transmitting centre, high on the North York Moors, north of Helmsley

Hikers Ron Needham, 71, and wife Sue, 69, were walking through the North Yorkshire Moors when they spotted dark smoke pouring out from the top of Bilsdale's mast.

Ron told GazetteLive: 'As we stood there looking, a huge cloud of black smoke was rising from the buildings at the bottom of the mast, and it continued for quite some time.

'We hike quite a bit on the North Yorkshire Moors as we have a caravan at Helmsley, and we do that route fairly regularly, but I've never seen anything like that.'

Eyewitnesses in the area described a scene of chaos, with plumes of black smoke billowing from atop the hills and spreading throughout the Yorkshire valleys

NYFRS said in a statement: 'North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service are currently in attendance tackling a fire at Bilsdale transmitting centre, which includes Bilsdale mast.

'We currently have six fire appliances and our mobile water bowser as well as command and control assets in attendance.

'Crews are working hard to control the fire in difficult circumstances - it is unclear at this time if any of the centre's transmitting capability has been affected or the cause of the fire which will be investigated in due course.

The transmitter (pictured above) was built in 1969 and supplies digital TV to huge swathes of the north east of England

'NYFRS ask that members of the public do not go near to the site, particularly as this area has limited access and we need to be able to move vehicles and people around to help fight the fire.'

The tower was built in 1969 and currently supplies digital TV signals to a large area of north-east England.

It is one of the nation's most powerful television transmitters.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Chilling TikTok videos of an 'evil' killer mother who danced with her three-year-old daughter just weeks before 'ferociously' beating her to death have been uncovered.

Nicola Priest, 23, was jailed for 15 years for manslaughter last week after little Kaylee-Jayde was tragically found dead with chest and abdominal injuries at the flat where they lived in Birmingham on August 9 last year. Experts likened Kaylee-Jayde's wounds to those of a child hit by a car at 40mph, or from falling three floors on to a concrete floor.

Her boyfriend Callum Redfern, 22, was also jailed for 14 years for manslaughter and was handed a concurrent sentence of three years for a child cruelty charge after Birmingham Crown Court heard the couple killed Kaylee-Jayde after she interrupted them while they had sex.

In the months before the child's death, she was used as a prop in multiple disturbing videos alongside her mother - with one clip showing Priest holding up both of her daughter's arms and moving her around the room like a puppet, forcing her to dance to music.

Kaylee-Jayde's body rocks back and forth at Priest's command as she squeezed out a smile for the camera.

In a second TikTok video posted a month before Kaylee-Jayde's death, Priest grabs her daughter's head and bops it left and right before the child tries to copy her mother and follow her lead. The video then shows Kaylee-Jayde nodding her head by Priest's direction while her mother dances in the background while wearing a pair of shorts.

In a third video posted in January 2020, a pregnant Priest can be seen lifting up her daughter, who smiles back at her, as she is shaken back and forth.

Just one day before Kaylee-Jayde was beaten to death at home, Priest flaunted her body while dancing in shorts and a crop top on the app. And in another TikTok video posted a month after Kaylee-Jayde was killed, Priest hangs her head and appears to wipe tears from her eyes.

She then mouths the words to the song playing in the background: 'I'm sorry mum and dad. I know I messed up bad. I should've done, should've done better.'

One clip showing Nicola Priest holding up both of her daughter's arms and moving her around the room like a puppet, forcing her to dance to music

In a second TikTok video posted a month before Kaylee-Jayde's death, Priest grabs her daughter's head and bops it left and right before the child tries to copy her mother and follow her lead. The video then shows Kaylee-Jayde nodding her head by Priest's direction while her mother dances in the background while wearing a pair of shorts

In a third video posted in January 2020, a pregnant Priest can be seen lifting up her daughter, who smiles back at her, as she is shaken back and forth

Three-year-old Kaylee-Jayde Priest was found dead on August 9, 2020 at the flat where she lived with her mother in Birmingham after a court heard her mother and boyfriend thought she got in the way of them having sex

Pictured: Priest (left) and lover Callum Redfern (right) were both were unanimously cleared of murder but convicted of the child's manslaughter on Thursday. Priest was sentenced to 15 years and Redfern has been jailed for 14 years

Priest and Redfern were convicted of manslaughter after a jury heard Priest rang 999 only after the youngster was dead. The mother was sentenced to 15 years for manslaughter and a three year concurrent sentence for child cruelty.

Sentencing Priest and Redfern last week, Mr Justice Foxton QC said: 'On the evening of August 8 you Redfern went to Priest's flat. The two of you went to have sex. Kaylee wanted to stay up and play. There is no direct evidence of what happened next.

'Kaylee was sick more than once during the night as a result of the severe beating. You lost your tempers and it is clear you were joint participants in that assault. You both knew you had seriously injured Kaylee.

'You, Priest did nothing to seek medical help. A prompt call could have saved Kaylee's life. You both lied repeatedly during interviews.

'From the severity of the injuries caused by the assault it is clear there was an intention to cause serious harm. The injuries were caused by a ferocious assault.

'You and Redfern were equally responsible. You had ample opportunity to raise any concerns. Kaylee was very vulnerable and you were in a position of trust. You did nothing to summon help.'

After the sentencing, Redfern's father Andrew branded Priest an 'evil mother' and said 'she doesn't deserve kids'. He said his son was misled by Priest and 'got caught up in it', describing him as a 'kid' incapable of manipulating his ex-girlfriend.

He also claimed Priest would refuse to change Kaylee's nappy, telling her daughter 'you can just stay in it' while smoking outside the house.

The final moments leading up to the death of Kaylee-Jayde Priest were revealed in chilling CCTV footage.

In the footage played to court, Kaylee-Jayde and her mother were seen together just hours before the youngster's fatal collapse, using a lift at the block of flats where they lived in Kingshurst House, Solihull.

The footage showed Priest's total disinterest in her daughter; repeatedly checking her reflection in the mirror and scrolling through her phone, while the youngster periodically gazed up at her mother's face.

In one sick video, Priest hangs her head in shame and seems to wipe tears from her eyes as a song plays in the background. She then mouths the words to the song: 'I'm sorry mum and dad. I know I messed up bad. I should've done, should've done better'

Priest and Redfern denied murdering the little girl but were both convicted of manslaughter

Pictured: A screen grab from CCTV footage issued by West Midlands Police of Kaylee-Jade and her mother by the lift in their apartment building, hours before the young girl was killed on August 9 last year

At no point in the footage was there any physical contact between the pair, with Priest neglecting even to reach out to hold her daughter's hand.

Hours later, the youngster described in court as a 'happy child', died from serious chest and abdominal injuries.

Medical examinations later showed she had also suffered historical injuries including broken ribs, lower leg fractures and a broken sternum, Birmingham Crown Court heard.

Priest and her 22-year-old lover Callum Redfern pointed the finger of blame at each other during their trial, but were at the time in a 'close sexual relationship'.

Both were unanimously cleared of murder but convicted of the child's manslaughter on Thursday.

Jurors had heard how Priest would hit Kaylee around the head and refer to her as a 'f****** brat', while the youngster was also heard crying 'in a fearful tone'.

On one occasion, neighbours in a flat below at Kingshurst House, Solihull, recalled hearing a bang above and then Kaylee crying, before allegedly hearing Priest say: 'I'll just say she fell off the bed.'

The same residents claimed they noticed that 'when Kaylee cried, the response appeared to be to drown out her crying with music'.

In a text message exchange on July 24 2020, days before Kaylee's death, Priest told Redfern: 'I'm gonna kill her... because she keeps leaving the living room or going in the kitchen, so I've paled (hit) her one and smacked her for s**tting in her nappy.'

Redfern said: 'Good - give her one from me.'

Priest replied: 'I will, babe.'

Three days later, Redfern messaged Priest saying: 'I'm going to keep the little brat away from me... sick of your spunking daughter.'

Pictured: A screen grab from CCTV footage of Kaylee-Jade (left) and her mother (right) outside their Kingshurst House, Solihull apartment building, hours before the young girl was killed on August 9 last year

The CCTV footage (pictured) showed Priest's (left) total disinterest in her daughter; repeatedly checking her reflection in the mirror and scrolling through her phone, while the youngster (right) periodically gazed up at her mother's face

Prosecutors said the messages painted a vivid picture of the 'uncaring attitude from Priest and Redfern towards Kaylee'.

Andrew Redfern told the Sun: 'Nikki is an evil mother - she doesn't deserve kids.

'She was stood outside this house smoking and Kaylee's nappy needed changing. She said 'you can just stay in it' - that was her attitude. She wouldn't come in the house to take her to the toilet.'

Of his son, Andrew said he 'got caught up in it' and that 'he was only there so he could have sex at the end of the day'.

'He's too much like a kid himself to be manipulating her', he added.

Opening the case at the start of the trial, prosecution barrister Andrew Smith QC said: 'The prosecution case is that her death was caused by her having received serious injuries to her chest and abdomen in a sustained assault on August 8 of last year.

'That intentional assault occurred when both of the defendants were alone with Kaylee-Jayde.'

Floral tributes to the young girl were left outside the flat after families learned of her death last year

From the time Priest moved in to the flat in mid-2019, neighbours heard her 'shouting with real regularity' at Kaylee, including comments like 'Shut up', 'Go away' or 'Leave me alone' - and 'never anything positive or kind'.

Priest was also found guilty of cruelty to a child, relating to the youngster's historical injuries, but Redfern was cleared of that charge.

In a statement released through police after the verdicts, Kaylee's grandmother Debbie Windmill said the impact of her death would live with her for the rest of her life.

She said: 'I could never stop staring at the smile on her beautiful face. I loved every moment watching her develop to nearly school age; preparing to buy my first grandchild her pre-school uniform was something that filled me with such happiness.

'I couldn't wait to see her in it, but this opportunity was stolen from me in the most brutal of ways.

'Everybody deserves the gift of life. Kaylee-Jayde deserved to show the world who she could have been and what greatness she could have brought to this world. Nanny will forever hold you in her heart.'

Speaking afterwards, Detective Inspector Adam Jobson, said: 'This is a really horrific set of circumstances and I cannot imagine for one second what Kaylee-Jayde's family must be going through, they've lost their three-year-old family member at the hands of her own mother and Nicky Priest's boyfriend, Callum.

'It is a grim picture.

'I don't think, sadly, we will ever fully know what has happened, we'll never get that full picture, both have not admitted their own responsibility.

'One thing is clear, Nicky Priest has failed her daughter, she's failed to protect her and she should be - being a mother to that little girl - the one person who should have been able to protect her.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They delighted Friends fans all over the world in May when they revealed they had been 'crushing hard' on one another during filming on the hit show's early seasons.

And although Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer had sparked speculation they are becoming each other's 'lobsters' in real life, it now seems they really are on a break and not seeing if there's any romance, years after 'crushing' on the hit show.

It had been reported the duo were 'growing close' after the recent Friends special 'stirred up feelings', 17 years after Ross Geller and Rachel Green's romantic reunion.

However on Wednesday, a representative for David, 54, told HuffPost UK that reports of a romance with his former co-star, 52, are not true.

On a break! David Schwimmer has denied speculation he and Jennifer Aniston are becoming each other's 'lobsters' in real life, amid reports they are 'growing close' again, 17 years after Ross Geller and Rachel Green's romantic reunion (pictured in May at the Friends reunion)

It was reported by a Closer Magazine that David and Jennifer were 'spending time together once again' after the reunion special 'stirred up feelings'.

A source said: 'After the reunion, it became clear that reminiscing over the past had stirred up feelings for both of them and that chemistry they'd always had to bury was still there.

'They began texting immediately after filming and, just last month, David flew from his home in New York to see Jen in LA.'

It was claimed the pair have been spending time at Jennifer's home, where she has treated David to dinners, with the source adding: 'They were also spotted drinking wine, deep in conversation, as they walked around one of Jen’s favourite vineyards in Santa Barbara, where it was clear there was lots of chemistry between them.'

However this has now been denied by David's representative. MailOnline has also contacted representatives for Aniston and Schwimmer for comment.

It's always been you, Rach: Jennifer, 52, and David, 54, were said to be 'spending time together once again' after the reunion special 'stirred up feelings', according to Closer Magazine (pictured on the show in 1995)

Amid the reports of the duo potentially becoming an item, thousands of Friends fans shared their excitement over the idea and urged them to get together.

Writing on Twitter, one fan penned: 'I really hope the rumour about Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer dating is true!!'

While another added: 'If Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer are actually together my whole life will be complete.'

This comes after Jennifer and David confessed that they had crushes on each other when filming began on Friends in 1994 - with the revelation coming during the HBO Max reunion special

'I mean, the first season, I had a major crush on Jen. At some point, we were crushing hard on each other,' David revealed.

I didn't get a cat! A source said: 'They began texting immediately after filming and, just last month, David flew from his home in New York to see Jen in LA' (pictured 1995)

David explained: 'But it was like two ships passing, because one of us was always in a relationship and we never crossed that boundary.

Matt LeBlanc, who played Joey Tribbiani, jokingly said: 'Bulls**t.'

Jennifer said that she had a conversation with Ross prior to their character's first kiss.

'Honestly, I remember saying one time to David, 'It's going to be such a bummer if the first time you and I actually kiss is going to be on national television,' Jennifer said. '

Jennifer noted: 'Sure enough, first time we kissed was in that coffee shop. So we just channeled all of our adoration and love for each other into Ross and Rachel.'

David and Jennifer also spent time together during breaks from rehearsal, with David recalling that they would 'cuddle on the couch.'

'We would spoon and fall asleep on the couch,' Jennifer said.

Reaction: Thousands of devoted Friends fans shared their excitement over the potential real life romance, with some gushing their 'lives would be made' if the rumours were true

Candid: This comes after Jennifer and David confessed that they had crushes on each other when filming began on Friends in 1994 - with the revelation coming during the HBO Max reunion special

During the reunion special, footage of their characters snuggling aired, with David adding: 'How did not everyone know we were crushing on each other?'

However, Courteney Cox, Matthew Perry both said they 'knew' about David and Jennifer's attraction to each other.

In the end, David said it 'was a situation we couldn't do anything about,' with Courteney adding that it was for the best: 'How great though, ultimately. Because if you had [acted on it] and it didn't work out, it would have not been as great [on the show].'

The Friends cast had an 'unspoken rule' not to date one another.

Although Jennifer, David, Matt, Matthew and Courteney all saw their sitcom alter egos hook up with one another at various times on the show, the group - along with castmate Lisa Kudrow - insisted their chemistry never spilled over into real life because they were determined not to 'mess with' the bond they had on screen.

Matthew said: 'There was a rule, it was really important to the six of us, that we kept a friendship. Hooking up could have caused a strangeness that might mess with things. And we are really good friends to this day.'

When were you under me? David explained: 'But it was like two ships passing, because one of us was always in a relationship and we never crossed that boundary' (pictured 1996)

David added: 'We didn't want to jeopardize any of the great relationships and friendships we had established. It was kind of an unspoken rule.'

Ross and Rachel's on-off romance kept viewers hooked for ten seasons, culminating in their iconic reunion in the 'I got off the plane' finale scene.

The first season of the show saw Ross harbour unrequited feelings for his school crush Rachel, who was blissfully unaware until the season one finale when Chandler let slip while Ross was in China.

She rushed to meet him at the airport to tell him her feelings but he had found a new girlfriend - Julie - in the space of a week.

Rachel then got drunk and admitted she was 'over' Ross in a voicemail, which he heard the next morning.

Friends reunited: The cast was seen together at the Friends reunion in May: Matthew Perry, Matt LeBlanc, Jennifer, Courteney Cox, Jennifer Aniston and David

The pair then shared the most legendary TV kiss of all time in the coffee shop, cementing their place in TV history.

After some false starts, the pair dated before famously 'going on a break' - with Ross sleeping with 'the girl from the copy place' in the interim.

Following the briefest of reunions, their relationship ended once again in season four with Ross then proposing to Brit Emily Waltham within weeks - before Rachel realised she was still in love with him.

Their fairytale wedding in London was gatecrashed by Rachel, who decided not to tell Ross she loved him after all, but the hapless paleontologist was the master of his own destruction when he said during the vows 'I Ross, take thee Rachel.'

On-screen soulmates: Ross and Rachel's on-off romance kept viewers hooked for ten seasons, culminating in their iconic reunion in the 'I got off the plane' finale scene (pictured 1996)

What is it with those names? Following the briefest of reunions, their relationship ended once again in season four with Ross then proposing to Brit Emily Waltham within weeks - with Ross memorably saying 'I Ross, take thee Rachel' during the vows

Family: The pair had a one-night stand in season seven, with Rachel giving birth to Emma in season eight

Although the pair remained friends and frequently showed their love for one another - as well as drunkenly marrying in Vegas and welcoming daughter Emma after a one-night stand in season eight - their reunion didn't come until the show's finale.

Following a one-night stand before Rachel's move to Paris - Ross rushed to the airport to declare his love for her, but returned home alone after Rachel rebuffed him.

However, Rachel then realised she still loved Ross too, rushing back to his apartment and giving fans the ultimate Roschel reunion.

She got off the plane! Roschel was finally reborn in the show's finale episode in season 10

They were on a break: The former sitcom stars recently chose some of their favorite moments from the early seasons of Friends - with Ross donning a sweater emblazoned with the pair's first kiss

In June Howard Stern asked the actress during his SiriusXM show if she and David ever 'banged.'

The Morning Show star, who had Friends vets Courteney Cox and Lisa Kudrow by her side while chatting with Stern, shared that they never did. 'I would proudly say I banged Schwimmer if that happened but no,' said the beauty.

'We were in relationships and it was always never the right time and it wouldn't have worked,' shared the blonde.

Iconic: The Friends cast had an 'unspoken rule' not to date one another

'The beauty of that was that whatever feelings we had we just literally channeled everything into Ross and Rachel and I think that's maybe why it resonated the way it did,' added the We're The Millers star.

'But no, we never, on my life [got together]. And Courteney and Lisa would know if it did because they would've heard about it. They can vouch for me,' she said as Cox, 57, added it was 'true.'

'Howard's not going to believe me,' Aniston then replied. 'No, I would proudly say I banged Schwimmer if that happened. But no.'

Jennifer also said of David: 'He was lovely, David was great.'

Her take: Aniston added, 'Honestly, I remember saying one time to David, "It's going to be such a bummer if the first time you and I actually kiss is going to be on national television." Sure enough, first time we kissed was in that coffee shop'

His ex: Schwimmer was married to Zoe Buckman from 2010 until they split in 2017; the share daughter Chloe. Seen in 2016

Jennifer and David's strong bond was evidenced once again just last week when they modelled a new merch collection for charity.

The former sitcom stars chose some of their favorite moments from the early seasons of Friends for the range - with Ross and Rachel's first kiss and the moment Ross finds out about Rachel's crush on him picked by the stars for the attire.

Jennifer also spoke recently about how David had jetted to LA and how she was able to meet his daughter Cleo, 10, for the first time, who he shares with ex-wife Zoe Buckman.

Jennifer was previously married to Brad Pitt from 2000-2005 and Justin Theroux from 2015-2017.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Three sisters who claim they stabbed their father to death in self-defence because he was sexually abusing them are unlikely to be jailed after new evidence shows they suffered deep trauma as a result of his relentless cruelty.

A fresh psychiatric evaluation improves the chances that none of the siblings will be jailed for stabbing patriarch Mikhail Khachaturyan, 57, with his own hunting knife as he slept in his Moscow flat in 2018.

Krestina and Angelina Khachaturyan, then 19 and 18, along with younger sister Maria, 17, admitted killing the 'tyrant' after facing 'years of abuse'.

They said they were raped and violated by their father in regular incestuous attacks, yet despite this, murder charges remain against the elder two siblings, while the third could also face punishment for his death.

However, the new evaluation demanded by the court will become key evidence at their upcoming trial, and found that their father had 'special sexual preferences' and abused them as a paedophile.

A fresh psychiatric evaluation improves the chances that none of the siblings will be jailed for stabbing patriarch Mikhail Khachaturyan, 57, with his own hunting knife as he slept in his Moscow flat in 2018. Pictured: Mikhail with Angelina

Krestina (left) and Angelina Khachaturyan (right), then 19 and 18, along with younger sister Maria, 17, admitted killing the 'tyrant' after facing 'years of abuse'

Maria is being dealt with separately by the legal system and, if convicted, faces time in a psychiatric hospital rather than jail after being judged temporarily insane at the moment her father was killed

Khachaturyan tortured the sisters and held them under his sway, say psychiatric experts at Russia's respected Serbsky Centre.

Lawyer Maria Davtyan said: 'The experts found that since 2014 each of the girls has suffered from abuse syndrome and post-traumatic stress disorder.

'All of these conditions in his daughters have a direct causal relationship from Khachaturian's actions.'

The sisters suffered from 'a violation of the ability to overcome (his) coercion' and 'they could not resist him'.

Then they killed him as he slept they were in an 'unstable' psychological state and felt 'hopeless', fearing for their lives. The sisters were all victims, she said.

Khachaturyan tortured the sisters and held them under his sway, say psychiatric experts at Russia's respected Serbsky Centre. Pictured: Mikhail with Maria (left) and Angelina (right)

Other family members have accused the sisters of lying about their father's sexual abuse, and killing him for his money.

Another lawyer Alexei Liptser representing the sisters said: 'Khachaturyan's relatives claim that the sisters invented everything because they suffer from a sexual disorder.

'But according to the experts, no such disorder was found in them.'

Maria is being dealt with separately by the legal system and, if convicted, faces time in a psychiatric hospital rather than jail after being judged temporarily insane at the moment her father was killed.

Now the elder sisters are more likely to be seen by the court as acting in self defence in Russian law.

The case has been seen as a litmus test in Russia for how the law deals with domestic sexual abuse with almost one million signing petitions calling for the sisters to go free.

In March, it was revealed that a new posthumous trial, in which the powerful Russian Investigative Committee has recognised the sisters as 'victims', will take place into the abuse allegations against Khachaturyan.

Angelina Khachaturyan's lawyer Maria Davtyan welcomed the move.

She said at the time: 'They are in fact victims because of the actions committed against them'.

The long running abuse they faced, Davtyan added, was 'the reason the girls were forced to do what they did'.

The case has been seen as a litmus test in Russia for how the law deals with domestic sexual abuse with almost one million signing petitions calling for the sisters to go free. Pictured: Mikhail Khachaturyan with his eldest daughter Krestina

The investigation earlier found they faced 'physical and mental suffering...over a long period of time'.

Evidence showed the father threatened one of his 'terrified' daughters: 'You will take the place of your mother.

'I will marry you and you will give birth to my baby.'

An experts' report said: 'He ordered them to get undressed in front of him, saying that he wanted to 'check' them.

'Then ordered them to masturbate him, saying that he had problems with his prostate and it would be a cure.'

He 'abused and humiliated' them 'with various weapons'.

Angelina had blood streaming from her face after one attack by her father who had links both to senior Russian officials and underworld kings, say reports.

But the sisters' aunt Naira Khachaturyan claimed the earlier official investigation found no evidence of sexual violence against the teenagers.

Medical tests showed two of the three were virgins, she claimed, while the third had a secret boyfriend.

'They knew they could live the way they wanted if they got rid of their father,' she told a TV programme.

They wanted to 'delete him from their lives' and enjoy a 'riotous lifestyle'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Devon residents have been left outraged after planning permission was granted for five holiday homes on Agatha Christie's favourite beach.

Developers have been given the green light to build a modern block of huts at Beacon Cove - dubbed 'Agatha Christie Mile'.

Hertfordshire-based Hemel Hempstead Property Company has been given the go-ahead for them on land half way up the cliff.

The firm said they would be used as holiday homes and any single user would only be able to stay for a maximum of 12 weeks a year - but they would be available all year round.

Aged 13, Christie almost drowned at the Torquay beauty spot while trying to help a nephew and had to be rescued by a passing sailor.

The pebble beach was a favourite of the best-selling author - who wrote Miss Marple and Poirot - and in Christie's day it was the Ladies Bathing Cove.

It remained popular until an ugly walled walkway was built in the 1980s when the area slipped into misuse and became an out-of-hours party area.

In the last few years campaigners have reclaimed the beach, with locals Graham Stephenson and Jim Cairns raising money to gate it off at night.

Locals at Beacon Cove in Brighton are angry at a proposed development at Agatha Christie's favourite Devon beach

Campaigners are opposed to the proposed luxury development are concerned about the level of anti-social behaviour in the area

‹ Slide me › Hertfordshire-based Hemel Hempstead Property Company have been given the go-ahead for them on land half way up the cliff

Developers have been given the green light to build a modern block of huts at Beacon Cove - dubbed 'Agatha Christie Mile' - in Devon

The firm said it would be used as holiday homes and any single user would only be able to stay for a maximum of 12 weeks a year. They would be available year-round. A sketch shows how the cove would like after the plans are undertaken

Locals were livid with the new plans, with some taking to the comments section of the application to vent their fury. All 15 who commented objected to the move (pictured, the plans)

Aged 13, Christie (pictured in later life) almost drowned at the Torquay beauty spot while trying to help a nephew and had to be rescued by a passing sailor

Residents were livid with the new plans, with some taking to the comments section of the application to vent their fury. All 15 who commented objected to the move.

One wrote: 'I am concerned that this development will result in an increase in people using Imperial Court environs, particularly the car park which is already short of space, especially for visitors.

'There may be accidents as there is little space for turning vehicles added to the people on foot walking from the Imperial Hotel to the town.'

They added: 'The access to the beach huts needs to be more carefully thought through. I am also concerned about increased noise from the people using the beach huts and the access.'

Another put: 'The proposal may result in increased footfall into Imperial Court, there is already congestion in the car park which lacks visitor spaces, and there is the propensity for accidents. Health and safety is a very real risk.

'Furthermore there is a risk of illegal parking by the barrier to Imperial Court which would impede emergency services such as fire and ambulance.'

Beacon Cove is pictured from above, showing the beach made famous by Christie as well as the site where the chalets would go

This plan show show the chalet would be set out, with a bathroom on the ground floor and a mezzanine sleeping platform above

A map shows a site plan for the five holiday homes as well as paths down to the beach and where the nearby car park is located

A wider map shows the area surrounding Beacon Cove in Deven, with the proposed holiday homes highlighted in red above

The news also sparked a furious backlash online. One person said: 'Firstly, are you telling me there are not enough places for people to stay in the area?' Pictured: Plans for the chalets

The news also sparked a furious backlash online. One person said: 'Firstly, are you telling me there are not enough places for people to stay in the area?

'Or is this for a few wealthy folk to buy up a prime seaside location? Either way it stinks. If you see the chaos boats and jet skis have caused in Babbacombe Bay over the years, this cove will go the same.

'Is it really worth it for five new builds? I think not. Leave the cove alone...' Another person said: 'I find it beyond belief that this application has been re-submitted.

'The area is a major conservation hotspot. The Seagrass is protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act and the Seahorses are a protected species.

'Isn't it time that humans put the environment ahead of temporary profit? We only have one planet folks, what are you leaving for your children to inherit?'

A third said: 'I strongly object. [It] will impact on local environment and sea with rubbish and strongly object to overnight accommodation, as soon there will be the Hilton and Premier Inn locally opening, it's a very small cove.

'If the old Living Coast land developed, the cove will naturally be used more. Does the Council guarantee 24 hour open access or will it become a privileged few?'

A fourth added: 'Nothing more than greed and back handlers. Locals should be listened to and areas of beauty protected and not ruined with more concrete monstrosities!'

'I'd like to know how much they will be banging them out for!' a fifth said. Someone's getting a backhander!'

A fifth said: 'Why oh why are you contemplating yet another disruption to a little cove and the disastrous building processes it will involve?

'Do not allow this building and destruction of this peaceful area. There is enough building being squeezed in all over the place - for a few to make loads of money. Protect the cove from exploitation for goodness sake.'

Mr Stephenson, the man behind the campaign to reclaim the beach, has written an angry letter to the leaders of Torbay Council in disagreement to the proposal (pictured)

Plans submitted to the council show how the beach huts would stand above the cove, with outdoor seating and sleeping platforms overlooking the sea

Describing Agatha Christie's childhood memories of Beacon Cove, an official website dedicated to her memory reads: 'Agatha enjoyed sea bathing, and regularly swam at Beacon Cove, Meadfoot Beach and Elberry Cove

Founder of the Seahorse Trust Neil Garrick-Maidment said: 'As a native of Torbay from a long standing Torbay family I find it frustrating the site is restricted and the thought of further restrictions would be unacceptable.

'I note the builders of the proposed development are not from the area and so they cannot be aware of the sensitivities of this site and its history.'

He added: 'With this lack of knowledge they would not be aware of its conservation, geological and indeed social history.'

Mr Stephenson, the man behind the campaign to reclaim the beach, has written an angry letter to the leaders of Torbay Council in disagreement to the proposal.

He expressed his anger at how their 'hard work' with the council in bringing the cove 'back to life' was in danger of being wasted.

Describing Agatha Christie's childhood memories of Beacon Cove, an official website dedicated to her memory reads: 'Agatha enjoyed sea bathing, and regularly swam at Beacon Cove, Meadfoot Beach and Elberry Cove.

'She recalls in her autobiography an afternoon at Beacon Cove when she was swimming out to the raft with her nephew Jack on her shoulders.

'She found herself struggling in the swell and they both had to be rescued by the 'crotchety' old man who managed the changing huts.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The current crop of COVID-19 vaccines may not be as effective against the Indian 'Delta' variant compared to the original strain of the virus, a new study suggests.

Researchers from the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, found that the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine - the most commonly used shot in the U.S. - was only 42 percent effective against infection in July.

Meanwhile, the Moderna vaccine was only 76 percent effective.

The highly contagious Delta variant is the dominant strain in the U.S., and there are fears that it has a unique ability to cause breakthrough cases among those who are fully vaccinated.

There is also growing conversation about booster shots being made available for Americans in the near future to continue immunity against virus variants.

Effectiveness of the Moderna (yellow) and Pfizer (blue) COVID-19 vaccines began to drop in June and July as the 'Delta' variant became more prevalent. Moderna had an effectiveness of 76%, while Pfizer's vaccine was 42% effective.

For the study, published on pre-printer server medRxiv.org - meaning it has not yet been peer review - the team gathered data on more than 25,000 Minnesotans from January to July.

While the vaccines remained about as effective as advertised, around 90 percent, for the first six months of the year, their effectiveness began to dip in June.

However, the efficacy largely dropped in July as the variant took hold in the United States.

The change in vaccine effectiveness corresponds with a massive surge in the prevalence of the Delta variant in Minnesota, growing from 0.7 percent prevalence in May to more than 70 percent in July.

Meanwhile, the Kent 'Alpha' variant, the previous dominant strain in the U.S., decreased in prevalence from 85 percent to 13 percent over the same time period.

Even despite a rise in breakthrough infections, the vaccines were still effective in preventing hospitalizations and severe cases from the virus, with both having a hospitalization rate of under 25 percent.

While breakthrough cases became more common in July, the rate of hospitalization remained low, with both being more than 75 percent effective

The rise of Delta variant prevalence in Minnesota, from 0.7% prevalence in May to more than 70% in July, correlates with the drop in effectiveness of the vaccines (above)

Unvaccinated people also still made up a vast majority of cases.

Still, vaccinated people being able to contract the virus is a worrying prospect for health officials.

Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention finds that vaccinated people who contract the Delta variant release similar viral loads to unvaccinated people, meaning they may be just as able to spread the virus.

While the risk is minimal, some vaccinated people still may be hospitalized, suffer long term negative effects, or even die, from COVID-19.

The Delta variant being able to bypass the existing vaccines also confirms what many feared, that the virus could potentially mutate to a point where it can bypass vaccines.

Last month, Pfizer published data showing its vaccine's efficacy drops to 86 percent after six months.

Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation's top infectious disease expert, warned last week that he feared a vaccine-resistant variant could form in the near future if the virus continued to spread.

But booster shots could soon rollout for Americans to enhance immunity to the virus and protect against these more resistant variants.

NBC News reported on Wednesday that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) planned to approve third doses for immunocompromised Americans.

It is a change of tone from other health officials in recent weeks, including National Institute of Health Director Dr Francis Collins, who said last week booster shots were not necessary.

Currently, there are three available Covid vaccines in the United States.

The Pfizer vaccine is the most popular, having been used 197 million times since it received FDA emergency use authorization (EUA) in December 2020.

The Moderna vaccine, which was also given EUA in December, has been used more than 140 million times.

Only one single dose vaccine is available in the U.S. - the Johnson & Johnson vaccine - which has been used 13.7 million times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Why it's become so hard to get an Uber: Perfect storm of problems facing customers wanting a ride Lack of drivers Uber has lost thousands of drivers since the start of the Covid pandemic, according to those working with the service. Many drivers are understood to have swapped taxi driving for takeaway deliveries following a huge drop in demand for cabs during lockdown. Uber says it wants to recruit 20,000 new drivers by the end of 2021. Surge pricing A lack of drivers has led to an increase in surge pricing, some say. The app automatically raises prices to match increased demand. With less Uber drivers around, surging happens more, drivers say. Drivers using rival apps Uber drivers are allowed to use rival ride-hailing apps at the same time. This allows them to pick and choose the best fares. But it also means drivers can cancel trips enroute to pick-ups if they find a better fare, leaving users facing a longer wait. Trips not worthwhile for drivers Because Uber does not pay its drivers to get to a customers, drivers say short trips which take a long time to get to aren't worthwhile. It means if you are far away from a group of drivers, and it is a short trip, it may not be economically viable for them to pick you p. Low Traffic Neighbourhood schemes causing a nightmare On top of that, Low Traffic Neighbourhood schemes are making it harder for taxi drivers to reach their customers, discouraging them from accepting fares. Advertisement

Frustrated Uber customers are facing higher fares and longer waits for a pick-up because of a perfect storm of driver shortages, surge pricing and so-called 'multi-apping', MailOnline can today reveal.

It is understood that 'thousands' of drivers have quit the ride-hailing app since the start of the pandemic, with many now working for takeaway delivery firms such as JustEat, Deliveroo and sister firm UberEats.

And while Uber says it is launching a recruitment campaign to up its numbers, current drivers say many who left during last year's lockdowns are yet to return.

This, drivers say, has led to an increase in the use of 'surge charging' - where the app automatically ups fare prices due to a spike in demand.

Meanwhile, drivers are said to be furious about changes to their pay deal with Uber, meaning they are now having to fork a larger chunk of their fare to the San Francisco-based tech firm.

Uber increased the service rate from 20 to 25 per cent for thousands of drivers after Supreme Court judges in the UK ruled the company must give its workers benefits such as holiday pay.

To keep their take-home pay up, drivers are taking to 'multi-apping' - using other ride-hailing services such as Bolt and FreeNow at the same - in order to pick-up the highest fare.

But it means passengers waiting for an Uber are regularly having rides accepted, only to have them cancelled while the driver is en-route.

Some disgruntled passengers say they have waited more than 10 minutes for a ride in London - where pick-up times were previously a matter of minutes.

On top of that, cabbies have continued to rail against the dreaded Low Traffic Neighbourhood schemes (LTNs) which are making it a nightmare for drivers to reach customers.

Disgruntled users have meanwhile vowed to no longer use Uber due to its long wait times and 'crazy' prices.

Meanwhile, Uber, which denies upping prices, says it is plans to sign-up an additional 20,000 drivers across the UK to meet demand as more workers return to the office.

But one customer told MailOnline: 'I use Uber quite a lot but have now decided to use other apps. I realised that it takes ages to get a ride.

'I had to wait around 10 minutes once for a service, and have also had rides confirmed thinking I would be on my way out just for it to have it cancelled - and this happened more than once.'

Frustrated Uber customers are facing higher fares and longer waits for a pick-up because of a perfect storm of driver shortages, surge pricing and so-called 'multi-apping', MailOnline can today reveal. Pictured: Drivers are allowed to run multiple ride-hailing apps at the same time - allowing them to pick and chose the biggest fares

It is understood that 'thousands' of drivers have quit the ride-hailing app (pictured: An Uber vehicle) since the start of the pandemic, with many now working for takeaway delivery firms such as JustEat, Deliveroo and sister firm UberEats

In a bid to keep their take-home pay up, drivers are taking to 'multi-apping' - using other ride-hailing services such as Bolt and FreeNow at the same - in order to pick-up the highest fare

How do the prices compare? MailOnline price checked the leading ride-hailing app to see how their prices compared. The figures are based on a trip from our office in Kensington to Trafalgar Square and were all quoted around 11am on August 12. Uber - £11.81 for a standard vehicle Bolt - £5 (with discount offer of 50 per cent) FreeNow (formerly Hailo) - £14 - £18 for a black cab Advertisement

Drivers have told MailOnline how the issue began at the start of the Covid pandemic, when demand plummeted due to the Covid lockdown in the UK.

Uber driver Nader Awaad said 'thousands' subsequently quit the ride-hailing app, because many were unable to make a living nor claim financial support.

Others were forced to take out Covid support loans to tide them over during the pandemic.

Mr Awaad, who is the elected chair of United Private Hire Drivers (UPHD), said many of the drivers began working for delivery firms such as sister company UberEats, and rivals such as JustEat and Deliveroo.

He told MailOnline: 'I had to take out a £20,000 loan at the start of the pandemic.

'I didn't stop driving. I was driving seven days a week to keep myself going.

'Not everyone was able to do deliveries, my car is a Mercedes so it wouldn't work for me. But that's why we lost a lot of drivers.'

He says the situation has been made worse by an effective cut in pay for thousands of Uber drivers.

Uber increased its service fee for many drivers following a Supreme Court ruling in the UK in February.

The ruling meant that Uber drivers are now classed as 'workers' rather than contractors and thus entitled to benefits such as holiday pay.

Uber later moved its longer serving drivers from a 20 per cent service rate - the cut it takes from each fare - to a rate of to 25 per cent.

Bosses of the ride-hailing app say the move was to 'standardise' the charge. Uber said newer drivers were already paying this higher rate prior to the court judgment.

But Mr Awaad says that some trips for Uber drivers are now no longer worth taking, particularly in the midst of rising fuel prices.

He says drivers are also not paid for their journey to the customer, meaning many drivers are rejecting trips which are not in a close vicinity.

This, along with the increased service charge, he says, has resulted in some drivers taking to 'multi-apping'.

Multi-apping, which is permitted by Uber, is when drivers have numerous ride-hailing apps opened at one time.

For example, a driver can be searching for an Uber customer and one from rival ride-hailing app Bolt at the same time.

Mr Awaad says this allows drivers to pick and chose the best fare. He said: 'I feel guilty cancelling a trip, but drivers are just driving to maximise the price.

'If Uber pays £15 for a trip and Bolt pays £25, what are you going to?

'That's why customers are waiting for so long at the moment. It's chaos.'

Mr Awaad also said drivers often boost their income by driving in 'surge periods'.

Surge times are essentially public transport peak periods, where prices are hiked to reflect demand.

Unlike traditional peak periods though, Uber surges can happen late at night, such as pub or club kick-out time, when there is a spike in demand for Ubers but not as many drivers.

However, Mr Awaad said that due to a lack of drivers, Uber was now 'surging all the time'.

'It's not fair on the customers,' he added.

Uber users have noticed the changes, with many taking to Twitter to moan about the service.

One Twitter user wrote: 'You legit have to allow an extra 20 minutes to your journey when using Uber.

'You have to wait so long for them to connect to a driver and it's almost guaranteed that you'll be cancelled on. Sort it out.'

Another wrote: 'Wait 10 minutes, finally connect with a driver... ALWAYS get canceled on at least once before they connect you with another 10 mins away. Such an awful service these days.'

Meanwhile, Twitter user Samia, added: 'Never using Uber again.

'Every time I try to book a ride home from central London it gets cancelled by at least five drivers.

'I have a 4.5 rating. It ends up taking longer to book an Uber now than to get home for me.

'I took a black cab home and it was cheaper including my tip!'

Others have taken to Twitter to complain about the 'crazy prices' they are being charged.

One wrote: 'I spent £13 on an Uber for Hockley to The Park Estate the other night... make it make sense.'

Another claimed they were quoted more than £70 for a trip from Croydon to east London.

One Twitter user wrote: 'Was in Hammersmith in west London the other day. Needed to go about a mile with the tube down.

'Uber wanted to charge £18 and make me wait 15 minutes for other passengers' rides to end.

'Hailed a black cab from the station who was ready to go, only cost me £15 with a tip.'

Union bosses have pointed the finger at Uber for the drop in service.

Charlie McNamara, branch coordinator at United Private Hire Drivers (UPHD) told MailOnline: 'Employers often complain about not being to get enough employees while paying low wages. This is one of those cases.

What as the Supreme Court ruling in the Uber case? In February the UK's Supreme Court ruled in favour of drivers being classed as 'workers' after a five year battle. Drivers were previously classed as self-employed 'contractors' by Uber, meaning they were not entitled to benefits in the same way paid employees are. But, in a landmark ruling for the gig economy, Supreme Court judges ruled that drivers should be classed as workers and therefore be given the same rights. It meant Uber faced having to pay workers millions in back-dated compensation, while newer drivers would have to be given pay for holidays going forward. The taxi giant had argued its 60,000 UK drivers were independent contractors and so not entitled to employment benefits. But judges instead ruled that Uber's 'very tightly defined and controlled' business model and fares process meant drivers were in 'a position of subordination and dependency' - and could not be deemed 'independent contractors' Advertisement

'Drivers need to be able to make a proper living and that's leading to this drop in service.'

Out of Uber's control is another problem for it and many other cab drivers - dreaded Low Traffic Neighbourhood schemes.

The schemes have wreaked havoc for drivers, particularly in London, where borough chiefs have closed off roads to essentially create giant cycle lanes and walkways.

Bollards or large planters are often installed, blocking once easy driving routes and sometimes creating long diversions.

Drivers, who already say they are struggling to make-ends-meet with some Uber trips, say LTN schemes make some trips even hard by forcing them to quite literally 'go-round-the-houses' to reach or drop off passengers.

The United Trade Action Group, a union group supported by taxi drivers, has been appealing against Transport for London schemes installed as part of its much-maligned Streetspace project.

However, last month, The Court of Appeal upheld TfL's appeal against a January ruling which declared parts of LTN's unlawful.

Meanwhile, another element of concern for Uber, who once held the monopoly on ride-hailing apps, will be the rise in competitor service Bolt.

The service was launched in 2013 by Estonian entrepreneur Markus Villig, who is just 27 years old.

The company, previously known as Taxify, now operates in more than 45 countries.

And just this month it was revealed the firm had €600million (£453million) from venture capital funds to grow the business.

Speaking to the Telegraph earlier this month, Mr Villig, who is still only 27, said: 'We have a very different mentality from some of the usual Silicon Valley companies which just raise billions and billions of funding.

One element of concern for Uber, who once held the monopoly on ride-hailing apps, will be the rise in competitor service Bolt (pictured: A Bolt vehicle). The service was launched in 2013 by Estonian entrepreneur Markus Villig, who is just 27 years old. The company, previously known as Taxify, now operates in more than 45 countries.

Britain's £15billion takeaway binge: Deliveroo orders double while JustEat sees 75% rise despite lockdown measures ending Takeaway giants Deliveroo and Just Eat have seen a huge rise in sales despite the end of lockdown, new figures show. The Covid pandemic resulted in a fast food spending boom with some £15 billion in sales registered last year compared to 2019. The spend is largely down to the regularity of orders, with 38% of homes tucking into a takeaway at least once a week, according to the British Takeaway Campaign. In new figures released today, Deliveroo said it took 71.4 million orders in the first six months of 2021 in the UK, double the figure of 34.7 million recorded in the same period last year. It also reported a doubling of gross transaction value, to nearly £3.4 billion. Rivals Just Eat, meanwhile, have also experienced a substantial sales hike, having received 135 million orders in the first half of this year, up from 76.8 million in 2020 - a rise of 76%. The firms have been boosted by more than a year of on-and-off lockdowns in the UK, with customers unable to visit restaurants, and so ordering their food online instead. At the start of lockdown, takeaway companies were hailed for their importance by ministers, with the Government reportedly asking pizza giant Domino's to keep stores open 'and provide local communities freshly made pizza to help boost morale and keep people safe at home'. Despite restrictions easing, Deliveroo said today that so far it has proven fairly immune to the end of lockdown, with 'no material impact' from the UK reopening during the second quarter of the year. In accounting, anything with a less than 1% effect on turnover can be considered as having no material impact. Advertisement

'They sort of lavishly spend the various things and think it's going to be a winner take all market.

'There will be a monopoly and it doesn't really matter.

'For us it is completely different. we're coming from Estonia [with an] Eastern European background.

'We're like: 'How do we operate this thing as frugally as possible?''

Bolt also told MailOnline it was hoping to expand into 10 new cities by the end of the year, though it did not reveal which ones.

Uber meanwhile is spending big to get drivers back to the service in the wake of the Covid lockdowns.

Last month it was announced in the US that the company was planning to send $250million (£180million) on incentives to encourage drivers back.

Uber told MailOnline it is planning to recruit 20,000 new drivers in the UK by the end of this year to meet an increase in demand.

It says it already has 70,000 drivers already on its books.

An Uber spokesperson said: 'As cities open up and people start moving again, we are encouraging 20,000 new drivers to sign up in order to meet rider demand.

'We are proud to offer every driver the rights and protections they deserve - a guaranteed wage, holiday pay and a pension - but we're not the only player in town.

'Drivers work with multiple operators and deserve the same standard of work on every trip.'

In response to concerns about pricing, Uber says its is 'committed' to offering competitive prices to its customers.

The spokesperson added: 'The Uber app uses dynamic pricing to respond to the levels of supply and demand at any one time.

'When a large number of people in a specific area are booking a trip at the same time and there aren't enough available cars, fares automatically rise to encourage more drivers to go to the busy area and earn a higher fare.

'Users will always see a fare estimate in advance so they have the choice to book a car or share the trip with others.'

Uber denied that it had reduced fares for drivers, and said drivers were now 'better off' in the wake of the Supreme Court ruling, as the company was now paying drivers 12 per cent of their earnings as cash on a weekly basis to represent holiday pay.

The company said under its policies that drivers are allowed to use multiple apps, such as Bolt, while being a driver for Uber.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Evacuation flights from Kabul airport are set to resume on Tuesday after eight people were killed on Monday, including two shot dead by US troops, three run over by taxiing jets and three stowaways who plummeted from the engines of an airborne plane amid chaotic scenes in Afghanistan.

Three stowaways fell hundreds of feet to their deaths after climbing onto the fuselage of a departing US Air Force C-17 plane as it took off from at Hamid Karzai International Airport, while hundreds of other desperate people tried to cling onto planes as they taxied down the runway.

Senior US military officials said troops shot and killed two armed Afghans among those trying to get onto the jet while US citizens were evacuated in two separate incidents. A further three people were caught under plane wheels amid scenes of anarchy as the country slips into Taliban control.

A Pentagon official said that US troops had come under fire at the airfield and grounded all flights while soldiers cleared the airfield with Apache helicopters and fired 'warning shots' to disperse the crowds. Flights resumed after 90 minutes but were suspended again after a security breach on the civilian side of the airport, a Pentagon spokesperson said.

Thousands of terrified people descended on Hamid Karzai International Airport as the US, Britain and other Western countries evacuate their citizens and diplomats on military aircraft following the Taliban's seizure of the capital city Kabul and much of Afghanistan this week.

Video posted on Twitter shows hundreds of people running alongside a C-17 crammed with 800 people - eight times its usual capacity - with many clambering on to the front and rear wheels, while others climbed airbridges hoping to force their way on to planes waiting at the departure gates.

The clip then shows three people falling to their deaths from hundreds of feet in the air, with images posted online later appearing to show residents collecting bodies from a rooftop in Kabul.

The C-17 can carry 171,000 pounds of cargo but its interior is designed to carry fewer than 150 soldiers. It is unclear who exactly was on board and how many Americans remain on the ground. However, a flight-tracker showed the jet was flown to the Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar.

The first of three German evacuation planes en route to Afghanistan diverted to the Uzbek capital Tashkent after it could not land at Kabul airport, a German general said on Monday.

The A400M transport plane circled for more than an hour over Kabul before changing its destination, Lieutenant General Markus Laubenthal told public broadcaster ZDF. A foreign ministry spokesperson said earlier in Berlin that no evacuation flights were leaving Kabul because people were blocking the runway.

A Pentagon spokesperson said 3,000 soldiers would be on the ground at the airport by Tuesday to help with the evacuation efforts, with a further 3,000 troops arriving later this week. However, the shambolic scenes further humiliated the US and its NATO powers, with much of the Anglo-US media and political class branding the withdrawal the 'biggest foreign policy disaster' since Suez.

In an extraordinary address to the American nation on Monday, Joe Biden defended the US withdrawal and blamed Donald Trump's agreement with the Taliban, Afghanistan's political leaders for refusing to negotiate and Afghan military forces for refusing to fight.

Announcing an end to the War in Afghanistan, the US President - who had returned to the White House from a 'vacation' in Camp David - said: 'I stand squarely behind my decision. After 20 years I've learned the hard way. That there was never a good time to withdraw U.S. forces.'

In a statement on Saturday, he blamed his predecessor Trump for creating the conditions of the Taliban takeover. However, President Biden has faced intense domestic and global criticism of his handling of the Afghanistan crisis from both the Left and Right of politics across the West.

US media said the 'debacle of the US defeat and chaotic retreat in Afghanistan' was a 'political disaster' and slammed the President's 'failure to orchestrate an urgent and orderly exit'. A New York Post editorial even said his claims that he 'inherited' Trump's withdrawal plans were a 'lie' and branded the crisis situation 'as humiliating an end as the rooftop scramble in Saigon in 1975'.

The head of German Chancellor Angela Merkel's party, Armin Laschet, called it the 'biggest NATO debacle' since the founding of the alliance, while MPs accused Prime Minister Boris Johnson of a 'shameful' silence and questioned if he did enough to discourage President Biden from withdrawing US troops.

UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said he was 'concerned' by accounts of human rights violations against the women and girls of Afghanistan who fear a return to the darkest days' of the 1990s when the Taliban came to power after the Civil War and imposed a brutal theocracy.

Afghanistan's representative to the UN Security Ghulam Isaczai told a meeting of the five powers - the US, Britain, China, Russia and France - on Monday that 'there are already reports of target killings and looting in the city'.

'Kabul residents are reported that the Taliban have already started house-to-house searches in some neighbourhoods, registering names and looking for people in their target list,' he added.

Afghan President Ashraf Ghani has also come under fire from critics and political rivals for hightailing out of the country as the Taliban stormed the Presidential Palace last night. The Russian Embassy claimed that he had fled in a helicopter full of cash. His whereabouts remain unknown.

It comes as:

Taliban fighters were seen patrolling the streets of Kabul as thousands of hopeful Afghans gathered on the runway at Hamid Karzai airport trying desperately to escape from Afghanistan;

The UK's ambassador to Afghanistan put plans to leave the country on hold - and remained at Kabul airport to help process the applications of those seeking to leave;

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said hundreds of nationals and eligible Afghans would be evacuated every day, with flights out of the country continuing as long as it is safe;

Defence Minister Ben Wallace choked up today as he vowed to fly hundreds of desperate Afghans out of the country within the next 36 hours - but insisted sending UK troops back in is not 'on the cards';

The EU said member states' foreign ministers would hold crisis talks via video link on Tuesday;

President Ashraf Ghani fled Afghanistan to 'avoid bloodshed' on Sunday night, Al Jazeera reported he sought refuge in Uzbekistan;

Ghani relinquished power to an interim government led by Taliban commander Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar;

Former President Hamid Karzai urged the Taliban to spare Kabul and told residents to stay in their homes and said he would be staying in the country;

Russian officials said they were in touch with the Taliban in Afghanistan via its Embassy in Kabul;

The US ambassador and embassy staff fled Afghanistan after Taliban forces stormed Kabul in scenes likened to the 1975 evacuation of its mission in Saigon;

PM Boris Johnson said said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the crisis;

British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was forced to return to the UK from his holiday abroad;

Tory MPs called fallout from Anglo-US withdrawal 'Britain's worst foreign policy disaster since Suez';

MPs are expected to to vent their anger and frustration when they return to Westminster on Wednesday for an emergency recall of Parliament to discuss the crisis;

President Biden defended the withdrawal of US troops and blamed his predecessor Donald Trump for a deal that left the warlords 'in the strongest position militarily since 2001';

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken insisted the scene in Afghanistan is not comparable to the fall of Saigon as he diverted blame for the Taliban takeover on Republicans.

Thousands of Afghans are trying to get on to flights out of the capital following the Taliban's seizure of the city. A US soldier is pictured aiming his weapon at a passenger at Kabul airport

Afghan people climb atop a KamAir plane grounded at Hamid Karazi airport as they wait at the Kabul airport in Kabul on Monday

Footage from Hamad Karzai airport showed hundreds of people running alongside - and in front of - a US Air Force plane preparing to take off

Afghans desperately tried to climb onto the rear right wheel of the US Air Force C-17 in a last ditch attempt to flee the country after the Taliban swept to power

Footage published by Afghan outlet Aśvaka showed three stowaways falling to the deaths after clinging on to the wheels of a military plane as it took off from Kabul airport

Senior US military officials said troops shot and killed two armed Afghans among those trying to get onto the jet while US citizens were evacuated in two separate incidents

Image of British citizens and dual nationals residing in Afghanistan being evacuated from Afghanistan to the UK

Video posted later appeared to show residents collecting the bodies of three stowaways, who reportedly fell from an airborne plane, from a roof in Kabul

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians after the Taliban walked into Kabul's presidential palace

US military Apache helicopters flew low over crowds of desperate people at Kabul airport in an attempt to clear them out of the way for a USAF plane taxiing behind

A satellite image shows crowds of Afghans gathered on the tarmac at Hamid Karzai airport on Monday as they desperately try to board the last flights out of Kabul

At least five people have been killed at Kabul airport as thousands of people tried desperately to get on flights out of Afghanistan amid increasingly chaotic scenes. Witnesses said it was not clear whether the victims were killed by gunshots or in a stampede

Thousands of Afghans scaled the walls of Hamid Karzai International Airport desperate to get on the last flights out of the country before the Taliban impose their rule. The group have been shooting at people trying to clamber their way into the airport

Hopeful Afghan passengers wait at Kabul airport as hundreds of US and UK citizens are evacuated following the Taliban's swift campaign

US soldiers stand guard as desperate Afghans try to board flights at Hamid Karzai International Airport on Monday

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

President Joe Biden speaks about Afghanistan from the East Room of the White House, August 16, 2021

Defence Secretary Ben Wallace breaks down as he admits 'some people won't get back' from Afghanistan Ben Wallace choked up today as he vowed to fly hundreds of desperate Afghans out of the country within the next 36 hours - but insisted sending UK troops back in is not 'on the cards'. The Defence Secretary was overcome with emotion as he talked about the consequences of the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army, after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace. He said the crisis had become inevitable after a deal was struck with the extremists and the US pulled out, and the focus was now on evacuating interpreters and others who might be subject to reprisals. But he conceded that 'some people won't get back'. 'It is sad the West has done what it has done,' he said. 'Twenty years of sacrifice.. is what it is.' Mr Wallace - who himself served in the military before entering politics - said he felt the issue so deeply because he was a soldier. Advertisement

The British Ministry of Defence confirmed the first UK nationals landed at RAF base Brize Norton early on Monday as 60 countries issued a joint plea to the Taliban to allow civilians to flee ahead of EU foreign ministers hold crisis talks via video-link on Tuesday.

But an emotional Defence Secretary Ben Wallace conceded that 'some people won't get back'. Around 4,000 British nationals and eligible Afghans are thought to be in Kabul and in need of evacuation.

James Rogers, Director of Research at the Council on Geostrategy, told MailOnline: 'The decision to leave Afghanistan was inevitable; the way that has been carried out is a shambles.

'We've effectively handed victory to the Taliban on a plate. At this point, as the Prime Minister has said, we need to ensure Afghanistan does not become a safe haven for jihadi terrorists.

'More strategically, we need to question our inability to act competently on the world stage without the US - or, in this situation, when the US decides to leave its allies in the lurch.'

Some 700 UK personnel are deployed at the airport, with Mr Wallace insisting the key areas are still secure despite chaotic scenes and reports of several people being killed when they fell from aircraft. The US has 5,000 troops in place.

The Taliban swept into the capital on Sunday after the Western-backed government collapsed and Ghani fled the country 'to avoid bloodshed', bringing a stunning end to a two-decade campaign in which the US and its allies had tried to transform the country.

The US Embassy has been evacuated and the American flag lowered, with diplomats relocating to the airport in scenes reminiscent of the evacuation of the embassy of Saigon in 1975. Other Western countries have also closed their missions and are flying out staff and civilians.

Almost all major checkpoints in Kabul were under Taliban control by Monday morning and Afghanistan's Civil Aviation Authority issued an advisory saying the 'civilian side' of the airport had been 'closed until further notice' and that the military controlled the airspace.

Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country.

Video from Afghanistan's parliament building showed Taliban fighters entering the main chamber. The grainy footage showed fighters carrying weapons sitting at a table at the head of the chamber under the government's seal, with some smiling and posing for photographs.

It comes after officials promised civilians would not be harmed and announced everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decided to stay in the country. The Taliban previously said westerners would be allowed to leave the country but that Afghans would be barred from departing.

Scramble to evacuate as UK pledges visas Afghans whose lives are at risk from the Taliban will be able to come to Britain. Government sources said the Home Office will set up a specific new visa route for those fleeing turmoil in the country. 'We will make sure there is a bespoke route for Afghans in need,' said a Home Office source. 'We'll ensure that we are leading the world on that.' Exact details of the resettlement scheme had not been finalised last night but the source insisted it would be 'generous'. It is understood that the visa scheme will be closely based on an existing project run from 2014 to March this year that brought 20,000 Syrians to the UK with refugee status. Advertisement

The UN is calling for an immediate end to violence in Afghanistan and urging the international community to unite to ensure that the human rights of all people, especially women and girls, are respected.

Mr Guterres said 'the world is following events in Afghanistan with a heavy heart and deep disquiet about what lies ahead' and with the country's future and the hopes and dreams of a generation of young Afghans in the balance, the coming days 'will be pivotal.'

At this 'grave hour,' the secretary-general urged all parties, especially the Taliban, 'to exercise utmost restraint to protect lives and to ensure that humanitarian needs can be met.'

Mr Guterres said the UN continues to have staff and offices in areas now under Taliban control, and which so far have been respected. 'Above all, we will stay and deliver in support of the Afghan people in their hour of need.'

'We cannot and must not abandon the people of Afghanistan,' he said.

Afghanistan's representative Ghulam M Isaczai said officials were 'extremely concerned about the Taliban not honouring their promises and commitments made in their statements at Doha and other international forums.

'We've witnessed time and again how Taliban have broken their promises and commitments in the past. We've seen gruesome pictures of Taliban's mass executions, of military personnel and target killing of civilians in Kandahar and other big cities.

''We cannot allow this to happen in Kabul, which has been the last refuge for many people escaping violence and Taliban's revenge attacks.

'Kabul residents are reported that the Taliban have already started house-to-house searches in some neighbourhoods, registering names and looking for people in their target list.

'There are already reports of target killings and looting in the city. Kabul residents are living in absolute fear right now. There is no time for blame game. We have an opportunity to prevent further violence, prevent Afghanistan descending into a civil war and becoming a pariah state.

'Therefore, the security council and the UN secretary general should use every means at its disposal to call for an immediate succession of violence, respect for human rights and international humanitarian law.'

Footage showed desperate Afghans trying to climb onto grounded planes at Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport after the Taliban swept the city

US troops fired shots into the air at Kabul airport today as desperate Afghans climbed up the outside of airbridges trying to flee as the Taliban took control of Afghanistan

Video posted social media showed hundreds of people trying to climb the outside of airbridges to board commercial liners grounded in Hamad Karzai airport

Thousands of Afghans scaled the walls of Hamid Karzai International Airport desperate to get on the last flights out of the country before the Taliban impose their rule. The group have been shooting at people trying to clamber their way into the airport

Hundreds of desperate Afghans scaled the walls of Kabul airport trying to escape before the Taliban imposes its brutal rule

US troops fired shots in the air at Hama Karzai airport to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac after they took control of the airport in Kabul and the country's air traffic control

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Early Monday morning, flight-tracking data showed no immediate commercial flights over the country even as thousands of Afghans flooded Kabul airport

Hundreds of Afghans desperately scaled the walls of Hamid Karzai international airport in Kabul as they try to flee the country

People swarmed to Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport on Monday hoping to flee the country after the Taliban's stunningly swift capture of much of Afghanistan

Desperate Afghans were seen chasing US military C-17s as the evacuation flights took off from Kabul airport on Monday

Hundreds of desperate people are seen around grounded planes at Kabul airport in this satellite image

Commercial flights have been suspended, with only military flights allowed in and out of the Afghan capital. Thousands of people have descended on the airport hoping to somehow get onboard a plane

Afghan passengers sit inside a plane as they wait to leave Kabul airport although all commercial flights have been grounded, with only military aircraft being allowed in and out

'The whole world was taken by surprise': Dominic Raab defends being on holiday during Afghanistan meltdown - as MOD confirms 200 more UK troops will be sent to Kabul Dominic Raab today defended being on holiday while Afghanistan plunged into chaos - saying the whole world was 'taken by surprise' - as the MoD confirmed a further 200 UK troops are to be sent to Kabul to assist with the evacuation effort. The Foreign Secretary insisted he was in touch with events throughout his break, believed to be in the Mediterranean, as the situation dramatically escalated over recent days with the Taliban regaining power. He arrived back in the UK last night, as extremist fighters posed in the presidential palace in Kabul, and took part in the emergency meeting of ministers and officials this lunchtime. A Ministry of Defence (MoD) spokesman told MailOnline there will shortly be 900 British personnel in Kabul, comprised of 16 Air Assault Brigade, Logistics, Medics and RAF. There had been around 100 UK personnel in the region roughly a week ago, before the explosion in Taliban advances throughout the country. But the MoD today confirmed that another 600 had been ordered to the region, and now another 200 are being dispatched. The spokesman said the plan was to have all British nationals evacuated by the end of the month, flying out more than 1,000 every day. More than 300 people - including Britons and Afghans eligible for settlement - have been evacuated so far. After attending the third meeting of the Cobra emergency committee in just four days, Mr Raab said 'modern' communications meant he could be in 'direct control' of the Foreign Office from anywhere. Advertisement

Ghani fled the country on Sunday night as the insurgents encircled the capital - saying he wanted to avoid bloodshed - capping a military victory that saw them capture all cities in just 10 days.

In a Facebook post, Ghani said he had left the country to avoid clashes with the Taliban that would endanger millions of Kabul residents. Some social media users branded Ghani, who did not disclose his location, a coward for leaving them in chaos. Al-Jazeera reported he had flown to Uzbekistan, citing his personal bodyguard.

'The Taliban have won with the judgement of their swords and guns, and are now responsible for the honour, property and self-preservation of their countrymen,' Ghani said after fleeing.

Taliban officials said they had received no reports of any clashes anywhere in the country: 'The situation is peaceful,' one official said. The Taliban control 90 percent of state buildings and fighters had been told to prevent any damage, the official added.

Scenes of panic spread across the country on Monday as thousands of Afghans desperately try to flee Afghanistan before the Taliban's brutal rules are implemented. Refugees massed at borders, with pictures from Afghanistan's border with Pakistan showing hundreds of people queuing in an attempt to leave.

'Today is a great day for the Afghan people and the mujahideen. They have witnessed the fruits of their efforts and their sacrifices for 20 years,' Mohammad Naeem, the spokesman for the Taliban's political office, told Al Jazeera TV. 'Thanks to God, the war is over in the country.'

Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who fought in the Soviet-Afghan War during the 1980s and helped ex-chief Mohammad Omar create the Taliban in 1994, is thought likely to be installed as the head of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, according to reports in the Arab world.

Former Afghan President Hamid Kharzai tried to reassure those left in Kabul in a video message: 'To the people of Kabul, I, my daughters and my family are here with you. My wish is that the problems of our country and capital could be solved with peaceful dialogue and negotiations.

'I want the Taliban forces, wherever you are, to provide safety to the people and pay attention to preserve people's lives. I advise all the people to stay in your homes. We are trying to talk with the leadership of Taliban to solve the problems of the people of Afghanistan through dialogue and brotherhood, for the sake of our nation.'

Afghanistan's Paralympic team have already announced they will not participate in Tokyo Games due to the closure of Kabul airport amid the worsening political situation in country.

Britain will evacuate hundreds of British nationals and eligible Afghan nationals every day, and flights out of Afghanistan will continue for as long as it is safe, Prime Minister Boris Johnson's spokesman said on Monday.

'I'd say at least hundreds every day will be leaving (on) the flights, but obviously this is a fluid situation,' the spokesman said. Asked how long Britain planned to keep such flights going, he said: 'We want to obviously continue to do this as long as we are able to do so and as long as it is safe to do so.'

The Government COBRA emergency response committee met on Monday to discuss the situation in Afghanistan.

It came after Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said the military side of Kabul airport was secure and that Britain was doing everything it could to evacuate British citizens and Afghans with links to Britain.

'Our target is... about 1200 to 1500 exit a day in the capacity of our airplanes, and we'll keep that flow,' he said.

Taliban fighters patrolled Kabul on Monday as chaos continued at the city's airport as thousands try to flee the fundamentalist group

Two Taliban fighters ride in the back of a vehicle with the group's white flag as the Afghan capital settled into a tense calm on Monday

Taliban fighters were seen inside the Afghan parliament on Monday after officials promised civilians would not be harmed and announced everyone would be allowed to return home from Kabul airport if they decided to stay in the country

Biden's statement 'washing hands' of Afghanistan 'is one of most shameful in US history': Left and right-wing media unite in condemnation of America's 'chaotic retreat' and 'betrayal' of Afghan people Media outlets across the political divide in the US and Britain have united in their condemnation over Joe Biden's handling of the Afghanistan crisis amid what is being billed the biggest foreign policy catastrophe in 65 years. Even Left-wing outlets such as CNN and The New York Times who have been among Biden's biggest cheerleaders have hit out at him for his role in allowing insurgents to take Kabul after routing Afghan forces in just a week, calling it a debacle and a political disaster. The Wall Street Journal condemned Joe Biden's statement 'washing his hands' of the situation, saying it should 'go down as one of the most shameful in history by a Commander in Chief at such a moment of American retreat'. As the crisis deepened, a CNN columnist said the 'debacle of the US defeat and chaotic retreat in Afghanistan' was a 'political disaster' for the US President and slammed his 'failure to orchestrate an urgent and orderly exit'. And an opinion writer in The Atlantic said there was enough blame attached for the Afghanistan crisis to 'fill a library of books', condemning the 'betrayal' of the Afghan people as he placed the 'burden of shame' on Biden. Meanwhile a New York Post editorial said Biden's claims that he 'inherited' his predecessor Donald Trump's withdrawal plans were a 'lie' and the situation is 'as humiliating an end as the rooftop scramble in Saigon in 1975'. An opinion piece in The New York Times claimed that Biden would 'go down in history, fairly or unfairly, as the president who presided over a long-brewing, humiliating final act in the American experiment in Afghanistan'. A Washington Post column said the situation 'is on Biden, and it will leave an indelible stain on his presidency', while a piece in USA Today said 'this catastrophe is appearing on his watch, and he will have to take his lumps'. Fox News ran a comment from Republican Senator Joni Ernst condemning the 'slap in the face to the thousands of men and women who served in this war' and a 'total abandonment of a country and its people' by Biden. Columnists in the British Press also hit out at Biden today, with The Sun's editorial saying he 'ignored repeated warnings, then withdrew crucial air support for the Afghan army it has spent billions arming over 20 years'. Commons Foreign Affairs Committee chair Tom Tugendhat wrote in The Times that it was the 'the biggest foreign policy disaster since Suez' in 1957, while a columnist for the i condemned the 'betrayal of Afghanistan's people'. The Financial Times said the 'abandonment of Afghanistan raises doubts over the depth of US commitment to supposed allies', while Mark Almond wrote in the Daily Mail that Islamist fundamentalism is now 'back on a roll'. Advertisement

Britain has relocated its embassy to Kabul airport from the city. Asked what he would feel to see the Taliban flag flying over the former British embassy building in Kabul, Mr Wallace said: 'Symbolically, it's not what any of us wanted.'

The Armed Forces are supporting the evacuation of British nationals and those eligible for relocation under the Government's Afghan Relocation and Assistance Program.

Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, with support from RAF teams from around the world, to airlift British officials out of the Kabul.

Revealing that the first evacuation flight had landed in the UK last night, the Ministry of Defence said in a Twitter post: 'Last night the first flight of British Nationals and Embassy Staff arrived at RAF Brize Norton as part of Op Pitting.

'The UK Armed Forces are supporting the evacuation of British Nationals and those eligible for relocation under the Afghan Relocation and Assistance Program.'

The rescue mission could eventually see thousands being evacuated from Afghanistan. Around 500 embassy staff are thought to be among those to be rescued.

Around 5,000 Afghan-English interpreters and their families are also seeking evacuation, as they fear being classed as 'traitors' by the extremist Taliban.

There are also thousands of British and dual nationality passport holders who may need evacuation to UK, and around 2,000 people with links to Britain who could also be eligible to leave Afghanistan for the UK.

It comes as the UK's ambassador to Afghanistan put plans to leave the country on hold - and remained at Kabul airport to help process the applications of those seeking to leave.

Despite the scramble to evacuate, the ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow was said to have remained in the city last night. Boris Johnson said he was at the airport helping to process the applications of those seeking to leave.

Some 700 UK personnel are deployed at the airport, with Mr Wallace insisting the key areas are still secure despite chaotic scenes. He said it could take more than 36 hours to get another 1,500 out, suggesting nearly 800 of those will be Afghans. Government sources said 1,000 interpreters and other staff had arrived over the past few weeks.

It is not clear how the evacuation is being prioritised, with Mr Wallace stressing that vetting applications to leave at high speed was more of a challenge than maintaining flights.

The Prime Minister has insisted Britain could 'look back at 20 years of effort and achievement In Afghanistan', as he argued he wanted to 'make sure that we don't throw those gains away'.

Mr Wallace choked up as he talked about the consequences of the collapse of the Western-trained Afghan army, after the Taliban walked into Kabul and took charge of the presidential palace.

He said the crisis had become inevitable after a deal was struck with the extremists and the US pulled out, and the focus was now on evacuating British nationals, interpreters and others who might be subject to reprisals.

But he conceded that 'some people won't get back'. 'It is sad the West has done what it has done,' he said. 'Twenty years of sacrifice.. is what it is.'

Mr Wallace - who himself served in the military before entering politics - said he felt the issue so deeply because he was a soldier.

Mr Wallace later told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'President Biden inherited a momentum, a momentum that had been given to the Taliban because they felt they had now won, he'd also inherited a momentum of troop withdrawal from the international community, the US.'

'So I think in that sense, the seeds of what we're seeing today were before President Biden took office. The seeds were a peace deal that was [effectively] rushed, that wasn't done in collaboration properly with the international community and then a dividend taken out incredibly quickly.'

MP Tobias Ellwood, former captain in the British Army and chairman of the defence select committee, criticised the West for pulling out of Afghanistan.

Appearing on Sky News, he said: 'The world is now a little bit more dangerous because they've now taken control of the country, and the West should really hang its head in shame after abruptly abandoning Afghanistan to a civil war after two decades of effort.'

He added: 'This is not a good day for the West at all, and China will be observing things very, very closely indeed. They are already making alliances with the Taliban and glossing over the human rights atrocities that are likely to unfold.'

Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said the military side of Kabul airport was secure and that Britain was doing everything it could to evacuate British citizens and Afghans with links to Britain

It comes as the Ministry of Defence confirmed the first British nationals had landed at RAF base Brize Norton after being evacuated from Kabul

Passengers arrived in RAF base Brize Norton after an evacuation flight from Kabul following the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan

Britain's ambassador to Afghanistan Sir Laurie Bristow (right) remains in Kabul today, despite an SAS-backed operation to evacuate embassy staff amid a Taliban takeover of the city

British Forces from 16 Air Assault Brigade arrive in Kabul, Afghanistan, to provide support to British nationals leaving the country, as part of Operation PITTING after Taliban insurgents took control of the presidential palace in Kabul, August 15

How did the Taliban take over Afghanistan so quickly? The Taliban's stunning and rapid takeover of Afghanistan was the result not only of their battlefield strength, but also a sustained push to force surrenders and cut deals. The insurgents mixed threats and lures with propaganda and psychological warfare as they took city after city - some with barely a shot fired - eventually capturing the capital Kabul. How did this happen? Why didn't the Afghan army put up a fight? As foreign troops began their final withdrawal in May, Washington and Kabul were confident the Afghan military would put up a strong fight against the Taliban. With more than 300,000 personnel and multi-billion-dollar equipment more advanced than the Taliban arsenal, Afghan forces were formidable - on paper. In reality, they were plagued by corruption, poor leadership, lack of training and plummeting morale for years. Desertions were common and US government inspectors had long warned that the force was unsustainable. Afghan forces put up strong resistance this summer in some areas such as Lashkar Gah in the south, but they now faced the Taliban without regular US air strikes and military support. Faced with the smaller but highly motivated and cohesive enemy, many soldiers and even entire units simply deserted or surrendered, leaving the insurgents to capture city after city. How did the Taliban take advantage of low morale? The seeds for the collapse were sown last year when Washington signed a deal with the insurgents to withdraw its troops completely. For the Taliban, it was the beginning of their victory after nearly two decades of war. For many demoralised Afghans, it was betrayal and abandonment. They continued to attack government forces but started to combine those with targeted killings of journalists and rights activists, ramping up an environment of fear. They also pushed a narrative of inevitable Taliban victory in their propaganda and psychological operations. Soldiers and local officials were reportedly bombarded with text messages in some areas, urging them to surrender or cooperate with the Taliban to avoid a worse fate. Many were offered safe passage if they did not put up a fight, while others were reached through tribal and village elders. What happened to the anti-Taliban warlords and their militias? With Afghan forces unable to hold off the Taliban advances, many of Afghanistan's famed - and notorious - warlords rallied their militias and promised a black eye to the Taliban if they attacked their cities. But with confidence plunging in the ability of Afghanistan's government to survive, never mind hold off the insurgents, the writing was also on the wall for the warlords. Their cities fell without a fight. Warlord Ismail Khan in the western city of Herat was captured by the Taliban as it fell. Abdul Rashid Dostum and Atta Mohammad Noor in the north fled to Uzbekistan, as their militia members abandoned humvees, weapons and even their uniforms on the road out of Mazar-i-Sharif. But how were the Taliban able to do this so quickly? The Taliban had started putting deals and surrender arrangements in place reportedly long before the launch of their blitz in May. From individual soldiers and low-level government officials to apparently provincial governors and ministers, the insurgents pressed for deals - with the Taliban all but victorious, why put up a fight? The strategy proved immensely effective. The images from their final march to Kabul were not of bodies in the streets and bloody battlefields, but of Taliban and government officials sitting comfortably on couches as they formalised the handover of cities and provinces. According to one reported US estimate less than a month before the fall of Kabul, the Afghan government could collapse in 90 days. But once the Taliban captured their first provincial capital, it took less than two weeks. Advertisement

Mr Ellwood later compared the mayhem at Kabul airport 'Saigon 2.0,' akin it to US evacuation of South Vietnam's capital in 1975.

The advance of the North Vietnamese prompted the US to evacuate thousands of its nationals and troops as well as South Vietnamese civilians who had helped during the war. The most dramatic images involved the evacuation of people from the roof of the US Embassy.

'If this is not Saigon 2.0, I don't know what is,' Ellwood said. 'Is this how we thought we'd depart Afghanistan? I repeat my call for a UK inquiry.'

Meanwhile Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has called on the government to 'get UK nationals out', but added 'we also have an obligation to all of those Afghans who helped and assisted the UK, and we shouldn't have nice distinctions between this type of person, this type of help, and that type of help.'

'If those in Afghan have helped us, the UK, in our work in Afghanistan, we have got an obligation to them.'

He said on the longer and medium-term there needs to be 'safe and legal routes for refugees'.

Families of soldiers who died on previous tours of Afghanistan have criticised the British and US Governments' handling of the withdrawal from the nation.

Graham Knight, father of 25-year-old RAF Sergeant Ben Knight who was killed when his Nimrod aircraft exploded in Afghanistan in 2006, said the British Government should have moved more quickly to get civilians out.

The 69-year-old said: 'We're not surprised that the Taliban have taken over because as soon as the Americans and the British said they were going to leave, we knew this was going to happen.

'The Taliban made their intent very clear that, as soon as we went out, they would move in. As for whether people's lives were lost through a war that wasn't winneable, I think they were.

'I think the problem was we were fighting people that were native to the country. We weren't fighting terrorists, we were fighting people who actually lived there and didn't like us being there.'

Discussing the footage of people desperately climbing on to planes in Kabul to escape, Mr Knight said: 'I feel very sorry for them, they're obviously fighting for their lives. Anybody who feels like that is in a desperate situation. It's like Saigon all over again.'

The fall of Saigon happened when military personnel evacuated the former southern capital of Vietnam in 1975 after the North Vietnamese army captured the city, leading to the end of the Vietnam War.

Mr Knight went on: 'I think it was all started too late again. It [the evacuation process] should have started about a week ago. My main worry is some hothead American, or British hothead, will decide that the Taliban isn't behaving how they want, shoot at them and that will be it.'

While Ian Sadler, whose 21-year-old Trooper son Jack died when his Land Rover struck a mine in Afghanistan in 2007, told PA: 'I was surprised the Americans and the allies had so much confidence in the Afghan national army.

'Why did they think the Afghan national army would be able to keep the Taliban back based on just numbers alone? Why did our Government and allies have so much confidence in them?

'It proved to be rubbish, really. Why did the president say Kabul will never fall when, at the same time, he must have been planning his escape?

'To pull them out so quickly like that... I would have thought it would have been more of a strategic advantage to reduce the British and American influence. When the Nato forces were pulled out so suddenly, the Afghan National Army were left without any direction.'

The 71-year-old added: 'I don't think any of the British Governments - Labour, coalition or Conservative - have handled the situation in Afghanistan particularly well... The level of support given to our soldiers in Afghanistan was trivial.

'It wasn't until we were out there for about 10 years that the urgent operational requirements came in. Why weren't our soldiers equipped with mine-protected vehicles? We would have lost a lot less.'

It comes after the US government said late on Sunday all staff from the US Embassy in Kabul and were at the airport. Ambassador Ross Wilson were both seen arriving at Kabul airport, as other Americans still in the country were ordered to shelter in place.

Initially, the aim had been to have staff removed within 72 hours, but the Taliban's advances across the Afghan capital Kabul prompted the immediate removal of all staff.

Former President Donald Trump sent a statement to his followers on Sunday calling on President Joe Biden to 'resign in disgrace' amid the Taliban's takeover of Afghanistan after the withdrawal of US troops.

'It is time for Joe Biden to resign in disgrace for what he has allowed to happen to Afghanistan, along with the tremendous surge in COVID, the Border catastrophe, the destruction of energy independence, and our crippled economy,' Trump said in an email.

He continued perpetuating his claim that Biden won the presidency via election fraud, concluding the email: 'It shouldn't be a big deal, because he wasn't elected legitimately in the first place.'

Earlier Sunday, he issued another statement denouncing the Biden administration over the withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan.

'Tragic mess in Afghanistan, a completely open and broken Border, Crime at record levels, oil prices through the roof, inflation rising, and taken advantage of by the entire world—DO YOU MISS ME YET?' he said in a short emailed statement on Friday.

The Trump administration negotiated the terms of a US withdrawal in talks with the Taliban last year. Now the speed of a Taliban advance has rattled officials three weeks ahead of President Biden's August 31 deadline to bring all troops home.

Biden has repeatedly said he has no regrets about pushing ahead with his timetable, insisting there was no choice but to withdraw American troops because he would not 'pass this war' to another president.

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital (pictured)

A man sits inside the frame of a airplane engine while waiting for an evacuation flight out of Kabul after the Taliban took the capital on Sunday

Pictured: Afghans crowd at the tarmac of the Kabul airport on August 16, 2021, to flee the country as the Taliban were in control of Afghanistan after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country and conceded the insurgents had won the 20-year war

Pictured: Pakistan's soldiers check the documents of stranded Afghan nationals wanting to return to Afghanistan at the Pakistan-Afghanistan border crossing point in Chaman on August 16, 2021

Pictured: People struggle to cross the boundary wall of Hamid Karzai International Airport to flee the country after rumors that foreign countries are evacuating people even without visas, after Taliban took control of Kabul, Afghanistan, August 16

Thousands of Afghans were at Hamad Karzai airport desperately trying to flee the country after the Taliban swept the capital on Sunday

US troops are guarding the airport and have taken over air traffic control, but all non-military flights are grounded. Soldiers fired warning shots in the air to prevent hundreds of civilians running onto the tarmac, a US official said

US soldiers take up their positions as they secure the airport in Kabul after the Taliban walked into the capital, forcing President Ashraf Ghani to flee

Thousands of Afghans gathered at Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport, but all commercial services have been suspended, with only military flights leaving the country as the UK, US and other western countries repatriate their citizens

Taliban members were seen patrolling the streets of Kabul on Monday morning after sweeping across the capital on Sunday

Taliban fighters removed the Afghan national flag and raised the group's white flag in Kabul on Sunday after sweeping across the country and forcing President Ashraf Ghani to flee

Taliban fighters ride through the city of Kabul on Monday, after a stunningly swift end to Afghanistan's 20-year war, as thousands flee

Taliban members were seen patrolling the streets of Kabul on Monday as the US and UK hurried to evacuate their ambassadors and citizens from Afghanistan

Taliban fighters guard a roadside near the Zanbaq Square in Kabul on Monday after the group swept the capital, forcing President Ashraf Ghani to flee

Taliban fighters raise their flag at the Ghazni provincial governor's house, in Ghazni, southeastern, Afghanistan, Sunday, Aug. 15, 2021

Hundreds of thousands of Afghanis have been displaced from their homes in recent weeks by fighting, with fears that could swell to millions if entire country falls

Iran's new ultraconservative President Ebrahim Raisi on Monday said that the 'defeat' of the United States in Afghanistan must usher in a durable peace in the neighbouring, war-wracked country.

'The military defeat and the US withdrawal from Afghanistan should offer an opportunity to restore life, security and lasting peace in that country,' Raisi said, quoted by his office.

The presidency statement came after the Taliban seized control of Kabul, but it did not mention the Taliban nor the fall of the Afghan capital.

Raisi, who made the remarks in a call with outgoing Iran's foreign minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, said the Islamic republic wanted good relations with Afghanistan. Iran was 'closely monitoring the evolution of events in Afghanistan' and wants good neighbourly ties with it, he said.

Raisi tasked Zarif and Iran's Supreme National Security Council to give him updated reports on the situation in Afghanistan, the statement added.

Iran shares a 900km (560 mile) border with Afghanistan, and hosts nearly 3.5 million Afghans, according to the UN refugee agency.

Russian ambassador to meet Taliban in Kabul Tuesday Russia said its ambassador to Afghanistan will meet with the Taliban in Kabul on Tuesday and that it will decide on whether to recognise the new government based on its conduct. 'Our ambassador is in contact with the Taliban leadership, tomorrow he will meet with the Taliban security coordinator,' foreign ministry official Zamir Kabulov said in an interview with the Ekho Moskvy radio station on Monday. He said the talks between Moscow's ambassador, Dmitry Zhirnov, and the Taliban would centre on how the group plans to provide security for the Russian embassy in the Afghan capital. On Sunday, as the Taliban completed its military takeover of Afghanistan, Kabulov said that Russia had no plans on evacuating its embassy - though on Monday he said that 'part' of its staff would be 'evacuated'. Kabulov also said that Moscow will decide on recognising the new Taliban government based 'on the conduct of the new authorities'. 'We will carefully see how responsibly they govern the country in the near future. And based on the results, the Russian leadership will draw the necessary conclusions,' Kabulov said. In recent years, Russia has sought to reach out to the Taliban and has hosted Taliban representatives in Moscow several times, most recently last month. Moscow is closely watching for a potential spillover of the instability into neighbouring ex-Soviet Central Asian countries where Russia maintains military bases. Reporting by AFP Advertisement

In 1998, Taliban troops entered the Iranian consulate in the northern Afghan city of Mazar-i-Sharif, killing several diplomats and an official news agency journalist.

The Taliban later said they had been killed by individuals acting independently, but Tehran held the movement responsible for the deaths, which sparked outrage and nearly triggered an Iranian military intervention in Afghanistan.

Analysts say Tehran is taking a pragmatic stance on the Taliban's resurgence in Afghanistan.

On Sunday the Iranian foreign ministry said it had reduced its diplomatic presence in Afghanistan.

The announcement came shortly after the Taliban reached the outskirts of the Afghan capital.

Foreign ministry spokesman Saeed Khatibzadeh said a skeleton staff remained at Iran's Kabul embassy and that employees had been also evacuated from three of out of five diplomatic missions in other Afghan cities.

Zarif meanwhile held Monday a meeting in Tehran with China's special envoy for Afghanistan Yue Xiaoyong, the foreign ministry said.

The talks focused on the situation in Afghanistan, it said.

Zarif on Sunday said that 'Iran stands ready to continue its peacemaking efforts' in Afghanistan.

'Violence and war - like occupation - never solve problems,' he wrote on Twitter.

His talks with the Chinese envoy come as a government spokeswoman in Beijing on Monday said China was ready to deepen 'friendly and cooperative' ties with Afghanistan.

Meanwhile Pakistan's state-run airline says it has halted all flights to Afghanistan's capital of Kabul because of the 'uncertain security situation' there.

Spokesman Abdullah Hafeez said Monday that Pakistan International Airlines decided to protect passengers, the crew and the planes after consulting the Afghan civil aviation authorities. He spoke as embassies scrambled to evacuate personnel and Afghan employees through the airport.

Australia is sending three transport and air-to-air refueling jets with 250 military personnel to repatriate more than 130 Australians and their families from Afghanistan, officials said on Monday.

Australia is also working to evacuate an undisclosed number of refugees, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said in a statement.

An Airbus A330 airliner modified for aerial refueling would support US-led operations in Afghanistan later this week, Australia's Defense Department said in a statement. Two C-17A Globemaster heavy transport aircraft would also be sent to the Middle East, the statement said.

Australia shut its Kabul embassy in May and withdrew the last of its troops from Afghanistan in June.

Germany Chancellor Angela Merkel said soldiers would be deployed to Afghanistan to help with the evacuation of Germany nationals and Afghans in danger from the Taliban, parliamentary sources said.

The government is planning to seek a mandate from parliament to allow the deployment of as many as 'several hundred soldiers', the sources told AFP, citing a briefing by Merkel to leaders of parliamentary groups late on Sunday.

Taliban commander 'spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay' A Taliban commander claimed he spent eight years in Guantanamo Bay in a triumphant speech from inside the Presidential Palace in Kabul as the militants declared an Islamic state of Afghanistan after the country's president joined thousands of Afghan nationals in a mass exodus. Taliban fighters marched into the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos, with US helicopters evacuating diplomats from the embassy in scenes echoing the 1975 Fall of Saigon which followed the Vietnam War. There were chaotic scenes at Kabul airport where thousands of desperate Afghans are gathering in an attempt to flee the country. Fighting and stampedes broke out between passengers before commercial flights were stopped and only military planes departed the terminals which are now guarded by US troops. The Al-Jazeera news channel livestreamed the press conference from inside the palace, which showed a group of Taliban fighters sitting at the President's desk before a fighter claimed he was a former inmate of the US-controlled Guantanamo Bay detention centre in Cuba. Established by George W Bush in 2002, suspected terrorists have been detained without trial and tortured at the facility. Donald Trump signed an executive order to keep the centre open indefinitely in 2018, while in February the Biden administration vowed to shut Guantanamo down. A spokesman for the Taliban's political office told Al-Jazeera TV on Sunday that the war is over in Afghanistan and that the type of rule and the form of regime will be clear soon. Advertisement

Portugal's defense minister says his country is prepared to take in 243 Afghans, and their families who worked with Portuguese forces stationed in the country.

Defense Minister Joao Gomes Cravinho said NATO is coordinating the evacuation of the Afghans because Portugal does not have the military capacity to do so. He told public broadcaster RTP late Sunday he is not aware of any Portuguese citizens living in Afghanistan.

Portugal had a small detachment of fewer than 200 troops stationed at Kabul airport, as part of the NATO mission in the country. The last ones pulled out at the end of May.

While Swedish Foreign Minister Ann Linde said on Monday that 19 embassy employees had been evacuated from Kabul to Doha, Qatar and that they will eventually flown to Sweden.

Earlier Monday, Norway and Denmark said that the bulk of the embassy staff were out of Afghanistan.

Denmark's Defense Minister Trine Bramsen told Danish broadcaster DR that while most Danish diplomats had been evacuated, 'there are still Danes,' and others in the country still to be flown out.

Challenges include being able to land at Kabul's chaotic airport, he said. But there's a struggle, too, to get people to the airport, 'a very difficult operation,' Bramsen was quoted as saying.

Italy's evacuated 70 embassy staff and Afghan employees from the capital city of Kabul with the plane scheduled to arrive in Rome on Monday.

The evacuation is part of Italy's Operation Aquila Omnia (Eagle Ready for Anything) to quickly evacuate Italian diplomatic staff, citizens and Afghan employees and family members. Italy had one of the largest contingents in Afghanistan before the pullout.

Italian journalist Francesca Mannocchi, who was on the plane, said that it was carrying 20 Afghan embassy employees and their families, including women and children. Prior to the Taliban advance, 228 Afghanis and their families had been transferred to Italy.

Officials declined to give number of how many remained, but Italian media reported over the weekend that some 390 Afghan citizens and their family members were awaiting evacuation.

The first Czech evacuation flight has taken off from Kabul's international airport and landed in Prague. Prime Minister Andrej Babis said 46 people were on board Monday's flight.

They included Czech nationals, the Afghan staffers at the Czech embassy and Afghan interpreters who helped the Czech armed forces during NATO missions together with their families.

Babis didn't immediately provide more details. It's not clear how many such flights will follow.

Czech Interior Minister Jan Hamacek tweeted that given the deteriorating situation at Kabul's airport, it was 'a miracle' that the Czech flight managed to take off.

Saudi Arabia says it has evacuated all its diplomats from its embassy in the Afghan capital, and New Zealand's government is sending a plane to help its people leave the country.

Saudi Arabia said all staff were evacuated from the embassy in Kabul on Sunday due to the changing conditions on the ground, joining other countries that have also shuttered their embassies as the Taliban advance on the Afghan capital.

New Zealand's government says its sending a C-130 Hercules military transport plane to Afghanistan to help with the evacuation of 53 New Zealanders and dozens of Afghanis and their immediate families who helped New Zealand troops when they were stationed there.

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said they had so far identified 37 Afghanis who had helped, but the number of evacuees would be in the hundreds once dependents and others were included.

Defense officials say they have planned for a monthlong mission involving at least 40 military personnel tasked with servicing and protecting the plane. Ardern asked that the Taliban allow people to leave peaceably: 'The whole world is watching,' she said.

South Korea's Foreign Ministry said it has 'temporarily closed' its embassy in Kabul and evacuated most of its staff to an unspecified third country in the Middle East.

The ministry said a few diplomats, including Ambassador Choi Taeho, remain at a safe location in Afghanistan to support the evacuation of a South Korean national in the country and that the Seoul government is closely working with the United States and other countries to ensure their safe evacuation.

Afghanistan has been on South Korea's travel ban list since 2007. There were reportedly around five South Koreans living in Afghanistan before the Seoul government in June called for all of them to leave the country within 10 days as the United States and NATO proceeded with troop pullouts.

Crowds gathered at Kabul airport trying to flee the country after the Taliban swept through the capital and effectively took power in Afghanistan

Pictured: Vehicles are seen on a congested street in Kabul, Afghanistan, in these still images taken from a video uploaded to social media on August 15, 2021

Footage on Sunday captured the sound of US gunshots after thousands of Afghans packed into Kabul's Hamid Karzai airport desperate for a flight out of the country

Pen Farthing, founder of animal rescue charity Nowzad, has pleaded with the British government to evacuate his staff from Kabul

Boris Johnson urges the West NOT to recognise Taliban government Boris Johnson is urging western countries to not recognise the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan and says the country must not become a 'breeding ground for terror', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. The Foreign Office refused to say where the Foreign Secretary was but said he was expected to land in the UK today. Following an emergency meeting of Cobra yesterday, Mr Johnson called for a 'united position among the like-minded' and said it was 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'. He said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.' He told Sky News: 'We don't want anybody bilaterally recognising the Taliban, we want a united position amongst all the like-minded, in as far as we can get one, so that we do whatever we can to prevent Afghanistan lapsing back into being a breeding ground for terror.' Advertisement

The United States had earlier released a statement with more than 65 nations urging the Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres urged the Taliban and all parties to 'exercise restraint' and said the rights of women and girls, who suffered under the previous Taliban regime, must be protected.

Pen Farthing, founder of animal rescue charity Nowzad, has added his voice to the calls, pleading with the British government to evacuate his 71 staff from Kabul.

He has vowed not to leave Afghanistan until his staff are granted safe passage to the UK. The Charity has launched a campaign called Operation Ark to fundraise £200,000 to evacuate staff and animals.

The US government has insisted in recent days that its two decades of war in Afghanistan was a success, defined by quashing the Al-Qaeda threat.

President Joe Biden also said he was determined there was no choice but to withdraw American troops, as he would not 'pass this war' onto another president.

But Washington was left shocked by the rapid collapse of the Afghan government, and critics have said the United States' reputation as a global power has been badly tarnished.

'America's credibility as an ally is diminished,' said Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's former ambassador to the United States.

The Taliban freed thousands of prisoners as they swept across the country as the police melted away in recent days. There were scattered reports of looting and armed men knocking on doors and gates.

The Taliban deployed fighters at major intersections and sought to project calm, circulating videos showing quiet city streets.

'There were a few Taliban fighters on each and every road and intersection in the city,' Shah Mohammad, a 55-year-old gardener, said after coming to work in the diplomatic quarter. He said there was less traffic than usual and fewer people out on the streets.

Suhail Shaheen, a Taliban spokesman, tweeted that fighters had been instructed not to enter any home without permission and to protect 'life, property and honor.'

The speed of the Taliban advance has taken almost everyone by surprise and Afghans who had booked commercial flights to escape the Taliban face being forced to remain in Afghanistan.

Westerners will be evacuated by their home nations on military flights but the Taliban has said that it will not allow Afghan citizens to leave.

Tens of thousands of interpreters and officials who helped the Western-backed Afghan government are desperate to escape the country for fear of reprisals by the Taliban.

On Sunday the US led more than 65 nations in urging the resurgent Taliban to let Afghans leave the country, warning of accountability for any abuses.

'The United States joins the international community in affirming that Afghans and international citizens who wish to depart must be allowed to do so,' Secretary of State Antony Blinken wrote on Twitter as the State Department released a statement signed by its close allies.

'Those in positions of power and authority across Afghanistan bear responsibility - and accountability - for the protection of human life,' the joint statement said.

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running (pictured: Scenes at Kabul airport)

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

Pictured: Chaotic scenes at Kabul airport as Taliban insurgents enter Kabul amid a withdrawal of western forces

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

Scenes from the Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul are pictured above

Pictured: Scenes at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban enter Afghanistan's capital

Ex-Nato chief says Raab's holiday amid Afghan crisis 'staggering' A former Nato chief has said they are 'staggered' Dominic Raab was on holiday as Afghanistan fell to the Taliban. Lord Robertson, a Labour minister before becoming secretary-general of the military alliance said the situation had not been taken 'seriously'. 'You've got to be on duty during that sort of period where we are so deeply and intimately involved in it,' he told the BBC's Good Morning Scotland programme. Looking at the British handling of the war in Afghanistan in the past 20 years, the former Nato secretary-general said: 'We bear a big responsibility ourselves. 'We never really took Afghanistan and the conflict there with the seriousness that it demanded. 'We sent people into danger, troops into danger and people died and yet we were not fully, it would appear, committed to the campaign that was going on there. 'I've been critical all along about our country not taking this situation seriously and now the chickens have come home to roost and we're facing a humiliation and a disaster for all of our people.' Advertisement

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running.

Following a meeting of the Government's Cobra emergencies committee on Sunday, Boris Johnson his priority was to get UK nationals and Afghans who had worked with them out of the country 'as fast as we can'.

'We are going to get as many as we can out in the next few days,' he said.

Around 4,000 British nationals and eligible Afghans are thought to be in the city and in need of evacuation.

When the Operation Pitting rescue operation, involving 600 troops, was announced at the end of last week, Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said it could carry on through the rest of the month.

However the speed of the Taliban advance suggests that there may only be a short window of a few days to get people out.

In a sign of the desperate situation the British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow was said to be helping the small team of diplomats still in the country to process the applications of those hoping to leave.

There was particular concern for the safety of Afghans who worked with British forces when they were in the country as interpreters and other roles amid fears of reprisals if they fall into the hands of the insurgents.

The Taliban insisted that they were seeking a peaceful takeover of power and were prepared to offer an amnesty to those who had worked with the Afghan government or with foreign governments.

However those assurances were being treated with deep scepticism by many British MPs amid reports of threats to those who remain and their families.

Heavily armed Taliban fighters fanned out across the capital, and several entered Kabul's abandoned presidential palace.

Suhail Shaheen, a Taliban spokesman and negotiator, said that the militants would hold talks in the coming days aimed at forming an 'open, inclusive Islamic government.'

But he refused to guarantee that Afghans would be allowed to leave the country, telling the BBC: 'We need all Afghans to stay'.

He said Taliban forces would not attack NATO teams overseeing evacuations, but said aid organisations and foreign embassies should stay, saying 'We won't hurt them'.

Boris Johnson has vowed to get as many as possible of the Afghans who worked with the UK out of the country as the Taliban stood poised to take control of the capital Kabul.

With President Ashraf Ghani fled, and insurgent fighters surrounding the capital, the Prime Minister said the situation was 'extremely difficult'.

'The Taliban have won with the judgement of their swords and guns, and are now responsible for the honour, property and self-preservation of their countrymen,' Ghani said after fleeing.

After chairing a meeting of the Government's Cobra contingencies committee he said the UK was determined to work with allies to prevent the country again becoming a 'breeding ground for terror'.

Britain has sent 600 troops - including Paras from 16 Air Assault Brigade - to assist in the operation.

Meanwhile other Western countries were scrambling to get their people out, with helicopters shuttling from the US embassy to the airport while smoke was seen coming from the embassy rooftop as diplomats burned sensitive material.

Secretary of State Antony Blinken had said earlier on Sunday that US embassy staff were ferried by helicopter from the diplomatic compound to the airport, about 5km (3 miles) away on the northeastern side of the city.

'We're working to make sure that our personnel are safe and secure. We're relocating the men and women of our embassy to a location at the airport,' Blinken told ABC news.

Asked if the evacuation was evocative of the US departure from Vietnam in 1975, he said: 'Let's take a step back. This is manifestly not Saigon.'

Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, to begin airlifting more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Pictured: Members of Joint Forces Headquarters get prepared to deploy to Afghanistan

UK military personnel boarding an RAF Voyager aircraft at RAF Brize Norton on August 14, 2021 to travel to Afghanistan

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

People wait at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban roll back into the country's capital

Taliban are seen inside the presidential palace in Kabul amid a withdrawal of western forces

Last days of the US Embassy in Kabul: Nerve centre of the war on terror is being gutted of all sensitive material as staff and CIA assets The US Embassy in Kabul - the nerve center of the war on terror - is being gutted of all its sensitive material and evacuated in 72 hours, as the Taliban coils around Afghanistan's capital. The Embassy's demise will create an intelligence void that could plunge the US into pre-9/11 blindness, unless it can find another nearby country that will allow it rebuild its spy center. For the past 20 years, the US Embassy in Kabul has gathered vast amounts of information that shaped counterterrorism military actions - such as precision drone strikes - and prevented another 9/11-type attack. The location allowed CIA agents to meet with sources and monitor the Taliban, Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations in the region. 'When the time comes for the US military to withdraw, the US government's ability to collect and act on threats will diminish. That's simply a fact,' CIA Director Bill Burns told Senators in April. Everyone in the Embassy - except Bureau of Diplomatic Security Service agents and top decisionmakers, including the ambassador - will be out of the country before the end of Tuesday. Security Engineers will also stay behind as they continue to burn, shred and pulverize 20 years worth of intelligence stored on electronics and in documents. Embassy or agency logos, American flags 'or items which could be misused in propaganda efforts' are also considered to be sensitive materials and will be destroyed. The military is prepared to lower the American flag flying above the Embassy - at the State Department's order - signaling the Embassy's official closure. Advertisement

Sources told Reuters that most U.S staff were expected to be evacuated from Kabul in the coming day or two.

A NATO official said all commercial flights had been suspended and only military aircraft were allowed to operate. The alliance said it was helping to keep the airport running.

France and Germany, members of NATO, said on Sunday they were moving their diplomats to the airport and sending military transport planes to Kabul to evacuate their citizens and their Afghan helpers.

A US intelligence assessment earlier in the week had said Kabul could be encircled in 30 days and could fall to the Taliban within 90 days, but the insurgents captured most of Afghanistan's major cities in less than a week and entered the capital on Sunday.

Some 4,200 people remained in the US embassy until Thursday, when the Taliban's rapid gains forced the Biden administration to begin flying in thousands of troops to help pull out many of the remaining diplomats.

The deployment included an additional 1,000 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division, who President Joe Biden said on Saturday would help evacuate citizens and ensure an 'orderly and safe' drawdown of US military personnel.

On Sunday, US officials said they were weighing whether more troops were needed. Another 3,000 are on standby in Kuwait.

Washington invested billions of dollars over four US administrations in Afghan government forces, giving them advantages over the Taliban, but they were unable to defend the country in the face of the militants' advance, Blinken told CNN.

The United States' original mission in Afghanistan, launched to oust al Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, had been fulfilled, Blinken said, saying Washington had prevented further attacks by militants harbored by the Taliban.

But Biden has faced rising domestic criticism after sticking to the plan to withdraw, which was agreed under his Republican predecessor Donald Trump. On Saturday, Biden defended his decision, saying an 'endless American presence in the middle of another country's civil conflict was not acceptable to me'.

Republican lawmaker Michael McCaul said a Taliban takeover would revive the threat to the United States.

'We are going to go back to a pre-9/11 state. A breeding ground for terrorism,' he told CNN on Sunday.

Biden met with his national security team on Sunday by secure videoconference from the presidential retreat at Camp David to hear updates on evacuations and the security situation, a White House official said.

US Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, a Democrat like Biden, said at a news conference that the safety of US personnel and of Afghans who supported the Americans should be Washington's top concern.

'Job number one is for us to bring back, first, all American personnel... But second, all of the brave Afghans who helped our military, they have to be provided an exit to come to America,' Schumer said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ian Paterson could face fresh prosecution after more victims have come forward

Disgraced surgeon Ian Paterson could face fresh prosecution after at least 70 more victims have come forward.

The Glaswegian-born breast surgeon, 62, is currently serving 20 years for his 14-year campaign of botched ops he carried out in the West Midlands.

Dozens launched claims after a £22million fund was set up in July to ­compensate patients he carried out unnecessary surgery on.

Linda Millband, head of clinical negligence at Thompsons ­Solicitors, which is representing more than 60 new victims said there is potential for 'new charges' according to The Daily Record.

Last year inquests were opened by the coroner in Birmingham into the deaths of seven women who were treated by the surgeon.

The investigation will be to see whether they might have died as a result of botched treatment at his hands.

They are among 23 deaths being investigated at the request of West Midlands Police.

Speaking about the new cases, Linda said: 'If coroners find unlawful killing, that could trigger further investigation by the Crown ­Prosecution Service. I think there is a potential for new charges.'

The Glaswegian-born breast surgeon is currently serving 20 years for his 14-year campaign of botched ops he carried out in the West Midlands (Pictured: Good Hope Hospital in Sutton Coldfield)

She added: 'Most of the previous claims were for breast surgery on women but there do seem to be a lot more operations on men for colonoscopies and hernias.'

Spire Healthcare said the £22million fund 'covers all the costs associated with contacting former patients of Ian Paterson last year and providing ongoing support to them'.

Paterson, who is due to be freed in 2027, was jailed in 2017 for wounding with intent and ­unlawfully wounding nine women and one man he treated between 1997 and 2011.

He convinced cancer patients to undergo ops in NHS and private hospitals by inventing or exaggerating the risks of tumours to earn extra cash and maintain a successful reputation.

Jailed for 20 years for wounding with intent: Ian Paterson Butchering breast surgeon Ian Paterson is currently serving his 20-year prison sentence. What was he convicted of? He was convicted of 17 counts of wounding with intent and three counts of unlawful wounding between 1997 and 2011, after a trial in 2017. How did he harm patients? Paterson carried out 'experimental mastectomies' on women that left the breast tissue in place, allowing the cancer to return. In some cases, he also advised treatment for women when they did not have cancer and offered them more expensive procedures. Who has been affected? 675 out of 1,207 women who underwent the unregulated treatment had died by 2017. Where did he work? Paterson worked at NHS hospitals in the West Midlands and private clinics including those run by Spire hospitals. Advertisement

He carried out unapproved 'cleavage-sparing' mastectomies on patients that left behind breast tissue and risked a return of cancer.

A total of 675 out of 1,207 women who underwent the unregulated treatment had died by 2017.

In some cases he advised treatment for women who did not have cancer, offering them more expensive procedures.

More than 750 victims have already successfully claimed after receiving unapproved and life-threatening surgery from Paterson - who treated more than 11,000 patients.

Most of these victims were women who believed they had breast cancer, and received compensation from a £37million fund.

He worked at NHS hospitals in the West Midlands and private clinics, including those run by Spire hospitals.

Last year Spire Healthcare wrote to 5,500 former patients of Paterson - who were seen by the surgeon between 1993 and 2011 - after being criticised by an independent inquiry for not doing enough to contact them.

Dozens are understood to have been told Paterson carried out ­surgery that was not needed.

Thompsons Solicitors said it had been asked to manage the new fund and to represent additional victims of Paterson's crimes alongside Slater and Gordon.

Paterson was employed by Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust (HEFT) – since taken over by University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust (UHB).

He also had practising privileges in the independent sector at Spire Parkway, Solihull, and Spire Little Aston in Birmingham.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Actress Emily Atack was suffering from a terrible hangover after enjoying a boozy night for a friend's wedding in Manchester on Sunday.

The Inbetweeners star, 31, left the hotel she was staying in wearing dark sunglasses, her tracksuit bottoms, complete with an orange hoodie and light blue ripped jeans.

Emily later took to Instagram Stories to say she had a bad headache, and that she felt like death (by posting skull emojis), while her mother Kate Robbins played loud music from her car.

Rough night? Actress Emily Atack, 31, was suffering from a terrible hangover after enjoying a boozy night for a friend's wedding in Manchester on Sunday

Emily's bright blonde locks were pulled back into a messy bun, and she completed the casual ensemble with white and red Adidas Stan Smith trainers.

Emily looked ready to return home from the northern city as she dragged her huge blue suitcase behind her, and totted a black handbag on her arm while she clambered into a black Peugeot.

Taking to her Instagram stories, she documented the hangover with a string of videos begging her mum to turn down the radio as to not hurt her sore head, sarcastically saying: 'could you please turn it up mum?'

Keeping it casual: The Inbetweeners star left the hotel she was staying in in the northern city wearing her comfies, complete with a baggy orange hoodie and light blue jeans

Hangover: Making sure she blocked out the light, Emily wore oversized black Gucci sunglasses after the fun filled trip before sarcastically asking her mum to turn up the music in the car

In another snap, she looked laid back in the car, with her hoodie covering half her face, as she admitted to feeling under the weather and captioned the post: 'Ouch.'

Clearly not doing so well, she looked exasperated as she held her hand on her head and simply penned for the caption a string of skull emojis.

The Celebrity Juice captain turned heads on Saturday as she captured her sexy outfit in a mirror selfie which she posted to her Instagram.

Sore head? In another snap, she looked laid back in the car, with her hoodie covering half her face, and admitted to feeling under the weather as she captioned the post: 'Ouch'

Oh no: Clearly not doing so well, she looked exasperated as she held her hand on her head and simply penned for the caption a string of skull emojis

Standing out from the crowd in the drape-neck number, she clutched a red velour purse in her left hand along with her phone in her right.

From her earlobes swung a pair of oversized red-and-orange floral earrings and her makeup had been applied flawlessly.

Emily wore her sandy tresses in a middle parting, which she had tied behind her head, and flashed her bronzed arms in the unmissable outfit.

She elevated her height in a pair of neon orange heels and wore a pair of bangles on her wrist.

Looking good: The Celebrity Juice captain turned heads the night before as she captured her stunning outfit in a mirror selfie which she posted on Instagram

The outing comes a week after she appeared to be resurrecting her part as 'Charlotte Big Jugs' in The Inbetweeners.

Reprising her role 13 years on, Emily dressed as a schoolgirl, filming what appears to be a skit for ITV2's The Emily Atack Sketch Show.

In a clip shared to Instagram while on a break, she joked that she looked like she was 45-years-old in the white shirt and striped tie.

Her blonde locks in pigtails, Emily then used a device to inflate her bust - truly bringing her Inbetweeners character back to life.

She found it hilarious, giggling with those around her at the gag.

'Charlotte Big Jugs having a break down 13 years on!' she joked in the caption.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alex Reid and fiancée Nikki Manashe's baby daughter was rushed to hospital in the middle of the night.

Anastasia was taken in via ambulance during the early hours of Sunday morning, after her mum panicked at the amount her little one was vomiting.

Taking to Instagram that evening, Nikki, 36, reassured her followers that they were back home and 'safe' after the unsettling experience, and encouraged other parents to 'never ignore a poorly child'.

Panic: Alex Reid, 46, and fiancée Nikki Manashe's, 36, baby daughter Anastasia was rushed to hospital in the middle of the night on Saturday

Sharing a photograph of Anastasia strapped into an ambulance, Nikki wrote: 'Last night at 1am we ended up in an ambulance.'

She then posted a snap of her daughter sleeping soundly in her carrier, and explained: 'Luckily she was seen straight away as she is so tiny.'

Over a video of little Anastasia sweetly yawing, Nikki shared: 'Baby was vomiting so much stomach bile I panicked.

'This is to all mummy's it's ok to be worried and panic if something doesn't feel right. Doctor said I did the right thing. Never ignore a poorly baby, even if it seems like you're being over the top.'

Getting checked: Anastasia was taken in via ambulance during the early hours of Sunday morning, after her mum panicked at the amount her little one was vomiting

Documenting: Nikki shared a photograph of Anastasia strapped into an ambulance

Poor thing: Over a video of little Anastasia sweetly yawing, Nikki shared: 'Baby was vomiting so much stomach bile I panicked'

Nikki then posted another sweet video and wrote: 'We are safe at home. My everything. I now understand conditional love.'

At the end of July, Alex confirmed his fiancée Nikki had safely returned home after being rushed back to hospital following the birth of their daughter Anastasia.

Nikki had been rushed to hospital in the early hours of the morning and was told she may need surgery for internal bleeding and blood clotting after giving birth.

However Alex, 46, has since revealed that Nikki didn't have to undergo surgery and her bleeding had reduced, meaning she was able to return home.

Panic: Taking to Instagram that evening, Nikki reassured her followers that they were back home and 'safe' after the unsettling experience

Update: In July, Alex confirmed his fiancée Nikki had safely returned home after being rushed back to hospital following the birth of their little girl Anastasia

Sharing the news on Instagram, Alex wrote: 'I have had so many messages of kindness I thought I would reply here. I have both my girls back home from hospital.

'@ivf_mama_nikki thankfully didn't need surgery, the heavy bleeding is slowing down. I've learnt a lot that having a c section comes with risks if you don't rest properly...

'(You women are amazing what you go through) Nikki was doing to much around the home and we have all kept telling her off but she insists on being super mum and doing everything.

Health: Alex previously revealed he was anxiously waiting to find out if his fiancée Nikki needed surgery for internal bleeding

'I've officially taken over all house duties and she's on strict bed rest and is on antibiotics. Thanking everyone for your kind messages. Can't wait to update you all on good news with my girlies.'

Alex and Nikki welcomed their baby Anastasia Pixie after a seven-year IVF battle and five miscarriages.

Taking to Instagram, Alex said their daughter was being 'well looked after' in hospital as Nikki awaited the results of the tests.

Family: Alex wrote in the caption: 'A picture speaks a thousand words - just to update everyone @ivf_mama_nikki is in hospital with Anastasia Pixie and is being well looked after'

The MMA fighter shared a picture of Nikki's hand, which had a cannula inserted, reaching out to baby Anastasia, who was resting by her bedside.

Alex wrote in the caption: 'A picture speaks a thousand words - just to update everyone @ivf_mama_nikki is in hospital with Anastasia Pixie and is being well looked after.

'Tomorrow we find out if she needs surgery for internal bleeding and blood clotting. Keep us in your thoughts please.'

Baby joy: The couple welcomed their baby Anastasia Pixie in July

Exciting: The couple announced they were expecting a child last November after a gruelling seven-year IVF battle

Alex also uploaded a video from their hospital room of himself holding Nikki's hand before cooing of their daughter.

He said: 'Well my gorgeous darling lovely lady. I didn't expect to be here for my birthday.

'Although you're not feeling too great and you might have to have an operation we're going to be alright. And I have to thank you for the most wonderful gorgeous birthday gift in the whole universe, Anastasia Pixie.'

Turning the camera to face him, Alex added: 'I'm a happy boy. I'm a bit sad for Nikki but we're going to ok.'

Doting mum: The MMA fighter shared a picture of Nikki's hand, which had a cannula inserted, reaching out to baby Anastasia, who was resting by her bedside

Sweet: Taking to Instagram, Alex said their daughter was being 'well looked after' in hospital as Nikki awaited the results of the tests

Positive: Turning the camera to face him, Alex added: 'I'm a happy boy. I'm a bit sad for Nikki but we're going to ok'

Birthday: Alex said 'We may be in hospital for my birthday, but all will be ok, and I have the best birthday present of my life, little Anastasia Pixie Reid'

Nikki previously shared an image of their newborn daughter Anastasia Pixie, writing alongside: '7 years seems like such an awful long time to keep going. But you Anastasia were so worth the wait!!! I can't believe how lucky I am. 'I would cry all the time asking why me - now I know why...

'God was making me wait for the most perfect little angel sent from the heavens. I have only ever felt this kind of love with my own mother and I never thought I would feel this again. You have healed my broken heart.'

The couple welcomed their baby girl on the 13th July.

Sweet: Alex's fiancée Nikki previously shared an image of their newborn daughter Anastasia Pixie, after welcoming the tot following a seven-year IVF battle earlier this week

Her love: She penned: '7 years seems like such an awful long time to keep going. But you Anastasia were so worth the wait!!! I can't believe how lucky I am'

Nikki has documented her journey to motherhood with fans and previously suffered six miscarriages before announcing she was four weeks pregnant last November.

Announcing she had given birth she wrote a poem in the caption that read: 'Welcome to the world little Miss Reid. I loved you from the very start, You stole my breath, embraced my heart.

'Our life together has just begun, You're part of me my little one. As mother with child, each day I grew, My mind has always been with thoughts of you.

'As you lay next to me I dim the light, I whisper, 'I will always say I love you' every night. I loved you from the very start;

'You stole my breath, embraced my heart. As mother and child our journey has just begun, My heart's yours forever my perfect little one.'

Sportsman Alex, who is the ex-husband of Katie Price, also shares an eight-year-old daughter Dolly, with former partner Chantelle Houghton.

Loss: The pair had originally conceived twins, but sadly one of the babies died in December

The pair had originally conceived twins, but sadly one of the babies died in December.

At the time, Nikki explained to MailOnline that she is 'balancing sadness with happiness' after finding out she and Alex had lost one twin at her seven-and-a-half-week scan at Harley Street Fertility Clinic, in London, on December 2.

She said: 'I haven't planned on ever having twins - who does? But once I was pregnant with two babies I wanted them both so much.

'I had started planning to move to a new house in the countryside and visualised and dreamed of two babies growing up together.

'I felt like all this hard work had paid off and I had two amazing babies at the end of a very dark sad tunnel.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He famously showed off his manhood while paddleboarding with his fiancée Katy Perry.

And Orlando Bloom showed how much he loved that sense of freedom as he took another dip in the nude in an Instagram post shared with his 5.2 million followers on Sunday.

The 44-year-old actor flaunted his ripped physique while taking a swim in a gorgeous rural spot before showing off his peach-covered backside.

Letting loose: Orlando Bloom, 44, stripped down to the nude for an invigorating swim in nature on Sunday, before showing off his pert backside for his Instagram followers

Orlando was nude at least from the waist up in a photo and an accompanying video he posted of himself taking a swim in what was either a lake or a gentle river.

In the short clip, he sent water flying as he finished up a backstroke, before standing up in the shallow water and swiping his hair back.

'Ah!' he exhaled with delight. 'So amazing!'

It wasn't clear if the Lord Of The Rings star was wearing swim trunks or in the buff, but he stripped down for a follow-up photo.

Stripped down: Orlando had his bare bottom covered with a playful peach emoji as he grinned and flashed a thumbs up

Freedom! Orlando famously showed off his manhood while paddleboarding with his fiancée Katy during a holiday in Sardinia in 2016 (pictured)

Orlando had his bare bottom covered with a playful peach emoji as he grinned and flashed a thumbs up.

It appeared to be a campground, and there were people off in the distance on the other bank, but he had some clothing draped over his nether regions so as not to flash them.

He let the photos and video do all the talking and simply captioned the post with water droplets emojis.

The post was a hit with fans, who left plenty of cheeky comments of their own.

His fellow actor Josh Brolin commented with multiple rock on emojis, while makeup artist Michael Anthony joked, 'Who knew he had the BACK STROKE toooooo!!!'

Helena Christensen joked, 'That family on the other side,' and added a staring emoji, while Roma Downey just wrote that it was 'peachy.'

Free and clear: Orlando was nude at least from the waist up in a photo and an accompanying video he posted of himself taking a swim in what was either a lake or a gentle river

Taking a dip: In the short clip, he sent water flying as he finished up a backstroke, before standing up in the shallow water and swiping his hair back

Refreshing: 'Ah!' he exhaled with delight. 'So amazing!'

Having a laugh: His fellow actor Josh Brolin commented with multiple rock on emojis, while makeup artist Michael Anthony joked, 'Who knew he had the BACK STROKE toooooo!!!'

Orlando was likely referencing his infamous and oft-mocked nude paddleboarding photos, taken in 2016 while he was on an Italian vacation with his then-girlfriend Katy Perry.

He was seen totally unclothed as he kneeled and paddled, while Katy was fully clothed and sat a the front of the board, looking somewhat embarrassed.

In July of last year, she opened up to Howard Stern about the risqué photos and admitted that her beau tried to get her to strip down with him.

After Howard asked if she refused to go nude because there were photographers around, she replied, 'I mean, I would have never, like, set him up if I had a real thought,' she said, via Vanity Fair.

'But in the back of my mind...I am Jim Carrey in The Truman Show a little bit, so I thought maybe there would be a chance. I would say I'm a little bit more of the pragmatic in the partnership.'

Old times: Orlando was likely referencing his infamous and oft-mocked nude paddleboarding photos, taken in 2016 while he was on an Italian vacation with his then-girlfriend Katy Perry; seen together on July 31 in Capri, Italy

Although her instincts turned out to be correct, she didn't think it was particularly nude that her love wanted to let it all free.

'Well it was Europe. Honestly, we had had a pretty chill time for a week and everywhere we looked it was like everybody was naked. It was Europe, it was Italy, and I think he wanted to fit in with the locals and it was the end of the trip,' she continued.

She also joke that she'd been unimpressed the day before when Orlando had been bragging about how popular his franchises Lord Of The Rings and Pirates Of The Caribbean franchises were on Twitter.

'I was like, eye roll, eye roll, eye roll,' she said, 'and then all of the sudden, he is number one trending on Twitter and I was like, 'How?! How?''

Seeing the sights: Orlando didn't specify where he was when he took his most recent nude photos, but he last updated his fans a week ago as he and Katy were on a gorgeous tour of Italy

Orlando didn't specify where he was when he took his most recent nude photos, but he last updated his fans a week ago as he and Katy were on a gorgeous tour of Italy.

He and his wife-to-be began dating in early 2016, though they split just over a year later in February 2017.

But their love brought them back together, and they reunited one year later in February 2019.

In March of last year, Katy revealed in her Never Worn White music video that she was pregnant with their first child, and they welcomed their daughter Daisy, 11 months, on August 26, 2020.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

TV chef Sandra Lee got engaged to boyfriend Ben Youcef in France as her ex Andrew Cuomo's career implodes over sexual harassment allegations in New York.

Lee, 55, accepted 46 year-old Youcef's proposal during a romantic break in Paris. They were seen outside L'Avenue restaurant in on Saturday night after Youcef popped the question.

The couple visited the upmarket brasserie to enjoy a romantic dinner together.

Youcef also appeared to be wearing a band on his ring finger.

Sandra Lee couldn't contain her joy as she stepped out to dinner at L'Avenue in Paris with new love Ben Youcef

The couple who have been enjoying a long romantic holiday in France were seen sharing a passionate kiss as they headed to upscale French bistro, L'Avenue

Sandra looked stunning in a white satin dress as the pair danced on the Parisian streets

She was seen sporting what appeared to be a sizeable engagement ring

The former Food Network star appears happier than ever with her 42-year-old nonprofit interfaith leader beau

The couple could be seen holding hands and even began dancing playfully in the street

Youcef stopped Lee and twirled her into an embrace as they danced, before they continued down the street

Youcef then whisked Lee away with a cheeky smile as they continued on their journey in the Parisian twilight

At one point, Youcef got down on one knee, again, in order to take a picture of Lee posing against a moped

Youcef stooped to take a photo of Lee but paused for a moment to gaze at her with a smile as she lay back against the bike

The beaming couple hit the streets of Paris to celebrate their engagement after friends said they had been rooting for them since they first got together

The couple were captured whispering sweet nothings towards one another at a restaurant as the locals went about their evenings none the wiser

Youcef looked delighted to led Lee through the Parisian streets as he pointed out the sights with a smile

Lee and Youcef were spotted in the City of Love after Cuomo - the New York Governor - announced he would quit in two weeks on Tuesday, and were seen over the weekend hitting the town to celebrate their engagement.

'Ben really wanted to distract Sandra from all the news, so he whisked her away to Paris,' an unnamed source close to Youcef told the outlet.

'He knows how hard this has been on her and he wants to make sure she feels loved and supported.'

The source added: 'Ben is incredibly protective of Sandra. They're soulmates and head-over-heels in love.'

Youcef looked casual in a black leather jacket, denim jeans and white sneakers while Lee wore white satin dress of her own

The lovebirds were pictured as they made their way around the French capital on a peaceful summer's evening

Lee, a 55-year-old lifestyle guru, wore a white summer dress as the pair strolled around Paris

The pair traveled to Paris following the news of Cuomo's resignation after they had spent time in St. Tropez in the South of France last week

They stopped every few minutes to take in the sights and share an embrace as they wandered through the City of Love

Youcef couldn't help but kiss Lee as they wrapped their arms around one another on a peaceful summer's evening

They strolled around the streets and observed the Parisian architecture before finding a suitable location for a romantic evening meal

The lovebirds frolicked happily in the street before settling down for a romantic dinner

The couple opted for a twilight dinner at L'Avenue, a popular upmarket French bistro in the 8th arrondissement of Paris

They were seated outside as they chose to take in the atmosphere of the City of Love from the popular restaurant

The couple stole a precious kiss while seated at L'Avenue in Paris on a peaceful Saturday night

The couple continued their smooch while other diners at L'Avenue around them appeared oblivious as to who they were

A source close to Yousef said: 'Ben is incredibly protective of Sandra. They're soulmates and head-over-heels in love.'

The couple looked very much in love as they smiled, laughed and gazed into each other's eyes as they meandered through the city

Lee met Youcef after moving to Malibu and leaving behind the home she shared with Cuomo

Youcef, a divorced dad-of-two, was discovered by Steven Spielberg and went on to appear in his 2005 movie Munich

The couple were originally seen earlier this month in St. Tropez, in the south of France, but decided to hit up Paris after the news broke last Tuesday that Cuomo was resigning from his position as governor, effective August 24.

Just a few hours earlier, Page Six reported, Lee, the former chef and author who broke up with Cuomo in 2019, and Youcef were seen stopping by a French church in the French Riviera.

Lee and Cuomo never got engaged during their 14 years together. The relationship is said to have ended when Cuomo reportedly cheated on her. The former Food Network star was previously married to former KB Home CEO Bruce Karatz from 2001 to 2005.

Youcef, meanwhile, is a devoted father of five-year-old twins. He separated from his wife, California-based realtor Apryl Stephenson in 2019 and they filed for divorce in January 2020.

He is an interfaith leader, an actor and a producer who had his big break when Steven Spielberg cast him as a Palestinian member of Black September in the 2005 movie, Munich.

The couple were all smiles as they paraded around the French capital on Saturday night

The pair stopped to share kiss after kiss as they became overwhelmed in the City of Love

The pair looked to the sky to count their lucky stars for having met and become engaged

The pair looked at ease with one another as Youcef guided Lee through the historic streets with a protective arm around her

The couple took time to take in their environment soaking up the distinctly French atmosphere and admiring the architecture

The couple took a moment to peek through the window of French high-end retailer Franck Namani

Lee could be seen fixing one of the straps on her dress as she made her way inside

Lee went inside L'Avenue restaurant in Paris to fix something on her dress

After dinner, the pair lingered a while longer on the street taking in the evening air

The couldn't help but share another kiss as they stood outside the restaurant and were left in perfect harmony by the locals

Arms wrapped around one another, the couple chose to continue their tour on foot as they strode off into the night

Sandra Lee and Ben Youcef were seen strolling around the streets of St. Tropez earlier this month. They are now reportedly engaged, with Lee spotted wearing her ring in Paris

Friends have said the two are 'soulmates' and are 'head-over-heels' in love. Their engagement comes as Lee's ex Andrew Cuomo resigned as Governor of New York over sex pest claims

Before their trip to the City of Love, Youcef, 46, and Lee, 55, explored the market in St. Tropez

Lee wore a tastefully simple white dress as she glided around the sun-baked streets of St. Tropez

They strolled around the St. Tropez market before going on a five-hour shopping spree

The couple were spotted munching on fresh fruit from the market as they continued their tour of St. Tropez boutiques

Youcef led Lee through the streets with his arm around her shoulders as the couple strolled through the streets of the Cote d'Azur

Youcef delighted in showing Lee the sights of the popular southern French town

Friends have said that Youcef is very protective of Lee, so he brought her to Paris after news broke that her ex, Andrew Cuomo, announced he was resigning as New York governor

Lee and Youcef passionately kissed while walking through the market in Saint-Tropez

News of their relationship broke earlier this month, when Lee told Page Six that she had lost 25 pounds and was dating again during a UNICEF Gala in Capri.

They are believed to have met at a charity event in Santa Monica back in March, with Youcef making the first move.

A friend told Page Six they were drawn together because they are both 'grounded in spirituality,' with another saying, 'We're just happy for her. We want Sandra to be happy, she deserves it.'

And Lee, a former QVC star who later hosted her own Food Network show, does appear to be happy, telling People, 'I'm having the best summer of my life.'

Sources told the Post that friends have been rooting for them since they met in the spring, shortly after Lee moved to Malibu following her 2019 break-up with Cuomo.

'Ben is a serious and accomplished nonprofit Interfaith leader providing the call to prayer heard all around the world,' a source familiar with the couple told Page Six.

Lee had dated Andrew Cuomo for 14 years until she broke up with him in 2019

People close to Lee said she struggled to get her life back over the past two years in the wake of her split with Cuomo, with one friend telling Page Six: 'It's very hard for Sandra to move on - she's not done licking her wounds.

'She's just trying to do the best she can to keep her head above water,' the friend said, noting that Cuomo's sexual harassment scandal 'has all been tremendously horrible and painful for her to read about.'

'Her heart was absolutely shattered,' the friend said, even though it had been 'an open secret' that Cuomo was cheating on her during their time together.

'When she split with Cuomo, she has never even spoken out about her time with him, she's always kept her mouth shut,' the unnamed friend said. 'She's just trying to find some kind of solace and happiness.'

'This is the first joy Sandra has had in years,' another unnamed friend said, 'but it's really not accurate to say she's moved on.

'She's spent the past two years in anguish since her split from Andrew. She had to move across the country to get her life back together again.'

Lee moved to Malibu, California following the 2019 break-up, where she bought a $3.4million beach house.

She sold her Mt. Kisko, New York home - named 'Lily Pond' - for $1.85 million last October.

The star was famously seen loading a U-Haul truck with her possessions before beginning the mammoth journey to her new home on the other side of the US.

Last Tuesday, Cuomo announced he was resigning as governor amid an attorney general's report showing that he had sexually harassed 11 women while in office

He has continued to deny the sexual harassment allegations. Pictured last week on August 10

Cuomo, meanwhile, gave his two-weeks notice on August 10, just weeks after Attorney General Letitia James released a scathing report concluding that he sexually harassed 11 women while in office.

He had repeatedly denied those claims, even as he announced his resignation, saying: 'Part of New York tough is being New York smart. New York smart tells us that this situation and moment are not about the facts. It's not about the truth. It's not about thoughtful analysis. It's about how do we make the system better.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is expecting her first child with fiancé Andre Gray.

And Leigh-Anne Pinnock, 29, looked radiant as she showed off her growing baby bump in a beautiful Instagram post on Saturday.

The Little Mix star posed for a slew of empowering naked snaps, telling fans in the caption: 'It's nearly time'.

The beauty embraced her changing body and oozed confidence in the series of pictures shared with her 7.1 million followers.

In the sweet snaps she is seen cradling her bump as she enters the final stages of pregnancy with her first child with footballer fiancé Andre.

The mum-to-be concealed her breasts with her hands and hair was styled in long braids.

Leigh-Anne captioned the post: 'I have dreamt of the moment I get to meet you, hold you guide you teach you It’s nearly time.'

Stunning: Leigh-Anne Pinnock, 29, showed off her growing baby bump in beautiful Instagram post on Saturday

Incredible: The star's pals were quick to comment on her stunning post, with Rochelle Humes calling the singer a 'goddess'

Fans and celebrity pals were quick to comment on the star's paired back post.

This Morning presenter Rochelle Humes commented 'Goddess'.

X Factor contestant Fleur East declared that the Little Mix star looked 'so beautiful!!!'

Leigh-Anne is one of the two Little Mix stars due to give birth later this year.

Her bandmate Perrie Edwards also revealed she was expecting her first child with Liverpool footballer Alex Oxlade Chamberlain shorty afterwards.

Beautiful: The Little Mix star posed for a slew of empowering naked snaps which celebrate her growing baby bump

Her stunning pictures come as Little Mix made chart history as they became the first girl group to score 100 collective weeks in the Top 10 Official Singles Chart three weeks ago.

The pop group, made up of Perrie, 28,Jade Thirlwall, 28, and Leigh-Anne, hit the landmark with their latest single Heartbreak Anthem in collaboration with Galantis and David Guetta.

After the achievement, Leigh-Anne told Little Mix fans on Official Chart: 'Wow! It’s amazing, and we wouldn’t have done this without you guys.'

'You never fail to blow us away – you’re just incredible and we wouldn’t be here without you. Thank you.'

Girl power: Her bandmate Perrie Edwards also revealed she was expecting her first child with Liverpool footballer Alex Oxlade Chamberlain shorty afterwards

A collective 100 weeks in the Top 10 far exceeds any other girl group in UK chart history.

Girls Aloud were the closest to hitting the landmark with 61 weeks in the singles chart, with iconic Motown group The Supremes just behind with 59 weeks.

And even the iconic British girl power group Spice Girls couldn't hit the record as they only managed 50 weeks in the top 10 singles chart.

Little Mix have landed 18 UK top 10 singles to date, including five number ones - with Sweet Melody topping the charts most recently in January this year.

The landmark comes after it was reported that the show that launched their career, the X factor, had been axed on Wednesday evening.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo spoke out about body positivity prior to taking to social media to decry 'racist' and 'fat-shaming' messages she received on social media amid the release of her single Rumors with Cardi B.

The 33-year-old singer, chatting Friday with Zane Lowe of Apple Music, discussed the scrutiny about her appearance amid her success.

'I feel like fat is the worst thing people can say about me at this point,' Lizzo said. 'This is the biggest insecurity. It's like, "How dare a pop star be fat?" I had to own that.'

The latest: Lizzo, 39, spoke out about body positivity Friday, prior to taking to social media Sunday to decry 'racist' and 'fat-shaming' messages she received on social media amid the release of her single Rumors with Cardi B

She explained how she feels her journey up the top of the charts has differed from other artists.

'I feel like other people who were put on that pedestal, or who become pop stars, probably have other insecurities or have other flaws,' she said, 'but they can hide it behind a veneer of being sexy and being marketable.'

'There's still so many people who suffer from being marginalized systemically. Meanwhile, there's a plus-size Black girl at the Grammys.'

Lizzo said things 'got a long way to go' in society amid the disparities based on race and appearance, as 'the infrastructure has not changed as much.

Exchange: The singer chat Friday with Zane Lowe of Apple Music, as they discussed the scrutiny about her appearance amid her success.

Lizzo explained how she feels her journey up the top of the charts has differed from other artists in the chat

Lizzo said things 'got a long way to go' in society amid the disparities based on race and appearance, as 'the infrastructure has not changed as much'

'Plus-size Black women are still not getting the treatment they deserve in hospitals and from doctors and at work,' she said.

On Sunday, Lizzo took to Instagram Stories to express her anguish amid the nasty feedback she received amid the release of Rumors, which marks her first single in more than two years, since Cuz I Love You in April of 2019.

'People say s*** about me that doesn’t even make sense,' Lizzo said in the candid social media clip, in which she used a tissue to wipe away her tears. 'It’s fatphobic, it’s racist and it’s hurtful - if you don’t like my music cool, if you don’t like Rumors the song, cool but a lot of people don’t like me because of the way I look.'

The Grammy Award-winning performer said she feels the loving energy she tries to put out isn't reciprocated.

Lizzo on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B

Emotional: The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling work schedule

'I’m putting so much loving energy into the world ... and sometimes I feel like the world don't love me back,' said the recording artist, whose real name is Melissa Viviane Jefferson. 'It doesn’t matter how much positive energy you put into the world, you’re still going to have people that have something mean to say about you.'

The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling schedule of writing, performing and promoting, but the reaction to Rumors has been an exception.

'I’m more sensitive and it gets to me ... I feel so down, I'm hurt so hard,' the Detroit native said, adding that she's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure.'

In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers.

Busy: The Detroit native said he's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure

Moving forward: The lauded artist was seen on the social media site with awards in the background

Cardi B took to her defense in a tweet, imparting her own wisdom on the topic of how to mentally deal with the haters.

'When you stand up for yourself they claim [you're] problematic & sensitive,' she said. 'When you don’t they tear you apart until you crying like this. Whether you skinny, big, plastic, they going to always try to put their insecurities on you. Remember these are nerds looking at the popular table.'

Cardi B also shared screen grabs documenting the early success of Rumors while adding that 'body shaming and callin her mammy is mean & racist as f***.

Double trouble: In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers

Cardi B took to Twitter to defend her musical peer against the torrent of hateful tweets

'Rumors is doing great,' she said. 'Stop trying to say the song is flopping to dismiss a woman emotions on bullying or acting like they need sympathy. The song is top 10 on all platforms.'

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release.

'Lizzo makes a song about people spending energy trying to bring women down,' Jamil said. 'Twitter erupts in abuse about her talent and mostly her appearance, and then she cries on IG live while addressing how damaging this culture is, and she gets made fun of for crying. This is so f****d up.

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release

Chloe credited Lizzo for inspiring her with her candor

She continued: 'This app has spawned, encouraged and celebrated the most depraved, dehumanized and depressing side of human beings. It’s not FUNNY that you’re hurting some innocent cheerful musician’s mental health. It’s not going to take back the pain of whatever your school bullies did to you.

'When you pile onto and Enjoy the pain of a Black woman who literally only tries to uplift other people, while NOT spending your time piling onto and going after actual abusers and predators… it doesn’t make you cool. It highlights what a useless, irrelevant, vicious pig you are.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer Hudson says that of all of the characters in a potential Hercules project, the one she would most want to play would be Calliope.

The actress/singer, 39, appeared in a segment for the outlet WIRED in which she answered questions most commonly asked online about her.

Hudson - in response to the question, 'Who is Jennifer Hudson playing in Hercules?' - said that all of her costars in her 2006 film Dreamgirls have been seen in Disney productions.

The latest: Jennifer Hudson, 39, says that of all of the characters in a potential Hercules project, the one she would most want to play would be Calliope

'Y'all listen close - all my Dreamgirls cast members, this is a fun fact, have been in Disney films,' she said, citing Beyonce, Jamie Foxx, Eddie Murphy and Anika Noni Rose.

The Academy Award-winning actress, said, 'Where's my Disney role?' noting her past experience with the character.

'I was Calliope, the head muse, on a Disney cruise ship, so that means I'm ready for my part,' Hudson said. 'We are the muses, goddesses of the arts and proclaimers of heroes. That was me, Calliope.'

She continued: 'So I'm ready, just roll the camera. You ain't even got to send a script, I don't need the music. I'm ready to shoot. So I'll just wait for your call, thank you.'

Details: The actress/singer appeared in a segment for the outlet WIRED in which she answered questions most commonly asked online about her

Coincidence: Hudson said that all of her costars in her 2006 film Dreamgirls have been seen in Disney productions

Hudson in 2015 told W Magazine about how her experience as an entertainer on the cruise ship prior to her showbiz breakout in finishing in the top 10 on American Idol season three in 2004.

'I was on a Disney cruise line the year I decided to audition for American Idol,' she said. 'I was Calliope the muse in Hercules: The Muse-ical and I was also the Circle of Life soloist in Disney's cruise.

'And in that show, I narrated the show, I did a lot of singing and we had a lot of choreography, as well. It's part of how I got Dreamgirls because they took that as an acting credit.'

Hudson can currently be seen playing Aretha Franklin in the biopic Respect, which comes about three years following the iconic singer's death in 2018 at age 76.

Backstory: Hudson had previously performed on a Disney cruise ship before her breakout on American Idol

The Academy Award-winning actress, said, 'Where's my Disney role?' noting her past experience with the Calliope character
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Home and Away star Lincoln Lewis has shared a photo of a family birthday party that noticeably doesn't include his NRL legend father, Wally.

The telling post over the weekend was to celebrate the fourth birthday of his nephew William, the son of Lincoln's brother Mitch.

'Happy 4th birthday to my little champion of a nephew, William,' Lewis posted, in a photo that also includes his mother Jacqui, sister Jamie-Lee, brother Mitch, and his wife Sarah with their four children.

Queensland rugby league great Wally Lewis is not seen in the picture.

In a shock to fans of the high-profile couple, Lewis quietly split from Jacqui after 36 years of marriage last year, and started a relationship with Townsville mum and writer Lynda Adams.

Lincoln Lewis (right) posted the celebration of his nephew's birthday with mother Jacqui (left), sister Jamie-Lee (back right), brother Mitchell (check shirt) and Mitchell's family

Lincoln Lewis and his dad, legendary rugby league player Wally Lewis, arrive at the 2014 Logie Awards in Melbourne

Lewis senior has not publicly discussed the marriage breakup, but in a statement earlier this year acknowledged the 'pain and upset' the end of the relationship caused the family.

'I want to acknowledge the pain and upset my family has gone through since Jacqui and I separated last year,' he said.

'I hope over time we can rebuild our ties and move on with life.

'I will confirm I am now in another relationship and only ask for the media to respect our privacy.'

Former Home and Away star Lincoln spoke about his parents' high-profile split during an appearance on The Anj, Rob & Robbo Show in May.

'It's been hard on everyone obviously, and anyone who goes through stuff... it's obviously going to be hard,' Lincoln told the show's Robert McKnight.

'You're going through things in the public eye and that comes with the territory.'

Wally Lewis with his family before the end of his 36-year marriage to wife Jacqui (left)

Asked to comment on how his mother Jacqui was coping with the split, Lincoln said she's 'surrounded by good people who love and care about her'.

In February, the league great was seen at son Mitchell's house to celebrate the sixth birthday of nephew Luke.

The appearance helped dispel stories Lewis was no longer on speaking terms with his three children as a result of his break-up with Jacqui.

Lincoln Lewis is known to be especially close to his mother, who encouraged his pursuit of an acting career.

'He has always been open about that with people close to him,' a friend of Lewis told News Limited at the time of the marriage split.

'He has been known to say that he was raised by his mother.'

At the time the breakup became public, Lewis also took to Instagram to share his feelings.

Wally Lewis and wife Jacqui at the Dally M Awards in Sydney in 2016

'When you have a friend who checks on and wants nothing but the best for you without motives... keep them close, such souls are rare,' Lincoln posted.

'Try to be like this as much as I can but wanna show some appreciation... lucky to have such amazing people in my life.'

Wally Lewis became one of the most acclaimed players in rugby league after a stellar playing career in the Queensland Rugby League, the Australian Rugby League and eventually as captain of Queensland's State of Origin team.

After retiring in 1992, he made a successful transition into the media as a commentator and nightly sports newsreader with Channel Nine. He was named a rugby league Immortal in 1999.

His son Lincoln is best known for his role as Geoff Campbell on the Channel Seven's long-running Home and Away soap, from 2007-2010.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid showed off her incredible bikini body in a new photo from her summer vacation in Ibiza.

On Sunday, the 24-year-old supermodel shared an image in which she was seen from the chest down while lounging outside in a sexy two-piece.

The runway star was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh as she draped her toned leg over a blue patterned cushion.

Mystery: Bella Hadid was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh in a sexy bikini snap from her vacation in Ibiza

Bella, who was laying next to a backgammon board, captioned her post: 'Undefeated.'

The Vogue cover star is a backgammon enthusiast and was spotted picking a new board during a trip to Paris last month.

Hadid flaunted her cleavage in a pink and maroon triangle top. She pulled the straps of her skimpy bikini bottoms high over her hips, showcasing her taut midriff.

The brunette beauty's long waves spilled over her shoulder as she reclined next to a glass of white wine and a pepperoni pizza.

Sizzling: Later on Saturday, the stunning model shared a mirror selfie to her Instagram Story in which she displayed her flawless figure in her bikini

Trendy: She also posted a series of photos on her Instagram in which she was seen striking a variety of poses in a light blue long-sleeved cutout bodysuit

Relaxing: In another photo, Bella donned a black string bikini as she floated on her back in a pool

The catwalk queen accessorized with several pink and orange beaded bracelets and a gold watch along with a pinkie ring.

In another photo, Bella donned a black string bikini as she floated on her back in a pool.

Hadid also shared two images of the food she was enjoying during her trip. In one photo, a bowl of delicious-looking croissants was seen on a wood table as well as a cutting board covered with bread crumbs.

Yum! Hadid also shared two images of the food she was enjoying during her trip. In one photo, a bowl of delicious-looking croissants was seen on a wood table as well as a cutting board covered with bread crumbs

Delicious: Platters of fresh pineapple slices and kiwi as well as a bowl of blueberries and strawberries were displayed in another shot

Fun: Bella concluded her post with a photo of a movie playing on a giant outdoor poolside screen at night

Platters of fresh pineapple slices and kiwi as well as a bowl of blueberries and strawberries were displayed in another shot.

Bella concluded her post with a photo of a movie playing on a giant outdoor poolside screen at night.

Later on Saturday, the stunning model shared a mirror selfie to her Instagram Story in which she displayed her flawless figure in her bikini. The two piece was by Gone Girl star's Emily Ratajkowski's swimsuit line Inamorata Woman.

Hadid wore the bikini top high on her chest, flashing a bit of underboob. She held her iPhone over her face as she took the sizzling snap.

On the photo she tagged Ratajkowski and Inamorata Woman. She wrote, 'Thank you @emrata @inamoratawoman Jadoreeeee.'

She also posted a series of photos on her Instagram page in which she was seen striking a variety of poses in a light blue long-sleeved cutout bodysuit.

Statement piece: The daring bodysuit was adorned with strands of brightly-colored beads that hung in between the cutouts across her chest and midriff

Stylish: She paired the bodysuit with baggy textured low-rise jeans and pale blue sandals

The daring bodysuit was adorned with strands of brightly-colored beads that hung in between the cutouts across her chest and midriff.

She paired the bodysuit with baggy textured low-rise jeans and pale blue sandals. Hadid accessorized with neon colored beaded bracelets and gold decorative rings on almost every finger.

Bella added a green butterfly clip at the bottom of one strand of hair to completed her 90s-inspired ensemble.

She was seen sitting outdoors on a white and sandstone staircase against a desert background. A couple of photos featured the model as she pulled her hair on top of her head and gave the camera a sultry stare.

Throwback: Bella added a green butterfly clip at the bottom of one strand of hair to completed her 90s-inspired ensemble

Scenic: She was seen sitting outdoors on a white and sandstone staircase against a desert background

Her latest shots may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month.

Kalman was recently featured on Hadid's Instagram page, which boasts 44.8million followers.

Kalman was included in last week's photo dump from his and Bella's 'Day off in paradise' together, which was shot back in February.

The snap showed Bella planting a kiss on Marc's cheek, while other showed the model prancing around a tropical destination in various bikinis.

New love: Her latest shots may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month

Her newest photos confirm that her romance with Marc has been going on for months.

The two were only romantically connected in July, when she shared a photo of them embracing in a since-deleted post, but a source shared with Page Six that the lovebirds had been together since the summer of 2020, though they 'hid it well.'

Their scheme to hide the relationship reportedly involved having Marc drive her car, but when they arrived at their destination he would let her out but would stay in the car and park it elsewhere, so as to be less conspicuous.

At the time that she went Instagram official with her Marc, who's an art director, her older sister Gigi Hadid left a smiley face emoji in the comments section.

Love: The model's sultry snaps may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month; the pair pictured in February
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jackie 'O' Henderson has revealed her incredible new figure after losing a whopping 10kg in just a few months.

The KIIS FM radio host, 46, embarked on her weight loss journey in June after signing with WW (previously known as Weight Watchers) as a celebrity ambassador.

Now, having finally hit her goal weight, Jackie says she's feeling better than ever.

Brand-new me! Jackie 'O' Henderson, 46, has debuted her her trim new figure after shedding 10kg with WW (previously known as Weight Watchers)

'I feel great. I've got so much more energy and I don't walk past the mirror anymore and think, "My God, how did I get to this point?"' she told Woman's Day on Monday.

'I can wear what I want, and I finally feel like my old self again.'

Jackie signed up to WW after noticing her weight was spiralling out of control due to her busy schedule, irregular sleeping patterns and poor food choices.

'I finally feel like my old self again': The KIIS FM host embarked on her weight loss program in June and is now feeling better than ever. Pictured left at the start of her journey in June, right in August

Cover girl! Jackie also showed off her new physique on the cover of Monday's Woman's Day

Jackie's day on a plate Breakfast: Chicken or vegetable soup Lunch: Turkey burger or Cruskits with ham, cottage cheese and tomato Dinner: Fish and vegetables, or poached chicken Snacks: Nuts and yoghurt Advertisement

Since signing up to WW, Jackie has been following a strict, yet nutritionally balanced, meal plan.

Describing her day on a plate, Jackie told Woman's Day she prefers to eat savoury food for breakfast, such as chicken or vegetable soup.

For lunch, she'll have a turkey burger or Cruskits with ham, cottage cheese and tomato, while dinner typically consists of fish and vegetables or poached chicken.

For snacks, the mother of one has swapped unhealthy options for nuts and yoghurt.

Discussing her weight loss on Monday's Kyle and Jackie O Show, Jackie said she 'never exercised once' during her 10kg slim-down.

Weight Watchers does offer an extensive range of exercise plans for clients, but it seems Jackie chose to avoid that part of the program.

Jackie, a notorious yo-yo dieter, has struggled with her weight for years.

Last May, she admitted she was 'embarrassed' about the weight she'd gained during lockdown and was desperate to lose the kilos before starring on The Masked Singer.

Ashamed: Last May, she admitted she was 'embarrassed' about the weight she'd gained during lockdown and was desperate to lose the kilos before starring on The Masked Singer

Embarrassed: She even revealed she was so self-conscious she would no longer let her daughter 10-year-old daughter, Kitty (left), see her naked

Jackie even revealed she was so self-conscious she would no longer let her 10-year-old daughter, Kitty, see her naked.

'Over the weekend I was in my bathroom and the door was closed. I took off my clothes because I was going to get in the bath,' she explained at the time.

'Kitty went to walk through into the bathroom and I screamed, 'Don't come in!' And she said, "Why?" And I said, "Because I'm naked."

'Kitty said, "You're my mum. I see you naked all the time." And I said, "I know, but I just don't want you seeing me naked right now." Because I'm just so embarrassed about how much weight I've put on.'

Three months later, Jackie revealed she'd begged The Masked Singer's producers to remove 'unflattering' footage of her looking bloated after gaining 5kg overnight.

She said she'd experienced water retention and bloating after eating 80 seaweed snacks backstage the previous night.

'I didn't want to leave the house': In June, Jackie spoke about how her weight gain had affected her life, after she stacked on the kilos during Covid and became the 'biggest I have ever been'

Unfortunately, it was too late for a costume change, so Jackie had to squeeze into her dress and felt uncomfortable throughout the taping.

In June, Jackie spoke about how her weight gain had affected her life, after she stacked on the kilos during Covid and became the 'biggest I have ever been' .

'I stopped wanting to leave the house and was avoiding social outings because I just didn't feel well, motivated or confident anymore,' Jackie said on air, adding that she would spend up to $300 per week on Uber Eats.

Woman on a mission: 'I joined WW so that I can feel healthier, be more active, feel good about myself, and fit into my old clothes again,' Jackie said in June

She went on to explain how her busy lifestyle and early-morning starts affected her sleeping pattern and energy levels.

Before she knew it, she'd slipped into unhealthy eating habits.

'It can be a challenge to set a good standard for the day when you're up at 4:30am and running out the door – your whole day and eating schedule can be a little bit out of whack from there,' she said.

'I was never cooking for myself, Uber Eats was my best friend. It was expensive and a really unhealthy habit, which made me feel so bad about myself.'

'I joined WW so that I can feel healthier, be more active, feel good about myself, and fit into my old clothes again,' she continued, adding: 'It's also important to me that I set a good example for my daughter [Kitty] about a healthy lifestyle and approach to eating.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Last December, the Mail published a landmark four-part investigation into Victoria Roberts Giuffre’s allegations against Prince Andrew.

During months of painstaking work we obtained testimony from new witnesses, gained access to sensitive documents and the contents of diaries and interviewed high-level sources.

Our inquiries took us from London to New York, Boston, Florida, the US Virgin Islands, South Africa and Australia and resulted in stunning revelations – a number of which undermined Miss Roberts’ allegations while others cast doubts on some of the Duke’s claims of innocence.

Here we assess the strengths and weaknesses of her case against the Queen’s second son.

Last December, the Mail published a landmark four-part investigation into Victoria Roberts Giuffre’s allegations against Prince Andrew

A ‘DAMNING’ PHOTOGRAPH AND SEX IN THE BATH

Her Complaint, Paragraphs 37-38:

‘On one occasion Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff in London at Maxwell’s home. During this encounter Epstein, Maxwell and Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff, a child, to have sexual intercourse with Prince Andrew against her will. The photograph depicts Prince Andrew and Maxwell at Maxwell’s home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing plaintiff.’

The photo of a grinning Andrew with his hand on the naked midriff of 17-year-old Miss Roberts, who was being sexually exploited at the time by his friend Jeffrey Epstein, is the bombshell at the heart of her case.

The picture, which shows Ghislaine Maxwell smiling in the background, is said to have been taken in London on March 10, 2001.

It appears to corroborate Roberts’s claims of closeness between her and Andrew. For his part, the Duke has questioned its authenticity and says he cannot remember it being taken, or even having met Miss Roberts at all.

He made these denials in his November 2019 car-crash interview with the BBC’s Emily Maitlis in which he said it could not have happened because he had taken his daughter Princess Beatrice, then 12, to a party at a branch of Pizza Express in Woking, Surrey.

Doubts have also been cast on her lurid description of bathroom fumbling which led to sex in the bath at Maxwell’s home (pictured). His supporters argue that the bath tub in place at the time did not match the one described by Miss Roberts and was ‘too small’ for such an encounter

Our investigation into the events of that 24 hours revealed that Beatrice had ‘absolutely no recollection’ of the party her father claimed to have attended. Nor could her hosts recall his presence.

We also revealed that, according to a family diary, the Duke had booked a home manicure that afternoon. Impeccable sources also said he had a ‘very vague’ recollection of waiting under a bridge near Pizza Express to collect his daughter.

The sense of collective memory failure deepened when housekeepers on duty that weekend at the prince’s home – Sunninghill Park, Ascot – told us they ‘can’t remember’ his movements either. The royal protection officer thought to have been on duty is now dead.

But questions were also asked about the accuracy of Miss Roberts’s claim that she went clubbing at Tramp in London with a ‘sweaty’ Andrew that evening. Her claim that he drank alcohol, for example, is not credible as he is well-known to be a lifelong teetotaller.

Doubts have also been cast on her lurid description of bathroom fumbling which led to sex in the bath at Maxwell’s home. His supporters argue that the bath tub in place at the time did not match the one described by Miss Roberts and was ‘too small’ for such an encounter.

But Andrew’s claim that he could not sweat thanks to a medical condition drew guffaws of disbelief.

The photo of a grinning Andrew with his hand on the naked midriff of 17-year-old Miss Roberts, who was being sexually exploited at the time by his friend Jeffrey Epstein, is the bombshell at the heart of her case

A royal puppet in New York

Her Complaint, Paragraph 39:

‘On another occasion, Prince Andrew abused Plaintiff in Epstein’s New York mansion in this District. During this encounter, Maxwell forced Plaintiff, a child, and another victim to sit on Prince Andrew’s lap as Prince Andrew touched her. During his visit Prince Andrew forced Plaintiff to engage in sex acts against her will.’

In his disastrous Newsnight interview, Andrew denied that he was an overnight guest at Epstein’s Manhattan mansion at 9 East 71st Street in the spring of 2001.

The Mail’s investigation proved that he had visited, however. And there was also an unexplained five hours spent by the Duke in the city earlier in the same trip.

The Duke had arrived in the Big Apple on official duties connected to the Outward Bound Trust charity, of which he was chair of trustees, on Monday, April 9, 2001.

That afternoon, between 1.45pm and 6.45pm, when he was due at a formal dinner, he managed to put himself in a potentially compromising situation. This period was described by two words that appeared in the confidential and previously unpublished copy of the Prince’s itinerary obtained by the Daily Mail: ‘Private Time’.

Exactly how that time was spent has never been fully explained by him. But just a six-minute walk from the Consul General’s residence was the biggest townhouse in Manhattan, which belonged to his ‘business mentor’, Epstein.

In his disastrous Newsnight interview, Andrew denied that he was an overnight guest at Epstein’s Manhattan mansion at 9 East 71st Street (pictured) in the spring of 2001

Flight logs appear to confirm witness accounts that earlier the same day Roberts, Epstein, Maxwell, and another young, though not under-age, female masseuse called Johanna Sjoberg had flown to New York on the tycoon’s private jet.

Sjoberg said she did indeed sit on Prince Andrew’s lap on a couch at Epstein’s house and the Duke put his hand on her breast. Maxwell, who had brought out a latex Spitting Image puppet of Andrew, then placed one of its hands hand on the breast of Roberts, who was sitting on the other side of HRH. Sjoberg said the situation seemed humorous rather than predatory.

But Miss Roberts, in an interview with a Sunday newspaper in 2011, her unpublished memoir of the same year, a 2015 deposition under oath, and later TV interviews, claimed events then took a sinister turn. She says she and Andrew went to a massage room known as ‘the dungeon’ where they had sex.

In the 2015 deposition, filed for a defamation action against Maxwell, Giuffre’s recollection was quite specific. ‘I had sex with Prince Andrew... in Epstein’s New York mansion in spring 2001. I was 17 at the time. Epstein called me down to his office. When I got there Epstein was there, along with Maxwell, Johanna Sjoberg and Andy.

‘I was very surprised to see him again. Epstein and Maxwell were making lewd jokes about Randy Andy. I had the impression Andy had come to see Epstein and have sex with me. There was no apparent purpose for Andy to be there.’

She was purportedly paid $400 on that occasion for her services.

Flight logs appear to confirm witness accounts that earlier the same day Roberts (pictured), Epstein, Maxwell, and another young, though not under-age, female masseuse called Johanna Sjoberg had flown to New York on the tycoon’s private jet

In his Maitlis interview, the Duke was challenged about the encounter and Sjoberg’s evidence. Asked if he visited Epstein’s mansion that month. He replied: ‘I probably did... because of what I was doing, I was staying with the consul general which is further down the street on Fifth so I wasn’t... I wasn’t staying there. I may have visited but definitely didn’t, definitely, definitely no, no, no activity.’

After an overnight trip to Boston to carry out Outward Bound duties, the Mail investigation established Andrew returned to New York and stayed, with a police bodyguard, at Epstein’s mansion. The sources said Roberts was not present then, nor was Epstein or anyone aside from housekeepers.

THE CURIOUS CASE OF LITTLE ST JAMES

Her Complaint, Paragraph 40:

‘On another occasion Prince Andrew sexually abused Plaintiff on Epstein’s private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands, Little St. James.’

Our investigations confirmed, for the first time, that Andrew was on Epstein’s island at the same time as Miss Roberts during the Easter weekend of 2001. Immediately after leaving New York, Andrew was due to travel to the Bahamas to join his estranged wife and their two daughters for a family holiday.

Instead, on Good Friday, April 13, 2001, we revealed that Andrew flew to Little St James after new travel arrangements were made by Ghislaine Maxwell. Flight logs and personal accounts suggest Epstein, Maxwell, Roberts and Sjoberg had flown there ahead of Andrew. The Prince and his bodyguard spent 48 hours as Epstein’s guest at a ‘weekend-long party’ before flying to the Bahamas for the delayed rendezvous with his family.

Sources close to the Duke conceded to the Mail that Andrew had been on the island that Easter. So was a US financier called Gwendolyn Beck.

Our investigations confirmed, for the first time, that Andrew was on Epstein’s island at the same time as Miss Roberts during the Easter weekend of 2001

In emails to a third party in 2016, Beck, 42, recalled: ‘The Prince was always charming, polite and a gentleman to me. As I remember, he arrived very late at night (on Little St James) spent the next day/night, and left early the following morning. He was in the bungalow next to me, and I heard no strange noises or anything unusual. If anything, he was flirting with me.’

Flight logs suggest Beck left the island on Easter Monday with Epstein, Maxwell and Roberts. Roberts has told a different story of Prince’s behaviour on Little St James. Or, rather, stories. She alleges the third sex attack on her by the Prince took place on the island during an open-air orgy involving up to eight other teenage girls – not during that 2001 Easter break, but later that year.

Yet there are inconsistencies in Miss Roberts’s accounts that remain unexplained. In 2011 she wrote the draft of a personal memoir called The Billionaire Playboys’ Club in which she described an episode she claims took place on Little St James days after her 18th birthday on August 9, 2001.

After French model agency boss Jean-Luc Brunel arrived with an entourage consisting of Russian models, the group repaired to Epstein’s cabana. Roberts wrote: ‘There was no need for words here... Through glimpses in between bodies crossing over me, I could see Jeffrey and Brunel watching us, sitting in a chair with their hands around their (genitals).

‘“The best part is they don’t even speak English, so there’s never a need to keep them amused,” I could hear one of the men divulge and (I’m) pretty sure it came from Jeffrey.’

Under oath in January 2015 she described an identical scenario, save for an important change in participants. ‘The third time I had sex with Andy was in an orgy on Epstein’s private island,’ she stated. I was around 18 at the time. Epstein, Andy, approximately eight other young girls, and I had sex together.

Immediately after leaving New York, Andrew (file image) was due to travel to the Bahamas to join his estranged wife and their two daughters for a family holiday. Instead, on Good Friday, April 13, 2001, we revealed that Andrew flew to Little St James after new travel arrangements were made by Ghislaine Maxwell

‘The other girls all appeared to be under the age of 18 and didn’t really speak English. Epstein laughed about the fact they couldn’t really communicate, saying that they are the “easiest” girls to get along with.’

Now Andrew rather than Brunel was Epstein’s companion at the orgy. That second scenario was repeated in a 2015 newspaper interview she gave.

All three accounts had striking similarities: The seven or eight Russian or East European girls provided by Brunel; their lack of English; Epstein’s joke about the utility of the language barrier; the provocative photoshoot which degenerated into an orgy.

But in the first version of the orgy, described in her memoir from which she hoped to make significant profit, the Duke does not appear at all. In fact there is no suggestion she had sex with him on the island.

THE VANISHED RANCH SEX ALLEGATION

Miss Roberts’ varying accounts of the this orgy are not alone in being potentially troublesome to her case against Andrew if it goes to court.

There was a fourth and final claim of sexual abuse committed by the Prince against Miss Roberts, which appears in the draft of her 2011 memoir, which has since become a legal exhibit.

She described being sent by air to Epstein’s Zorro Ranch in New Mexico to spend two days with the Duke, alone save for security and domestic staff. Their time was filled with horse riding and ‘erotic massages’. In other words, sexual activity which, Roberts made plain, she didn’t want.

There was a fourth and final claim of sexual abuse committed by the Prince against Miss Roberts, which appears in the draft of her 2011 memoir, which has since become a legal exhibit. Pictured: File image of Prince Andrew walking with Jeffrey Epstein in 2011

But this interlude was never again mentioned by Miss Roberts; at least not in any of her affidavits, court testimonies or media interviews. Why?

Andrew denies ever having met her at the ranch, with sources close to him suggesting to the Mail he could not have gone riding with her because of a serious horse allergy. A contemporaneous note kept by his police bodyguard, says Andrew’s companion was not Miss Roberts but a 28-year-old doctor called Melanie Walker.

If the Duke never met Miss Roberts at Zorro – in a subsequent account delivered under oath she described the claim as a ‘mistake’ made by a journalist with whom she worked – what impact could that have on the credibility of her other allegations?

Additional reporting: Simon Trump.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears's mother on Thursday night told of her relief after Jamie Spears finally agreed to step down as their daughter's conservator, in a huge victory for the singer as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship.

Lynne Spears, 66, said through her lawyer that she was 'pleased Jamie has agreed to step down.'

The lawyer added: 'Lynne entered into this conservatorship to protect her daughter almost three years ago. She has accomplished what she set out to do.'

The Spears family have been torn apart by fights over the pop singer's career and fortune - with the family resentment exploding this summer when Britney addressed a court and pleaded to end the arrangement, claiming that she had been taken advantage of by her entire family.

Jamie Spears, 69, has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's multimillion dollar fortune.

On Thursday he announced that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

Britney's parents Jamie and Lynne are seen in November 2012. They had divorced in 2002

In a parting shot, Jamie's lawyers attacked his ex-wife Lynne - Britney's mother - at length in the filing.

Lynne had accused Jamie last month of keeping 'microscopic control' over their daughter, and said Britney was 'living in custody'.

Jamie said that Lynne did not know what was going on; said she had not been involved in their daughter's life in 12 years; and pointed out that Britney was paying over $150,000 a year for Lynne's Louisiana mansion.

He also revealed that Britney's medical costs amounted to more than $10,000 a month, and said Lynne was ignorant of the extent of their daughter's troubles.

His lawyers write that Jamie will assist with 'an orderly transition to a new conservator,' but said that he will not step down immediately.

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Britney Spears is seen with her brother Bryan and her father Jamie in February 2016. She posted the image to Instagram with the caption: 'The fam!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'

Britney is pictured on stage in London in August 2018, during the Piece of Me tour

The court filings come as Britney's former bodyguard claimed she is living 'like an inmate in a golden prison' as the singer has her phone calls monitored and is not allowed out unsupervised

Jamie then attacked his ex-wife Lynne, who he divorced in 2002 after 30 years of marriage.

Jamie claims that Lynne has had scant involvement in Britney's life, and pointed out that Britney refused to even see Lynne when she was at a mental health facility in 2019.

He said that Britney pays in excess of $150,000 a year for Lynne's Louisiana mansion, despite having been largely absent for the past 12 years.

'Unfortunately, it appears that Lynne has not accepted the full extent to which Ms. Spears has had addiction and mental health issues or the level of care and treatment she needs,' Jamie's team wrote.

Jamie said in the court documents that he stepped in at a dire moment, when she was 'in crisis, desperately in need of help' 13 years ago.

His lawyers wrote: 'Not only was she suffering mentally and emotionally, she was also being manipulated by predators and in financial distress.

'Mr. Spears came to his daughter's rescue to protect her.'

He says he has never forced her to do anything, including performing.

'Mr. Spears has not coerced Ms. Spears to do anything. By her own admission, Ms. Spears is strong and stands up for what she wants,' the lawyers stated.

'Mr. Spears has tried to do everything in his power to accommodate Ms. Spears' wishes, whether regarding her personal life, family, or career, while fulfilling his duties and obligations as Conservator, protecting her from others seeking to take advantage of her, and ultimately, looking out for Ms. Spears' bests interests.

'Sometimes, that has meant telling Ms. Spears that, as an adult, she must follow through on agreements or promises she makes – whether it involves her medical care, career, or personal life.

'This is not coercion – it is the type of good advice that a conservator, or a father, must give.'

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, who was appointed in July - replacing a court-appointed attorney - told TMZ: 'We are pleased but not necessarily surprised that Mr. Spears and his lawyer finally recognize that he must be removed.

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'We are disappointed, however, by their ongoing shameful and reprehensible attacks on Ms. Spears and others.

'We look forward to continuing our vigorous investigation into the conduct of Mr. Spears, and others, over the past 13 years, while he reaped millions of dollars from his daughter's estate, and I look forward to taking Mr. Spears's sworn deposition in the near future.

'In the interim, rather than making false accusations and taking cheap shots at his own daughter, Mr. Spears should step aside immediately.'

What is a conservatorship? A conservatorship is a legal concept whereby a probate court appoints a person to manage an incapacitated person or minor's financial and personal affairs. It is often a relative. The terminology and details vary state-by-state, but the general principals are all similar. The conservator's duties include overseeing finances, medical care and living arrangements. In Britney's case, the conservators also oversee visitation arrangements with her two teenage sons, who are under the full custody of her ex-husband, Kevin Federline. It is most frequently used for someone who is severely mentally incapacitated, or suffering from dementia. Yet in the 13 years of Britney's conservatorship, she has released four albums - two of them going platinum; appeared as a judge on both The X Factor and American Idol; and had a four-year residency in Las Vegas that reportedly grossed close to $138 million. The specific details of Britney's case have not been revealed. Unless a judge says otherwise, they still retain rights to make certain decisions, according to the California handbook. They can control salaries they earn, spend an allowance, retain legal representation, vote in elections, get married, draft their own wills, make medical decisions for themselves and ask a judge to terminate conservatorships or replace their guardians. 'All conservatees have the right to be treated with understanding and respect and to have their wishes considered. They have all basic human rights, as well, and the right to be well cared for by you,' the California handbook says. Britney says that she has not had these rights. It is unclear whether this is a violation of her case, or as agreed. There are two types of conservators: a conservator of the person, who looks after meals, housekeeping, transport, housing and recreation, and a conservator of the estate who manages finances and protects assets. Sometimes one person can play both roles. The conservator of the estate must file periodic activities reports by the first year after their appointment and every two years following, until the relationship is terminated. The estate managers have to disclose asset values, gains and losses, and show receipts for all expenditures of conservatorship funds. They are also prohibited from borrowing money from the conservatee or lending out their cash. Many countries have similar systems. In the U.K. it is called a deputyship. In Britain, however, the court will appoint an independent conservator, rather than a family member. Advertisement

Less than a week ago, Jamie was arguing in court that he should not step aside.

On August 6 he claimed in a court filing that Britney is struggling so much with her mental health that court-appointed professional Jodi Montgomery, who overseas the pop star's life decisions, recommended hospitalizing her on emergency psychiatric hold.

In court documents, Spears said Montgomery had called him, distraught, last month and sought his help with his daughter's mental health struggles.

He claimed that Montgomery had explained that Britney was not taking her medications properly and refused to see some of her doctors and that she was 'spiraling out of control'.

But Montgomery and her lawyer said in response that Jamie 'misrepresented and manipulated' the call to use it to his own advantage'.

Jamie stepped aside from the part of the conservatorship that controls his daughter's life decisions in 2019, with Montgomery taking over, though her official status remains temporary.

Jamie said on August 6 that the call for his urgent removal was 'ironic', considering the call he received from Montgomery on July 9.

'Ms. Montgomery sounded very distraught and expressed how concerned she was about my daughters' recent behavior and overall mental health,' Jamie said in a personal declaration included with his court filing.

'Ms. Montgomery explained that my daughter was not timely or properly taking her medications, was not listening to the recommendations of her medical team, and refused to even see some of her doctors.

'Ms. Montgomery said she was very worried about the direction my daughter was heading in and directly asked for my help to address these issues.'

Jamie said they discussed the possibility of hospitalizing Britney on an emergency psychiatric hold.

Montgomery acknowledged, in a statement through her attorney Lauriann Wright, having concerns about Britney Spears' behavior and mental health, but said Jamie Spears' stepping down would only help.

The statement said 'having her father Jamie Spears continuing to serve as her Conservator instead of a neutral professional fiduciary is having a serious impact on Ms. Spears' mental health.'

At no time during the phone call did Montgomery suggest Britney Spears qualifies for a psychiatric hold, the statement said.

The fighting between those involved in the conservatorship has grown increasingly heated, and increasingly public, since Britney's dramatic testimony at a hearing on June 23, when she told a judge ' I just want my life back.'

She told the court that she was forced to have an IUD implanted against her wishes, and that she wanted to marry her boyfriend, Iranian actor and personal trainer Sam Asghari, and have more children - but was prevented from doing so.

She said she was forced to perform against her wishes, and denied even basic freedoms.

In July, Britney told a court in LA that she wants her father charged with conservatorship abuse.

Speaking on the phone, an emotional Britney said: 'I would like to charge my father with conservatorship abuse. I want to press charges against my father today. I want an investigation into my dad.'

She described once again the torment of her conservatorship, in a repeat of her explosive June 23 testimony.

Britney claimed her father and others involved in the conservatorship had threatened her, and added: 'There should be no threats to me at all, ever. I have serious abandonment issues.'

She said that her car keys, hair vitamins and coffee had been taken from her.

She tearfully told Judge Brenda Penny, according to Sky News: 'Ma'am, that's not abuse, that's just f****** cruelty. Excuse my language but it's the truth.'

Britney then told the court: 'I thought they were trying to kill me. If this is not abuse, I don't know what is.'

The court filings come as Britney's former bodyguard claimed she is living 'like an inmate in a golden prison' as the singer has her phone calls monitored and is not allowed out unsupervised.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The taliban is tarring men accused of theft and parading them around the streets of newly-captured city Herat with fears that Kabul could fall within days or weeks sparking increasingly urgent evacuation efforts by British and American soldiers.

The pictures shared by Afghan journalist Bilal Sarway show men tarred in black with nooses around their necks being dragged through the streets by armed gunmen, were shared online in the wake of the Taliban seizing control of Herat on Thursday.

With the 20th anniversary to 9/11 looming, Afghanistan risks falling to the Taliban after the militant group seized control of two thirds of the nation following the prolonged withdrawal of US and UK troops.

Some reports have claimed that the Taliban is as little as 50 miles from Kabul, but the Pentagon yesterday held a press conference insisting that the Afghan capital is not in immediate danger of falling.

The Taliban seized its 17th major city on Friday as they raced to take full control of Afghanistan and inched closer to Kabul, with the main settlement in Logar province - just 40 miles from the capital - falling to the militants.

The blitz through Afghanistan's southern heartland means the insurgents now hold half of the country's 34 provincial capitals and control more than two-thirds of the nation.

US President Joe Biden, whose announcement of a 31 August withdrawal appears to have led to the collapse of the Afghan National Army is spending a long weekend at Camp David.

Taliban commanders have 'vowed to enter Kabul like a roaring lion' as their rampage towards the strategic stronghold, and capital of the country, continues.

The Times reports one senior figure saying: 'We will enter Kabul like a roaring lion soon, God willing, hopefully within this month and wrap up the American puppets who are already in a state of fear.

'Their silence on our triumphs in the south and west speaks for itself and they are hiding like cowards.'

It comes after Boris Johnson said last night that it is not 'realistic' to expect outside powers to impose a 'combat solution' on Afghanistan as the Taliban's surging advance closes on Kabul and British and US troops start to arrive to evacuate Westerners.

The Prime Minister said: 'There isn't a military solution. Thanks to the efforts of the UK armed services and all the sacrifices they made we have seen no al Qaida attacks against the West for a very long time.'

The pictures, which show men tarred in black with nooses around their necks being dragged through the streets by armed gunmen, were shared online in the wake of the Taliban seizing control of Herat, Afghanistan on Thursday

The men pictured above are purportedly accused of theft, and have been tarred in black and dragged through the streets by armed Taliban sympathisers

The armed insurgents celebrated in the streets of Afghanistan's third most populous city, Herat, as the Taliban continue their march eastwards towards Kabul

Pink areas show Taliban control while green represents territory held by the government as insurgents move through the country towards the capital Kabul

'I think we have got to be realistic about the power of the UK or any power to impose a military solution - a combat solution - in Afghanistan.'

He spoke after the Taliban seized large swathes of Helmand province , where hundreds of UK troops died over more than a decade of fighting that has seen 454 UK personnel killed since 9/11.

'What we certainly can do is work with all our partners in the region around the world who share an interest with us in preventing Afghanistan once again becoming a breeding ground for terror.'

After a week of intense fighting saw the Taliban seize control of swathes of the country, the Prime Minister said the UK can be ‘extremely proud’ of its role in the last 20 years.

But after leading a meeting of the Cobra emergency committee yesterday, Mr Johnson insisted there was no military solution to the deteriorating security situation.

And he denied that the sacrifices made by British forces in Afghanistan had been in vain.

'I don't think that it was in vain. If you look back at what has happened over the last 20 years there was a massive effort to deal with a particular problem that everybody will remember after 9/11,' he said.

'That was successful. To a very large extent the threat from al Qaida on the streets of our capital, around the UK, around the whole of the West was greatly, greatly reduced.

'I believe it was right, it was worth it and what we must do now is not turn our backs on Afghanistan.'

Some 600 troops are due to deploy to Kabul within days to evacuate British nationals as a mass exodus begins to escape the ravages of the hardliners.

He finally addressed the situation after fierce criticism from Labour and even his own MPs over his silence on the issue.

The crisis worsened yesterday as the Taliban continued its bloody advance, seizing control of Afghanistan’s second largest city Kandahar.

Some of the 600 soldiers headed to Kabul to evacuate Britons are pictured on a military transport headed to Kabul

Members of the Parachute Regiment are among the troops being sent to Afghanistan with the Taliban just 90 miles from Kabul

Boris Johnson said tonight that it is not 'realistic' to expect outside powers to impose a 'combat solution' on Afghanistan

First lady Jill Biden (right) is helped onboard Marine One by President Joe Biden (left) wearing a walking boot on her left leg and using a crutch. She was at Walter Reed more than two weeks ago getting a puncture wound cleaned out of her foot

The Taliban have completed their sweep of the country's south on Friday, as they took four more provincial capitals in a lightning offensive that is gradually encircling Kabul. Pictured: Taliban fighters stand guard over surrendered Afghan troops in the city of Ghazni

It now controls more than two-thirds of the country and is closing in on the capital Kabul.

Mr Johnson said yesterday it was not realistic to expect outside powers to impose a ‘combat solution’ on Afghanistan.

‘There isn’t a military solution. Thanks to the efforts of the UK armed services and all the sacrifices they made, we have seen no al-Qaeda attacks against the West for a very long time,’ he said.

‘I think we have got to be realistic about the power of the UK or any power to impose a military solution, a combat solution, in Afghanistan. What we certainly can do is work with all our partners in the region around the world who share an interest with us in preventing Afghanistan once again becoming a breeding ground for terror.’

Mr Johnson insisted the 457 British military personnel killed in the country had not died ‘in vain’ and said the military intervention that began 20 years ago was right and had been ‘worth it’.

He suggested he had no choice but to pull out troops as he was dealing with the ‘consequences’ of the US’s decision to withdraw.

Tory MPs had earlier accused him of a ‘shameful’ silence as the situation deteriorated and questioned whether he had done enough to persuade Joe Biden to not pull out US troops.

Defence Secretary Ben Wallace yesterday said the US withdrawal was a ‘mistake’ and the West will ‘probably pay the consequences’.

He voiced fears about the resurgence of al-Qaeda – the terror group behind 9/11 – who he warned could plot attacks on British soil.

He told Sky News: ‘Of course I am worried, it is why I said I felt this was not the right time or decision to make because, of course, al-Qaeda will probably come back, certainly would like that type of breeding ground.

‘That is what we see – failed states around the world lead to instability, lead to a security threat to us and our interests.’

He refused to rule out further military action in the country, telling LBC: ‘I’m going to leave every option open. If the Taliban have a message from last time, you start hosting al-Qaeda, you start attacking the West or countries, we could be back.’

Last night, the Prime Minister faced growing calls from some of his own backbenchers as well as opposition party politicians for Parliament to be recalled.

The Lib Dems demanded MPs are brought back from their summer break and shadow foreign secretary Lisa Nandy said Labour could join the push to hold the Government to account if it did not show a clear strategy.

Tobias Ellwood, the Tory chairman of the Commons defence committee, urged Mr Johnson to call an emergency session of the UN Security Council and to ‘consider recall of Parliament to seek views on leading a non-US led coalition and prevent a full scale civil war’.

Grieving families of British soldiers killed in Afghanistan also spoke of their anger as the Taliban captured territory UK troops fought and died to protect.

Donald Trump and the Taliban signed a deal last February for the US to withdraw from Afghanistan. Joe Biden has continued with the withdrawal timetable, with all troops due to have left by the symbolic date of September 11 – the 20th anniversary of the terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York.

The UK Government announced on Thursday around 600 troops are being deployed to help evacuate British nationals and former Afghan staff.

Meanwhile in Kabul, US troops sent to evacuate embassy staff reportedly started to arrive at the international airport, with more expected over the next 24 hours.

And hundreds of thousands of Afghans have fled their homes amid fears the country will return to the brutal, repressive rule imposed by the previous Taliban government. The UN Refugee Agency said nearly 250,000 Afghans have fled their homes since the end of May.

The announcement came hours after the Home Office said Home Secretary Priti Patel had taken on the role’s responsibilities following criticism of the Government for failing to replace James Brokenshire – who had left the post last month.

The Pentagon claimed on Friday it did not believe Kabul was under imminent threat from the rapid Taliban advance, as the first of 3000 U.S. troops arrived in the Afghan capital to protect embassy staff.

Earlier Taliban fighters seized the country's second and third biggest cities, and their fighters closed to within 50 miles of Kabul.

The speed of their advance has sent Western nations scrambling to bring home civilian staff.

And a defense official told the Associated Press that an attack on Kabul could come within days.

Department of Defense spokesman John Kirby declined to say whether officials were surprised by the way Afghan forces had failed to slow the advance.

'We are certainly concerned by the speed with which the Taliban has been moving,' he said.

'And as we've said from the very beginning, this still is a moment for Afghan national security and defence forces, as well as their political leadership.

'No outcome has to be inevitable here.'

'We're obviously watching this just like you're watching this and seeing it happen in real time, and it's deeply concerning.'

Instead, he echoed President Biden and other administration officials in insisting that Afghan security forces held the advantage over the Taliban.

'We will do what we can from the air, but they have the advantage,' he said.

They have greater numbers. They have an air force. They have modern weaponry.

'It's indigenous forces that can make the difference on the ground.'

The signs so far are that Afghan forces are struggling, despite billions of dollars in U.S. training and equipment.

In some cases they have simply melted away or switched sides in the face of an insurgency emboldened by Biden's promise to end the U.S. combat mission by Aug 31.

'They have the benefit of the training that we have provided them over 20 years,' said Kirby. 'They have the material, the physical - the tangible - advantages.

'It's time now to use those advantages.'

Yet the Taliban advance continued at rapid pace on Friday. They took four more provincial capitals on Friday, including Ghazni on the road south out of Kabul.

Staff at the U.S. embassy were told on Friday to begin destroying sensitive information or anything that could be used by the Taliban, according to a management memo obtained by CNN.

A former diplomat told DailyMail.com it suggested that plans were further advanced for fleeing the compound than officials had suggested.

But Kirby said the capital was not at imminent risk of Taliban capture.

'Kabul is not right now in an imminent threat environment,' he said.

'But clearly ... if you just look at what the Taliban has been doing you can see that they are trying to isolate Kabul.'

In the meantime, the first forces of a Marine battalion arrived at Kabul's Hamid Karzai International Airport.

'I expect that by the end of the weekend the bulk of the 3,000 that we talked about yesterday will be in place,' said Kirby.

Yesterday, militants seized Pol-e Alam - the provincial capital of Logar - which lies less than 40 miles south of Kabul, according to a local official. They also captured the key cities of Lashkar Gah - the capital of the southern province of Helmand - earlier on Friday, and the capitals of Kandahar and Herat on Thursday, tightening the group's grip on the country.

The loss of Helmand's provincial capital of Kandahar in the past 24 hours comes after years of toil and blood spill by American, British and allied NATO forces. Estimates suggest those countries lost some 800 troops over the decades-long war there.

Britain alone lost more than 450 troops in Afghanistan. Just over 400 were the result of hostile action, and the vast majority of causalities were in Helmand province.

Former army officer and ex-defence minister Tobias Ellwood invoked Winston Churchill - the PM's political hero - after the evacuation deployment was announced.

Ellwood, chairman of the defence committee, said on Twitter: 'What would Churchill say? This is NOT our finest hour. What happened to GLOBAL BRITAIN and AMERICA IS BACK?

'The largest high tech military alliance ever - defeated by an insurgency armed with mines, RPGs and AK47s. We can and must do better.'

Defence Secretary Ben Wallace this morning said that the withdrawal of the US, the dominant military force in Afganistan, had meant the UK had to leave as well. He said there has been no international will to carry on without Washington's involvement.

But former defence minister and Afghanistan veteran Johnny Mercer contested the idea that the UK cannot act alone in the central Asian country.

The Conservative MP said the current situation was 'deeply humiliating', telling BBC Breakfast: 'This idea we cannot act unilaterally and support the Afghan security forces is simply not true.

'The political will to see through enduring support to Afghanistan has not been there and a lot of people are going to die because of that, and for me that is extremely humiliating.

'It's a world tragedy and we are going to reap the repercussions of this over many years to come.'

It all comes little more than a month after US president Joe Biden said: 'The likelihood there's going to be the Taliban overrunning everything and owning the whole country is highly unlikely.'

The economic centres of Kandahar, Afghanistan's second biggest city, and Lashkar Gah - the capital of the southern province of Helmand where many British troops were stationed - were the latest to fall to the insurgency, prompting questions over how long the capital Kabul will hold out. Pictured: Taliban fighters in a vehicle along the roadside in Herat today

A Taliban fighter holds a rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) along the roadside in Herat, Afghanistan's third biggest city, on Friday after government forces pulled out the day before following weeks of being under siege

Taliban fighters stand on a vehicle along the roadside in Herat today. The British Government has said it will be sending 600 troops to Afghanistan to help British nationals flee the country

Up to 300,000 people have fled their homes since May, according to the UN, and thousands of refugees have headed for a makeshift camp in a public park in Kabul or towards the key border crossings to escape from Taliban rule. Spin Boldak, near Kandahar and Khan Kala, near Kabul, are two crossing points where thousands of people have been seen as they hope to enter Pakistan

UN begs Afghanistan's neighbours to keep borders open The United Nations begged on Friday for neighbouring countries to keep their borders open to allow people to escape the Taliban, and U.N. agencies warned of a growing humanitarian catastrophe amid spreading hunger. The plea comes as hundreds of thousands of Afghans fled their homes amid fears the Taliban will again impose a brutal, repressive government, all but eliminating women's rights and conduct commonplace public executions. Pictures from Friday showed fleeing Afghans entering neighbouring Pakistan after the country re-opened its Chaman-Spin Boldak border crossing for people who had been otherwise stranded in recent weeks. The crossing is a major gateway between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and is reported to be under Taliban control. Juma Khan, the border town's deputy commissioner, said the crossing was reopened following talks with the Taliban. The decision to open the border was made after the United Nations refugee agency called on Afghanistan's neighbours to keep crossings open as the crisis intensifies. 'An inability to seek safety may risk innumerable civilian lives. UNHCR stands ready to help national authorities scale up humanitarian responses as needed,' a spokesperson for the agency told a briefing in Geneva. The World Food Programme sees food shortages in Afghanistan as 'quite dire' and worsening, a spokesperson added, saying the situation had all the hallmarks of a humanitarian catastrophe. As Western embassies prepare to send in troops to help evacuate staff, the United Nations said its 320 staff members would remain. 'We fear the worst is yet to come and the larger tide of hunger is fast approaching... The situation has all the hallmarks of a humanitarian catastrophe,' the World Food Programme's Thomson Phiri told a U.N. briefing. More than 250,000 people have been forced from their homes since May, 80 percent of them women and children, the U.N. refugee agency's Shabia Mantoo said. Many reported extortion by armed groups on the way and having to dodge improvised explosive devices along major roads. Thousands of people are rushing from rural areas to the capital Kabul and other urban centres in search of shelter, another U.N. official said. 'They are sleeping in the open, in parks and public spaces,' Jens Laerke, spokesman of the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 'A major concern right now is simply finding shelter for them.' A World Health Organisation official reported a doubling of trauma cases in the last two to three months in the health facilities it supports. She also expressed concerns about shortages of medical supplies and said it was training medical staff on mass casualty management. Posting to his private Instagram account on Thursday, Sultan Ghani shared pictures of him walking across a runway to a private jet. 'Moving from one crisis to the other as elegantly as I can' his caption read, sparking outrage on social media. 'While Afghanistan is burning & the ppl are suffering across the country because of his uncle's disastrous leadership, posts these photos on his Instagram account,' one user wrote on Twitter while sharing the images of the Sultan and his plane. The Taliban insurgency seized Lashkar Gah - the capital of the southern province of Helmand - on Friday, and two afghan lawmakers officials had surrendered the capital of Uruzgan province to the rapidly advancing Taliban. On Thursday, the group took of Kandahar and Herat, marking the biggest prizes yet for the Taliban, who have taken 12 of Afghanistan's 34 provincial capitals as part of a week-long blitz 'The city looks like a front line, a ghost town,' provincial council member Ghulam Habib Hashimi said of Kandahar via telephone from Herat, a city of about 600,000 people near the border with Iran. 'Families have either left or are hiding in their homes.' Of Afghanistan's major cities, the government still holds Mazar-i-Sharif in the north and Jalalabad, near the Pakistani border in the east, in addition to Kabul. According to recent UN data, 400,000 people have fled their homes inside Afghanistan since the start of the year, with almost 300,000 of those fleeing since May as fighting between the government and Taliban stepped up. The vast majority of those are still inside the country, the UN says, but with Islamist fighters making rapid gains in almost every region and government forces in retreat, many are looking to leave the country. Advertisement

The government has now effectively lost control of most of Afghanistan, following an eight-day blitz into urban centres by the Taliban that has also stunned Kabul's American backers.

Prime Minister Ashraf Ghani's administration now controls just three major cities - including Kabil - but is unlikely to have the logistical manpower left to marshal a successful defence of the capital without foreign aid.

The head of the council in the western province of Ghor later on Friday said the city of Feroz Koh had also fallen to the insurgents, after two Afghan lawmakers said officials surrendered Tirin Ko - the capital of Uruzgan province.

The Defence Secretary admitted UK troops could return to Afghanistan in future, warning 'al Qaida will probably come back' and it could again become a major breeding ground for Islamic extremist terrorists.

Yesterday morning he laid into the Republican former US leader Donald Trump, saying his 'rotten' February 2020 peace agreement with the Islamists was a 'mistake'.

The UK is sending 600 soldiers and the US 3,000 to evacuate their people in scenes likened to the fall of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam War.

Tom Tugendhat, the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee and a veteran of the conflict, said 'the decision to withdraw is like a rug pulled from under the feet of our partners'.

'A hasty exit is not a sign of success. Needing reinforcements to keep the door open as you leave is a sure sign of failure,' he added.

Mr Wallace told Sky this morning: 'I was public about it that at the time of the Trump deal - with obviously the Taliban - I felt that that was a mistake to have done it that way, that we will all as an international community pay the consequences of that, but when the United States as the framework nation took that decision, the way we were all configured, the way we had gone in meant that we had to leave as well.'

Asked on BBC Radio 4's Today programme whether the UK could return for future military operations if al Qaida or other terrorist organisations rise in Afghanistan, he added: 'If you want to cut out the short-term threat globally, wherever Britain has a threat to her interests and her people, we have a global counter-terrorism capability...

'It is obviously not as perfect as being based in a country as we have been in Afghanistan but we retain military capability to deal with a threat where we face it or we have to deal with it under international law.

'If there is an imminent threat emanating anywhere in the world. Britain, the United States, France, other countries have a capability to deal with that.'

He added: 'I will always deploy either force or disruptive capabilities alongside other parts of the British state - or indeed a coalition - to protect our national security and our interests. We will always do that, we will reserve the right to do it, and that is a global capability.'

He said that Afghanistan's second biggest city of Kandahar and the town of Lashkar Gah was 'pretty much now in the hands of the Taliban.' The latter fell after two weeks of heavy fighting, according to a police official on Friday.

Former international development minister Rory Stewart called the troop withdrawal 'a total betrayal by the US and by the UK' that risked triggering a civil war between rival warlords currently defending against the Taliban.

Johnny Mercer, a Conservative MP and former veterans minister who served in Afghanistan, called the withdrawal 'a disgrace'.

'I think it's humiliating for the UK military, for the families who lost individuals over there but above all it's a huge tragedy for the people of Afghanistan, who've been through so much over so many years,' he told Times Radio.

'We've chosen this defeat and it's shameful.'

NATO will hold an urgent meeting Friday on the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan after the US said it was sending troops to evacuate its nationals, diplomatic and official sources told AFP.

NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg will lead discussions with envoys from the 30 allies in the meeting starting at 1300 GMT, with one source saying it would focus on evacuation planning from Afghanistan.

'It is about determining who does what, when, and how, and what support is given for this,' the source said.

Two Afghan lawmakers said on Friday that officials have surrendered the capital of Uruzgan province - Tirin Kot - to the rapidly advancing Taliban. The news came shortly after an Afghan official said the Taliban have captured Lashkar Gah, the capital of the southern province of Helmand.

The loss of Helmand's provincial capital comes after years of toil and blood spill by American, British and allied NATO forces. Estimates suggest those countries lost some 800 troops over the decades-long war there.

The Taliban were also closer to taking Logar province, at the gates of Kabul, with a Taliban spokesman saying insurgents had captured the police headquarters and city jail in the capital, Pul-e-Alam.

Earlier Friday, officials and residents in Kandahar told AFP that government forces had withdrawn en masse to a military facility outside the southern city.

'Kandahar is completely conquered. The Mujahideen reached Martyrs' Square,' a Taliban spokesman tweeted, referring to a city landmark.

Pictured: Afghan military vehicles are parked inside a base in Kandahar city during fighting between the Taliban and Afghan security personnel in the city of Kandahar, southwest of Kabul, Afghanistan

Pictured: Smoke rises after fighting between the Taliban and Afghan security personnel in the city of Kandahar, southwest of Kabul on Thursday

The Taliban has now seized around two thirds of the country from the government in a little over three months

Timeline of Afghanistan's provincial capitals falling to the Taliban Aug. 6 - ZARANJ - The Taliban take over the city in Nimroz province in the south, the first provincial capital to fall to the insurgents since they stepped up attacks on Afghan forces in early May. Aug. 7 - SHEBERGHAN - The Taliban declare they have captured the entire northern province of Jawzjan, including its capital Sheberghan. Heavy fighting is reported in the city, and government buildings are taken over by the insurgents. Afghan security forces say they are still fighting there. Aug. 8 - SAR-E-PUL - The insurgents take control of Sar-e-Pul, capital of the northern province of the same name. It is the first of three provincial centres to fall on the same day. Aug. 8 - KUNDUZ - Taliban fighters seize control of the northern city of 270,000 people, regarded as a strategic prize as it lies at the gateway to mineral-rich northern provinces and Central Asia. Government forces say they are resisting the insurgents from an army base and the airport. Aug. 8 - TALOQAN - The capital of Takhar province, also in the north, falls to the Taliban in the evening. They free prisoners and force government officials to flee. Aug. 9 - AYBAK - The capital of the northern province of Samangan is overrun by Taliban fighters. Aug. 10 - PUL-E-KHUMRI - The capital of the central province of Baghlan falls to the Taliban, according to residents. Aug. 11 - FAIZABAD - The capital of the northeastern province of Badakhshan is under Taliban control, a provincial council member says. Aug. 12 - GHAZNI - The insurgents take over the city, capital of the province of the same name, a senior security officer says. Aug 12 - FIRUS KOH - The capital of Ghor province, was handed over to the Taliban on Thursday night without a fight, security officials said. AUG 12 - QALA-E-NAW - The Taliban have captured the capital of the northwestern province of Badghis, a security official and the Taliban said. Aug 12 - KANDAHAR - The Taliban have captured Afghanistan's second biggest city of Kandahar, government officials and the Taliban said. Aug 13 - LASHKAR GAH - The Taliban have captured the capital of the southern province of Helmand, police said. Aug 13 - HERAT - Capital of Herat province in the west was under Taliban control after days of clashes, a provincial council member said. Aug 13 - POL-E ALAM - Taliban captured provincial capital of Logar, 30 miles south of Kabul Provincial capitals being contested as of Aug. 13: FARAH - Capital of the western province of Farah. Advertisement

Hours later, the Taliban said they had also taken control of Lashkar Gah, the capital of neighbouring Helmand province.

A security source confirmed the fall of the city, telling AFP that the Afghan military and government officials had evacuated Lashkar Gah after striking a local ceasefire deal with the militants.

The government has now effectively lost control of most of the country, following an eight-day blitz into urban centres by the Taliban that has also stunned Kabul's American backers.

The government now controls just three major cities, and is unlikely to have the logistical manpower left to marshal a successful defence of the capital.

The Taliban are moving rapidly towards Kabul with reports suggesting their fighters are making progress on the northern and southern flanks of the capital.

Of Afghanistan's major cities, the government still holds Mazar-i-Sharif in the north and Jalalabad, near the Pakistani border in the east, in addition to Kabul.

The insurgents on Friday held more than a dozen provincial capitals in recent days and now control more than two-thirds of the country just weeks before the U.S. plans to withdraw its last troops.

Fazel Haq Ehsan, chief of the provincial council in western Ghor province, said on Friday that the Taliban had entered Feroz Koh, the provincial capital, and there was fighting inside the city.

The Taliban meanwhile claims to have captured Qala-e Naw, capital of the western Badghis province. There was no official confirmation.

The Taliban are also on the move in Logar province, 50 miles south of Kabul, where they claim to have seized the police headquarters in the provincial capital of Puli-e Alim as well as a nearby prison.

Speaking to the Today Programme, a spokesperson for the Taliban blamed the Afghanistan government for the conflict, saying Taliban wanted a peaceful settlement, and that an agreement had been broken by the Kabul administration.

'We had proposed a three-months reduction in violence about four months ago, but it was rejected by the same Kabul administration,' the spokesperson said on Friday morning.

Suhail Shaheen - based in Doha - also called the claims of the Taliban's brutal regime 'propaganda' against the group when confronted with reports about the group's treatment of women and citizens who don't adhere to their extremist rules.

The United Nations refugee agency called on Afghanistan's neighbours to keep borders open as Taliban insurgent advances heightened the country's crisis.

'An inability to seek safety may risk innumerable civilian lives. UNHCR stands ready to help national authorities scale up humanitarian responses as needed,' a spokesperson for the agency told a briefing in Geneva.

The World Food Programme sees food shortages in Afghanistan as 'quite dire' and worsening, a spokesperson added, saying the situation had all the hallmarks of a humanitarian catastrophe.

The U.N.'s statement came after Pakistan re-opened its Chaman border crossing for people who had been stranded in recent weeks. Juma Khan, the Pakistan border town's deputy commissioner, said the crossing was reopened following talks with the Taliban.

Peace talks in Qatar remain stalled, though diplomats are still meeting, as the US, European and Asian nations warned that any government established by force would be rejected.

'We demand an immediate end to attacks against cities, urge a political settlement, and warn that a government imposed by force will be a pariah state,' said Zalmay Khalilzad, the US envoy to the talks.

Ismail Khan, a veteran local commander leading militia resistance in Herat, Afghanistan, speaks to Taliban media while in their custody, in this screen grab taken from an undated video from social media uploaded on Friday

Meanwhile, Taliban insurgents detained veteran militia commander Mohammad Ismail Khan on Friday after they seized the western city of Herat, a provincial council member said.

Khan, who has been leading fighters against the Taliban in recent weeks, was handed over to the insurgents along with the provincial governor and security officials under a pact, provincial council member Ghulam Habib Hashimi told Reuters.

'The Taliban agreed that they will not pose any threat or harm to the government officials who surrendered,' Hashimi said.

Khan is one of Afghanistan's most prominent warlords. Known as the Lion of Herat, he battled Soviet occupiers in the 1980s and was a key member of the Northern Alliance whose U.S.-backed forces toppled the Taliban in 2001.

Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid confirmed that Khan had been detained.

Pictured: Pakistani soldiers stand guard while stranded people walk towards the Afghan side at a border crossing point, in Chaman, Pakistan on Friday

Pictured: Stranded people sit around a coffin of their relative, loaded in a pickup truck moving towards the Afghan side at a border crossing point, in Chaman, Pakistan, on Friday

One clip purportedly showed prisoners - released by the Taliban - walking free down a dirt road, while another showed Taliban forces raising the group's flag outside what was claimed to be a government building in Lashkar Gah (pictured)

Pictured: Video from August 13 purportedly showed freed prisoners walking down the street after the Taliban reportedly broke open a prison in Qalat, the capital city of Zabul

Picutred: Taliban fighters posing with a man believed to be famous warlord Ismail Khan, who is the Governor of Herat. He has been kept in his Herat residence under heavily armed Taliban guards

Taliban fighters stand on a vehicle along the roadside in Kandahar on August 13, 2021

Kandahar and Herat fell on Thursday - further squeezing the country's embattled government just weeks before the end of the American military mission there.

The seizure of the two cities marks the biggest prizes yet for the Taliban, who have taken 12 of Afghanistan's 34 provincial capitals as part of a week-long blitz.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Around 6 per cent of homes– roughly 1.5 million – do not have internet access

Concerns over older and vulnerable households which are not online, do not use a mobile phone or live in a rural area with poor connectivity being left behind

The death knell has been sounded for the traditional landline telephone.

From 2025, all households and businesses will need the internet to make calls under a major digital shake-up.

It means millions of customers will be pushed online for the first time or forced to rely on a mobile phone instead.

Those without internet may need an engineer to visit their home to get them set up and those with older phones could need to buy a new handset.

Industry insiders compared the move to the switch to digital TV in 2012, when broadcasters stopped transmitting traditional analogue signals to household rooftop or indoor aerials.

But while that change was led by the Government, the switch to 'digital' calls is being driven by the telecoms industry.

The major digital shake-up means millions of customers will be pushed online for the first time or forced to rely on a mobile phone instead [Stock image]

The upgrade will also impact other services that rely on the existing telephone network such as alarm systems, phones in lifts, payment terminals and red telephone boxes. Telecoms giants are aiming for the switchover to be complete in 2025.

But experts have raised concerns that millions of older and vulnerable households which are not online, do not use a mobile phone or live in a rural area with poor connectivity are at risk of being left behind.

Q&A Will I need a fast connection? Internet speeds of just one megabit per second (Mbps) should be enough for a good digital phone service. And every UK household has the right to demand a download speed of at least 10 Mbps. Will my bills rise? Customers will have to pay for the internet to use their home phone. But experts have said providers are likely to offer cheap, basic deals similar to landline-only contracts. It is not known if customers with older phones will need to buy a new handset or if they will get one for free. What if the internet goes down? If the internet crashes or there is a power cut, digital phone lines will stop working. Those who are vulnerable or do not have a mobile phone should be offered a back-up such as a battery pack, emergency phone line or mobile phone so they can still call 999 in an emergency. What do I need to do? Nothing yet. Those on landline-only deals or without the internet will hear from their providers later on. Advertisement

Around 6 per cent of households – roughly 1.5 million homes – do not have access to the internet, according to watchdog Ofcom.

Many may only use the internet on their mobile phone via wireless services, while around half a million households do not own a mobile.

Caroline Abrahams, director of Age UK, said: 'Given that about half of older people over the age of 75 are not online, this could be a particular problem for our oldest citizens.

'Given the threat of fraud, telecom providers also need to take steps to prevent anyone who is in particularly vulnerable circumstances from becoming victims of digital scams.'

Amid fears a power cut or internet outage could leave households stranded, Ofcom has stressed that telecoms providers have an obligation to ensure all households have access to the emergency services.

This means firms may need to provide customers with a free mobile phone or battery packs.

Around two million customers are believed to have already been switched to an internet-based phone service. BT, which memorably used Maureen Lipman as 'Beattie' to promote landline services in the 1980s, said half a million customers now have its Digital Voice service.

It is not known when providers will write to landline-only customers to inform them of the switchover.

Openreach, which runs the majority of the nation's wire and cable infrastructure, has been working with businesses for months to ensure they are ready.

And the firm is aiming to install ultra-fast full fibre broadband in 25 million households by the end of 2026, which should provide a more reliable service.

Virgin Media, which owns its own cables, is also working to switch its home phone service to its fibre broadband network by 2025.

Martyn James, of dispute service Resolver, criticised the 'failure to publicise' the switchover decision, adding: 'The telecoms businesses risk causing considerable distress to those many customers who find the online world hard to navigate.

'It's vitally important landline customers do not end up paying more and that cheap or subsidised broadband services are available for people forced online.' An Openreach spokesman said: 'Protecting vulnerable customers is an absolute priority for us. We are working with communications providers to identify vulnerable customers early on.'

Ofcom said it is working to ensure vulnerable customers get all the support they need.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Love Island SPOILER: 'We are made for each other!' Jake attempts to keep Liberty sweet as she confesses doubts after he admitted to fancying Millie AND Mary

Dramatic Love Island teaser for tomorrow night reveals that Jake is also having doubts over Liberty. This comes as she confessed to having a rough week.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than 1,000 people have been barred from using electric scooters during a city’s trial scheme.

The figures emerged following a spike in complaints and accidents in Liverpool.

The vehicles have been linked to several serious collisions, including nine cases where riders had life-changing injuries.

Operators Voi said over 1,000 people had been banned for seven days for antisocial riding

One female rider lost a finger and a passenger on an e-scooter suffered a serious leg injury when his suspected drunk driver lost control and they both fell off.

Operators Voi said over 1,000 people had been banned for seven days for antisocial riding.

They are one of several operators who have launched e-scooter schemes in more than 50 English towns and cities over the past 18 months.

Although the scooters are designed to carry one person, drivers with passengers hanging on to the back of them have become common.

A man wearing a dark jacket, short blue jeans and a backpack was filmed riding an electric scooter through the Queensway Tunnel in Liverpool

There have also been complaints about the scooters being driven by children as young as ten on main roads and causing an obstruction to pedestrians – especially blind and disabled people.

Voi said: ‘The [ban] figures reflect the positive and successful collaboration between Voi, Liverpool City Council, and the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority to clamp down on a tiny percentage of people engaging in anti-social behaviour and misuse of our service.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 21-year-old British student who says he is trapped in Afghanistan during the taliban takeover has posted online he is now 'safe and comfortable.

Miles Routledge claims he has been abandoned by the British Embassy in Kabul, which he alleges have not responded to any of his phone calls or emails as the Islamist terror group streamed into the capital.

The Loughborough physics student says he is hiding in a United Nations safehouse in Kabul, where about 50 others including Britons, Americans and Turks are also staying, after arriving in the country this week.

He said: 'I’m all safe in this safe house, the people are great. We may be happy, I'm fine but please consider the people who live in Afghanistan as they’re doing so much worse. Pray for them please, I will be doing so tonight.'

Mr Routledge, from Birmingham, posted a series of photos of his apparent trip around Afghanistan including his air ticket to Kabul and posing with body armour and a gun that he says belong to UK security personnel.

He has also previously bragged of visiting Chernobyl, posting pictures in May saying it was two years since he visited the scene of the 1986 nuclear disaster in Ukraine.

Miles Routledge, 21, claims he has been abandoned by the British Embassy in Kabul, who he alleges have not responded to any of his phone calls or emails as the Islamist terror group streamed into the capital

Pictured: an image posted to Mr Routledge's 4chan shows a flight ticket to Kabul

In posts to message board site 4chan and livestreaming platform Twitch, Mr Routledge, from Birmingham, claims he was quizzed by armed Taliban militants while on his way to Kabul International Airport

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

In posts to message board site 4chan and livestreaming platform Twitch, he claims he was quizzed by armed Taliban militants while on his way to Kabul International Airport.

They apparently asked him where he was from - to which he said Wales. He claims the fighters did not know where Wales was, and let him go. Mr Routledge says he later came across another armed convoy during the Taliban insurgency and took a selfie on one of their gun emplacements.

Speaking to the Times, he claims he made the decision to visit Afghanistan after watching tourism videos on YouTube. He says that when the takeover began, he could not refund his flights so chose to travel instead.

Mr Routledge also said he had accepted the possibility that he might die in Afghanistan. In a message addressed to friends on social media, he apparently wrote: 'I've bitten off more than I can chew and something has not gone to plan resulting in this situation.

Mr Routledge says he came across two armed convoys during the Taliban insurgency, and took a selfie on one of their gun emplacements

The Loughborough physics student says he is hiding in a United Nations safehouse in Kabul, where about 50 others including Britons, Americans and Turks are also staying, after arriving in the country this week

Taliban fighters stormed the ancient palace on Sunday and demanded a 'peaceful transfer of power' as the capital city descended into chaos

Mr Routledge has also previously bragged of visiting Chernobyl, posting pictures in May saying it was two years since he visited the scene of the 1986 nuclear disaster in Ukraine

Boris Johnson blames US withdrawal for 'accelerating' Afghan collapse and vows to get Brits out in address made just hours after clowning around with Olympic athletes - and Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was on HOLIDAY Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current situation and said the Government is getting Britons out of the country 'as fast as we can', after he was seen posing for pictures with Team GB Olympians. The Prime Minister has earlier posed for publicity pictures with athletes at an event in London as Downing Street said ministers and senior officials would meet on Sunday afternoon to discuss the worsening situation. And it emerged Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab had flown back to Britain from his overseas holiday, breaking his silence on the war-torn country. He said the world must tell the Taliban 'the violence must end and human rights must be protected'. Advertisement

'There was no convincing me otherwise and I knew the risks, it was a gamble I took that went wrong despite my confidence and jokes.'

He yesterday told his viewers: 'I was fully prepared for death, I accepted it. This trip has been a test of God. I'm very religious so I believe I'll be looked after.

'Before I left I wrote a letter to my friends saying that if I died, not to feel guilty, that I would die happy and religious and proud.'

He says that he may be safe because of a £15 joke purchase he made which gives him the right to use the title 'Lord', seen on his American Express card.

The student told his followers: 'The Taliban may see that as reason enough to keep me alive, thinking it may hold some negotiating power as they'll think I'm important. Let's hope it won't get to that stage though.'

MailOnline has contacted the British Foreign Office and the UN for comment.

US-backed Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country for Tajikistan, effectively ceding power to the Taliban and bringing the 20-year Western occupation of Afghanistan to an end, while thousands of Afghan nationals rushed to the Pakistan border in a bid to escape Islamist rule.

Mr Ghani said in a Facebook post that he escaped Afghanistan to 'prevent a flood of bloodshed', claiming 'countless patriots would be martyred and the city of Kabul would be destroyed' if he had remained.

He did not disclose details on his current location.

Foreigners in Kabul were told to either leave or register their presence with Taliban administrators, while RAF planes were scrambled to evacuate 6,000 British diplomats, citizens and Afghan translators, and the British Ambassador was moved to a safe place.

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

Taliban fighters take control of Afghan presidential palace after the Afghan President Ashraf Ghani fled the country

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces

China and Russia prepare to accept Taliban rule of Afghanistan: Beijing officials pose with leaders of militants and Kremlin has 'no plans' to evacuate its embassy due to 'good relations' China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise Taliban rule in neighbouring Afghanistan after the Islamist terror group seized the Presidential Palace in Kabul on Sunday and the country's embattled president fled for Tajikistan. Most global powers are reluctant to recognise the rule of the militant group overthrown by US-led coalition forces in 2001, with British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warning that Afghanistan cannot be allowed to become a 'breeding ground for terror' again. But Beijing and Islamabad could break rank in order to form closer ties with the likely new government, with Chinese state media preparing its people to accept the likely scenario that the ruling Communist Party might have to recognise the Islamist group. In China, a series of photos were published last month by state media showing Foreign Minister Wang Yi standing shoulder to shoulder with visiting Taliban officials decked out in traditional tunic and turban in Tianjin. Meanwhile, the Kremlin said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, with Russian state media reporting that the Sunni Islamist group formed after the Soviet withdrawal of Afghanistan has promised to guarantee the safety of its diplomatic staff. And Iran, which has long been wary of the Sunni Muslim Taliban, has moved to ensure the safety of its diplomats and staff after previously offering to help end the crisis during talks in July. Advertisement

The US and French Ambassadors have already been evacuated as the US rushes to rescue more than 10,000 of its citizens.

Italy's defence ministry said a first military plane would arrive on Sunday to begin 'emergency evacuation' operations, while Denmark, Norway and Finland are temporarily shutting their Kabul embassies, with Finland to offer asylum to 170 local staff and their families.

However, the Kremlin's envoy said that there are no plans to evacuate the Russian Embassy in Kabul, as China, Russia, Pakistan and Turkey all appear set to formally recognise the rule of the Sunni extremist group which was created after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

Bagram airbase was also surrendered to the Taliban by Afghan troops, despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent by the US and NATO to build up Afghan security forces. Upon its takeover, hundreds of Taliban and Islamic State terrorists being held prisoner there were freed.

Commercial flights were later suspended after sporadic gunfire erupted at the airport, according to two senior US military officials who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss ongoing operations.

Evacuations continued on military flights, but the halt to commercial traffic closed off one of the last routes available for Afghans fleeing the country.

As night fell, Taliban fighters deployed across Kabul, taking over abandoned police posts and pledging to maintain law and order during the transition.

Residents reported looting in parts of the city, including in the upscale diplomatic district, and messages circulating on social media advised people to stay inside and lock their gates.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current crisis and announced his government's priority is to get UK nationals out 'as fast as we can' after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in Downing Street.

He also vowed that the Middle Eastern state must not become a 'breeding ground for terror' again.

But he was slammed by Tory MPs - including ex-soldiers Tom Tugendhat, Johnny Mercer and Tobias Ellwood - for presiding over Britain's 'biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez and called for UK troops to be redeployed.

They also called the crisis a humiliation for the West.

Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab was accused of 'going AWOL' after spending the past week on holiday abroad while the Afghanistan crisis unfolded.

The British Foreign Office said he was returning to the UK on Sunday and was 'personally overseeing' the department's response to the situation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@BBC journalist Sarah Rainsford revealed her 'devastation' at being expelled from Russia and told she can never return in move of retaliation by Kremlin.

Moscow correspondent Sarah Rainsford was told by the Russian authorities that her visa would not be renewed and that she must leave before it expires at the end of the month.

'I am being expelled and I have been told that I can't come back - ever,' she told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme.

Russia has expelled senior BBC journalist Sarah Rainsford in retaliation for Britain 'discriminating' against the Russian press

Ms Rainsford, who first went to the country as a student in the 1990s, said she had spent almost a third of her life living there.

She said: 'To be honest, it's devastating personally but it is also shocking.

'Russia has never been a posting for me, it is not just any old place, it is a country that I have devoted a huge amount of my life to trying to understand.'

The BBC has denounced the decision by the Russian authorities not to extend her visa as 'a direct assault on media freedom'.

Officially the Russians have linked the decision to difficulties Russian journalists have had in obtaining or extending visas from the UK.

Moscow has refused to renew a visa for Rainsford, state TV reported, in an effective expulsion amid simmering tensions with the UK

Ms Rainsford said she had also been told that it was connected to sanctions imposed by the UK on Russian nationals for corruption and for human rights violations in Chechnya.

However, she said she believed that it was another sign of the way the country was increasingly turning in on itself.

'There were clear signs for Russian media, there have been really serious problems in recent days and weeks for Russian independent journalists,' she said.

'But until now, for the foreign press, we'd kind of been excluded from that, somehow shielded from all of that, but this is I think a clear sign that things have changed.

'It is another really bad sign about the state of affairs in Russia and another downward turn in the relationship between Russia and the world and a sign that Russia is increasingly closing in on itself.'

She said it appeared that the Russians preferred not to allow foreign journalists, like her, who could speak the language and communicate directly with people in the country.

'It is much easier to have fewer people here who understand and can talk directly to people and hear directly people's stories and to relate them,' she said.

'It is much easier to have people who perhaps don't speak the language, don't know the country so deeply.

Rainsford, a Russian-speaker, is an experienced BBC foreign correspondent who has also done stints in Havana, Istanbul and Madrid

'I just think it is indicative of a really increasingly difficult and repressive environment.'

It is an unusual move that signals a further deterioration in already poor ties between London and Moscow.

It follows a crackdown before parliamentary elections in September on Russian-language media at home whom the authorities judge to be backed by malign foreign interests intent on stoking unrest.

State TV blamed Britain's treatment of state-backed Russian broadcaster RT and of online state news outlet Sputnik, saying neither could get accredited in Britain to cover international events, for the expulsion.

'Sarah Rainsford is going home. According to our experts, this correspondent of the Moscow's BBC bureau will not have her visa extended because Britain, in the media sphere, has crossed all our red lines,' Rossiya-24 said.

'The expulsion of Sarah Rainsford is our symmetrical response,' it said.

Rainsford, a Russian-speaker, is an experienced BBC foreign correspondent who has also done stints in Havana, Istanbul and Madrid.

Russia's relations with the West have sunk to the lowest levels since the Cold War, following Moscow's 2014 annexation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula, accusations of Russian interference with elections, hacking attacks and other tensions.

Russian President Vladimir Putin described an incident involving a Royal Navy ship in the Black Sea earlier this year was a provocation, and Moscow warned that the military could fire to hit intruding warships if they do not heed warnings

Relations between Russia and Britain have remained particularly strained after the 2018 poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in the UK.

It was an attack with a Soviet-designed nerve agent that British authorities said had almost certainly approved been 'at a senior level of the Russian state' — an allegation Moscow denies.

In a June incident that further aggravated ties, Russia said one of its warships fired warning shots and a warplane dropped bombs in the path of the British destroyer HMS Defender to chase it away from an area near Crimea that Moscow claims as its territorial waters.

The UK, which like most other nations did not recognise Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea, insisted the Royal Navy ship was not fired upon and said it was sailing in Ukrainian waters.

Russian President Vladimir Putin described the incident as a provocation, and Moscow warned that the military could fire to hit intruding warships if they do not heed warnings.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her sun-soaked hen party getaway will feature in an ITVBe special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding.

And Jess, 35, along with her younger sister Natalya, 21, proved that celebrations continued to be in full swing as they partied the weekend away in Ibiza on Sunday.

Flashing her bronzed pins in a shimmering white sarong and bra co-ord, Jess fanned herself with a 'bride' diamond embellished fan, while donning a pair of shades.

Sun-kissed: Bride-to-be Jess Wright, 33, and her lookalike sister Natalya, 21, flashed their bronzed pins on Sunday as the former's Ibiza hen party filming for ITVBe continued

The former TOWIE star had styled her luscious chocolate tresses into twin braids and wore a touch of silver glitter on her cheeks for the afternoon of fun.

Appearing to be in good spirits, the barefoot beauty sported a pair of full-looking eyebrows and her highlighted visage glowed in the sunlight.

Jess's mini-me Natalya, who was just ten-years-old when her big sister shot to fame on the ITV2 reality show, wore a similar ensemble in black.

Having a blast: Flashing her bronzed pins in a shimmering white sarong and sleeved bra-top co-ord, Jess fanned herself with a 'BRIDE' diamond embellished fan

Appearing to be enamored with her phone, she had slung a gold handbag over her shoulder for the day trip.

The influencer protected her eyes with a pair of gold-rimmed sunglasses, which complemented her chunky hoops in the same colour.

Her dark brown locks had been tied back in a middle parting and she seemed to be wearing minimal makeup.

Joining the pair for the extended hen do are close female friends and family members, including mum Carol, 61.

From fiancée to wife! The 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34

It comes as ITV told MailOnline that filming is well underway for a 90-minute special which will chronicle Jess's build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34.

The show, which will likely air in late autumn according to the TV network, will follow Jess' journey to the altar as she and William set about staging their dream wedding, a star studded event on the paradise island of Mallorca.

Having already delayed their nuptials once already, and with travel restrictions constantly changing due to Covid-19, there is much for the pair to navigate.

Last hurrah! Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's known to draw attenion while making her way to and from work in Leicester Square.

And Monday was no exception as Myleene Klass, 43, looked stylish as ever while heading home after her show at Global Radio Studios on Monday morning.

Following her Smooth FM show, the singer looked flawless as she hit the city centre in a green-and-blue floral maxi dress from her own Next collection.

Wow! Myleene Klass turned heads in a tropical blue-and-green maxi dress on Monday as she headed to the Global Radio studios

Complete with mid length sleeves and a tropical palm print, the showstopping number caused onlookers to stop and point at the brunette beauty.

The mum-of-three carried a shiny black leather handbag, which she matched with her classic strappy heels.

Donning an unmissable gold-faced watch on her left wrist, Myleene accessorised her right with a black-and-silver bangle.

Fashion forward: She's known to cause a commotion in London's West End whenever she makes her way to work

Talented: Arriving in time to present her Smooth FM show, the singer looked flawless as she hit the Big Smoke in a green-and-blue floral maxi dress from her own Next collection

Classy: Myleene's luscious walnut tresses had been straightened into a sleek side-parting and she populated her neck with a trio of gold delicate necklaces

Flawless: The mum-of-three carried a shiny black leather handbag, which she matched with her classic strapped heels

Blingy: Donning an unmissable gold-faced watch on her left wrist, Myleene accessorised her right with a black-and-silver bangle

Stunning: The model's ruby red-painted lips popped against her sparkly white teeth and her makeup had been kept to a minimum

Her luscious walnut tresses had been straightened into a sleek side-parting and she decorated her neck with a trio of gold delicate necklaces.

The model's ruby red-painted lips popped against her sparkly white teeth and her makeup had been kept to a minimum.

Framing her face, the former Hear'Say bandmember donned a pair of oversized gold-rimmed shades.

Myleene shares daughters Ava, 13, and Hero, nine, with her ex-husband Graham Quinn, while she has son Apollo, two, with fiancé Simon Motson, 46.

Standing out: Myleene demanded attention in the unmissable outfit

Chic: She looked ever-elegant as she strutted her way to the studio

Who's that? Complete with mid-forearm length sleeves and a tropical palm print, the showstopping number caused onlookers to stop and point at the brunette beauty

Myleene got engaged to Simon last September. The couple's engagement delighted Myleene's daughters who have been determined to see them walk down the aisle.

Simon's children, a 13-year-old son and nine-year-old daughter, were also said to be thrilled.

The happy couple began dating in 2015 and welcomed son Apollo in August 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Prince Harry 'seemed to have a sense of humour' about HBO Max's animated comedy The Prince, the series creator has claimed.

Family Guy co-executive producer Gary Janetti, who created the 12-part animated series, appeared on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen where he was asked by a fan whether Orlando Bloom - who voices Prince Harry - had discussed his role in the series with his friend and neighbour.

'I don't know if Harry has said anything to Orlando about it, but I know before the show premiered, he was aware that Orlando was doing it,' Janetti said. 'And he seemed to have a sense of humour about it.'

The show has sparked a backlash over its decision to mock George, eight, and his siblings Charlotte, five, and Louis, three, as well as its depiction of the late Duke of Edinburgh.

The controversial series - which focuses in a fictional version of Prince George as a child tyrant with expensive taste, a withering sense of humor and a dim view of his family - also shows Prince Harry as an inattentive father who has to work at a coffee shop to pay the bills after his TV projects fail.

Prince Harry 'seemed to have a sense of humour' about HBO Max's animated comedy The Prince, the series creator has claimed. Pictured, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in the controversial series

Orlando Bloom attends the amfAR Cannes Gala 2021 during the 74th Annual Cannes Film Festival at Villa Eilenroc on July 16, 2021 in Cap d'Antibes, France

Janetti (pictured) appeared on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen and was asked by a fan whether Orlando Bloom - who voices Prince Harry - had discussed his role in the series with his friend and neighbour, the Duke of Sussex

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle are depicted living in an Los Angeles apartment after quitting royal life, with the pair eventually forced to take the bus to work to make ends meet once their money starts to run out.

Harry, who is voiced by his friend and Montecito neighbor Orlando Bloom, arrives at the coffee shop and asks how to make a cup of tea. In a separate episode he hands over a gold ring in a supermarket because he doesn't understand how to pay.

The Lord of the Rings actor's portrayal of the Duke of Sussex came just months after the royal told Dax Shepard's 'Armchair Expert' show that he'd struck up a bond with his new neighbours Orlando, 44, and singer Katy Perry, 36, who live 'just down the road' from the couple's £11million mansion in Montecito, California.

The Hollywood actor revealed how the Lord of the Rings star tipped him off about a photographer and that the pair 'keep in touch' over text.

Harry is seen taking Archie to the supermarket after being asked by Meghan to pick up milk. He is amazed by the refrigerated aisle and ends up handing over a gold ring in payment

Actor Alan Cumming has defended blistering royal satire The Prince and insisted it is 'not as mean as people think'. Cumming voices Owen, Prince George's butler (pictured)

In the satire, Prince Harry is shown coming to terms with his post-royal life as he and Meghan arrive in an LA apartment. Looking around, he says to his wife: 'This might be the smallest palace I have ever been in.'

Meghan corrects him: 'Well, it's an apartment,' to which Harry replies: 'Yes, an apartment palace, I know that. Lots of tiny palaces inside one big palace.'

In a previous interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Orlando Bloom said that 'It's not malicious or intended to be' and went on to say how it was wife Katy Perry who urged him to accept the role.

'Actually Katy saw one bit of it and was like, 'You've got to do this. This is genius.' And the animation is done by some of the guys who did Family Guy, so it's going to be very amusing,' Bloom said. 'And who doesn't love the royal family?'

The 12-episode series - which is available to stream in the US on HBO Max from today but is not yet airing in the UK - threatens to make a dent in the public images Harry and Meghan have spent months carefully crafting.

The 12-part animated series, created by Family Guy co-executive producer Gary Janetti, centers around a fictional version of Prince George as a child tyrant with expensive taste, a withering sense of humour and a dim view of his family. Pictured, Owen and George

It has also drawn criticism from viewers over its decision to parody the young royals, with many noting George, Charlotte and Louis have not chosen their public lives.

Others said it was 'upsetting' to see Prince Philip ridiculed with gray skin and a hump back just a few months after his death at the age of 99.

Archie also features in the series but, unlike his cousins, does not appear to speak.

In one episode Harry ends up in a coffee shop after his TV projects fail. The story line is a nod to real life as the Duke and Duchess of Sussex have secured a $140million Netflix (£100 million) deal.

On their way to their respective jobs on a bus, Harry asks her, 'Why are there so many people in our car? And why does it smell?'

When he arrives he asks his stunned trainer: ' My favorite drink is tea. I'd love to learn to make tea but is that too advanced?'

Meanwhile Meghan returns to her former career as an actress and leads classes. She is also seen auditioning for TV shows.

In episode two, Meghan asks Harry to look after Archie, who Harry mistakenly calls 'Arbie' and pick up milk while she goes to an audition.

The show has sparked a backlash over its decision to mock George, eight, and his siblings Charlotte, five, and Louis, three. Pictured, Prince George and Princess Charlotte

Clearly confused by how to buy milk, Harry walks down the street and asks strangers: 'Milk?,' before finding his way to a grocery store.

'F*** me, the whole aisle is a refrigerator,' he says, after being directed to the milk. He hands over a gold ring to the member of staff who helped him and says: 'For your kindness'.

He proudly presents the milk to Meghan saying: 'You don't need to work anymore because I've found this! Game on America.'

His exasperated wife replies: 'Okay, well, you don't get paid for that but I'm super happy for you, you're figuring things out!'

Later Meghan phones Kate and says: 'Hi Kate, it's Meghan, just wondering if you've heard from Harry?' A bemused Kate asks: 'Meghan?'

The Duchess of Sussex replies: 'Meghan Markle, your sister-in-law?' The call ends after Kate is overheard telling William 'someone gave her our number'.

The Prince has drawn criticism from viewers over its decision to parody the young royals, with many noting George, Charlotte and Louis have not chosen their public lives. Others said it was 'upsetting' to see Prince Philip ridiculed just a few months after his death at the age of 99.

The Duke of Edinburgh, voiced by Downton Abbey's Dan Stevens, is portrayed as drooling and vacant, and at one point collapses onto the floor while the family continues to talk around him

The Duke of Edinburgh, voiced by Downton Abbey's Dan Stevens, is portrayed as drooling and vacant, and at one point collapses onto the floor while the family continues to talk around him.

In another scene he is seen gasping at the dinner table, pointing Prince George to ask an aide to 'get the defibrillators ready'.

The 12-episode series - which is available to stream in the US on HBO Max but is not yet airing in the UK - was originally due to premiere in the spring but was delayed following the Duke of Edinburgh's death on April 9.

In a statement at the time, the network said: 'We were saddened to learn of Prince Philip's passing and will adjust plans for the series debut. A new date will be announced at a later time.'

However, actor Alan Cumming has defended blistering royal satire The Prince and insisted it is 'not as mean as people think'.

Cumming, 56, who voices Owen, Prince George's butler, told the Daily Telegraph the programme is 'actually quite tender' and urged people to 'watch it' before judging.

Asked if the Royal Family would find it funny, he said: 'I don't know. If they appreciate satire, they might… It's quite tender, actually – my character with George, it's a really lovely relationship. It's not as mean as people think.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mike Shouhed admitted that he had an addiction to attention amid a break from girlfriend Paulina Ben-Cohen during Sunday's season finale of Shahs Of Sunset.

The 42-year-old reality star made the revelations during a group trip organized by Golnesa 'GG' Gharachedaghi, 39, on the season nine episode titled High And Dry.

Mike fled a cannabis-fueled animal spirit exercise in which his bat persona and its description of being 'faithful' was mocked by 'hyena' Reza Farahan, 48, who starting laughing at the idea.

Attention addiction: Mike Shouhed admitted that he had an addiction to attention amid a break from girlfriend Paulina Ben-Cohen during Sunday's season finale of Shahs Of Sunset

'This is so f***ing crazy. This is the same song and dance. Like, damn, you're hurting me. You're my brother. If you're a hyena, you act like a hyena does. Reza, you bite through the bone,' Mike told his frenemy.

Mike claimed that felt bullied and Reza accused him of playing the victim.

Destiney Rose, 38, interjected and stated that Paulina was 'not here for a reason' and urged Mike to stop pretending that his life was perfect.

He admitted that raunchy text messages that Paulina found created 'a lot of problems', but denied giving Paulina any other reason to distrust him.

Opening up: The 42-year-old reality star made the revelations during a group trip

'That's a lie,' Destiney told him.

'Okay, I'm completely done, 'cause I'm not gonna play this game,' Mike said as he left the group.

Mike privately spoke with Mercedes Javid, 49, who told Mike that his actions weren't matching his intentions.

Called out: 'That's a lie,' Destiney Rose said after Mike said he never gave Paulina reason to distrust him besides those raunchy texts

'Your intentions are, I will never hurt Paulina. In reality, you harmed and shattered and broke her heart,' MJ told him.

'Yes, I broke her heart,' Mike admitted.

MJ asked Mike to walk her through it and he shared that Paulina does not like him communicating with other women

Candid conversation: Mike privately spoke with Mercedes Javid, 49, who told Mike that his actions weren't matching his intentions

'I thrive off that attention. I do. I seek it, which is a problem,' Mike said.

Mike said he had to deal with it or risk losing 'the battle of having Paulina in my life.

'You're not gonna lose that battle,' MJ said.

Tough love: 'Your intentions are, I will never hurt Paulina. In reality, you harmed and shattered and broke her heart,' MJ told him

'There's deep love that we have for each other, but above that there's some f***ing damage that was done. We're taking a few days of break and just giving each other some space, and that's that,' Mike said.

'So, you guys broke up?,' MJ asked.

'No, hell no. There's no breaking up in me and Paulina's relationship because we both don't think that way,' Mike said.

A break: 'No, hell no. There's no breaking up in me and Paulina's relationship because we both don't think that way,' Mike said

Mike then clarified that he didn't mean they took a relationship break, but just a break from each other.

They rejoined the group where GG had another exercise in which they wrote down what they wanted to release and then tossed the paper into a fire.

'The whole point of this trip, the whole thing I've been waiting for, is this moment right here, for everyone to say out loud to all of us what it is that you want, your intentions,' GG said.

Intentions known: 'The whole point of this trip, the whole thing I've been waiting for, is this moment right here, for everyone to say out loud to all of us what it is that you want, your intentions,' GG said

Mike participated and said, 'I want to let go of the idea that everything is perfect, and I need to become better at being open and honest about it.'

The next morning MJ and Reza talked about Mike and his 'break' with Paulina who Mike admitted does not forgive easily.

Mike during breakfast apologized for skipping out the night before and thanked his friends for allowing him to have a breakthrough.

Letting go: Mike participated and said, 'I want to let go of the idea that everything is perfect, and I need to become better at being open and honest about it'

He admitted that he went into his shell to keep from getting hurt, but realized they will never trust him if he doesn't stop fooling himself.

Mike said his biggest fear was losing Paulina and Reza blurted out that MJ told him they were on a break.

'No, we're not on a break. We're taking a break from each other while we're here. There are some issues in our relationship,' Mike said.

Blurted out: Mike said his biggest fear was losing Paulina and Reza blurted out that MJ told him they were on a break

Some issues: 'No, we're not on a break. We're taking a break from each other while we're here. There are some issues in our relationship,' Mike said

Mike told his friends that social media had become a 'big problem' and he thrived on the attention.

'Because my whole thing is or what I'm trying to fight, is that chase that I f***ing like, and me getting off on the fact that I still can pull some f***ing a**, and it's a f***ing problem. I f***ing need to f***ing work on that s***, that I f***ing allow my horniness,' Mike said.

GG chimed in that he should let go of Paulina and stop hurting her and her children while he's trying to get himself together.

Good question: GG's sister Leila asked Mike if he could be monogamous

Reza asked Mike if he pushed it past the point of no return with Paulia.

'I don't know. I'm hopeful that I didn't,' he replied.

Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip.

Caught again: Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip

'I'm addicted to attention,' Mike said.

'Of course, I like attention. It's human nature. If someone tells you, you look attractive today, you feel good about yourself, right? But I take it too far,' he added in a confessional.

Mike said he was capable of being monogamous and declared they were going to see a 'new Mike'.

Human nature: Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip

The organizer: GG was impressed by Mike opening up and being honest

'A part of me doesn't believe it because I've heard this thing that he does all the time. 'I'm trying to get to a better place,' blah, blah, blah. But I also do hope that he's really taking the steps to make himself better. I really do. I'm that dumb b**** that believes there's always a rainbow on the other side of a rainy day,' Destiney said in a confessional.

The episode also showed Reza writing an apology letter to MJ's husband Tommy who has forbidden his son Shams from meeting Reza after a nasty falling out.

MJ delivered the letter, but Tommy ripped it up without reading it.

The Shahs Of Sunset will return next week with first reunion episode.

Heard before: 'A part of me doesn't believe it because I've heard this thing that he does all the time. 'I'm trying to get to a better place,' blah, blah, blah. But I also do hope that he's really taking the steps to make himself better. I really do. I'm that dumb bitch that believes there's always a rainbow on the other side of a rainy day,' Destiney said in a confessional

Off limits: Reza looked hurt as he watched MJ talk to her baby sons Shams who he still has not met

Apology note: The episode also showed Reza writing an apology letter to MJ's husband Tommy who has forbidden his son Shams from meeting Reza after a nasty falling out

Tore up: Tommy tore up Reza's not without even reading it
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katie Price has been defended by fans after trolls slammed the star when her son Jett's name was incorrectly spelled in a birthday video on Instagram.

The former glamour model, 43, took to the social media platform to share a series of sweet pictures of her and Jett, whom she shares with ex-husband Kieran Hayler, to celebrate his 8th birthday.

The video sees a spelling mistake in the message: 'Happy Birthday Jet!', to which trolls attacked her with one penning: 'You'd think they'd have spelt his name right.'

Cruel: Katie Price, 43, was cruelly attacked by trolls after misspelling her son Jett's name in a birthday video on Instagram on Thursday

The mum-of-five seemed to re-share the video from a fan page, as she thanked another user at the end of the video: 'Thanks to Ruby at the Pricey Fan Page for making this X'.

Katie captioned the birthday tribute to her son: 'HAPPY BIRTHDAY JETT'.

'Happy 8th Birthday to my baby boy Jett , it wasn’t a great start in life with my waters breaking in France and him being born early and the horrid circumstances at the time and intensive care but he was strong and turned out to be my gorgeous lovable mini bear grills watch out for the next adventurer I love you so much'.

Others chimed in to troll Katie and the fan-site, saying: 'You'd think the fan page would've spelt his name right! and 'It's Jett, not Jet.'

Birthday wishes: The former glamour model took to the social media platform to share pictures of her and Jett Hayler, whom she shares with ex-husband Kieran Hayler, for his 8th birthday. Pictured in 2015 at her and Kieran's wedding vows renewal

Sweet: Katie captioned the seemingly re-shared video 'HAPPY BIRTHDAY JETT'

Spelling mishap: The video sees a spelling mistake in the message: 'Happy Birthday Jet!', to which trolls attacked her, saying 'You get the award for the worst celebrity parent ever'

Meanwhile, others took to her comments section, highlighting the fact that Katie was abroad in St Lucia for her son's birthday.

'Missed yet another child's birthday because of your holiday' commented one troll.

'Katie your missing all your children's birthdays and important milestones been away. Happy birthday Jett xx' another said.

The star's youngest daughter Bunny also celebrated her 7th birthday last week whilst Katie was away.

Bad timing: Other cyberbullies took to her comments section, highlighting the fact that Katie was holidaying over her son's birthday - without him

However, other fans rushed to Katie's defence, calling her 'an absolutely awesome mom'.

'The Best Mother, I love you Katie', one fan commented.

'Omg whats with all the negative comments on Katie's post? She is a better than the rest of you will ever be, leave her be, her kids adore her and she is a fantastic mother.'

'Happy birthday Jett! ignore all the idiots, everyone is actually so judgmental and disrespectful towards a post on a child’s birthday. He deserves more than a bunch of adults trying to slate his mum for when she posts. A post on social media first thing or last is completely irrelevant to when she’s said hbd herself' another dan commented.

Kind support: However, fans rushed to Katie's defence, calling her 'an absolutely awesome mom'

Her birthday post celebrating Jett comes after Katie set off to St Lucia with her fiancé Carl Woods and children Harvey, 19, and Princess, 13.

Katie made the most of her fun-filled trip by enjoying some pampering, a water park and an entertaining private chef.

Katie enjoyed a private helicopter ride with her family as she kick started her fourth trip abroad in two months - shortly after she was unknowingly embroiled in an online scam.

Katie fled the UK for sunny Saint Lucia with her family two weeks ago after being left 'absolutely devastated' that her fans had lost thousands of pounds because she promoted a conman's business on Instagram.

After arriving on the island, Katie's fiancé shared selfies with her daughter and filmed her son Harvey as they prepared to fly in a helicopter.

Carl captured a helicopter on a runway as the former Love Islander, Katie, Princess and her son Harvey made their way towards it.

Holiday time: Her birthday post celebrating Jett comes after Katie set off to St Lucia with her fiancé Carl Woods (pictured) and her children Harvey, 19, and Princess, 13

'Harv' what do you reckon, on a helicopter?' he said to her eldest child who excitedly responded: 'Yes!'

'I bet you can't wait!' Carl added. Flight attendants gingerly carried their luggage to the aircraft before loading it on board.

Katie grabbed Harvey's top and guided him towards the helicopter entrance doorway while her fiancé gave an animated expression towards his camera.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The owner of Geronimo the alpaca says she was 'discriminated against from the very get-go' and has demanded 'appropriate testing' - as Boris Johnson's father again voiced his support and a petition to save the doomed animal gets more than 108,000 signatures.

Geronimo, originally from New Zealand but now living in south Gloucestershire, tested positive for bovine tuberculosis (bTB) twice, and must now be put down, the Government says.

A warrant has been issued to kill the eight-year-old alpaca stud following a £50,000 High Court battle, but his owner Helen Macdonald, 50, insists that the skin tests were flawed.

She has received backing from the Prime Minister's father Stanley Johnson, who today reiterated his support for Ms Macdonald, but revealed that he had not phoned his son over the issue because he doesn't wish to 'invoke some privileged access mechanism' to advance his opinion.

Ms Macdonald has also had support from protesters who yesterday demonstrated outside the Defra headquarters in London and Downing Street, and a petition to save Geronimo has now brought in more than 108,000 signatures.

Geronimo had been given the vaccine tuberculin which, Ms Macdonald says, produced a false positive.

The petition claims: 'DEFRA had prior knowledge that giving multiple injections of tuberculin before the Camelid Enferplex blood test (known as priming) produces false-positive test results in healthy camelids. This happened to Geronimo in 2017 and DEFRA failed to declare this.'

Ms Macdonald told Good Morning Britain today: 'We've known that there's been problems with this test since 2016 but Defra didn't tell me that before the first test result in August 2017.

'The second round of testing by their own admission was biased, they actually said ''we deviated from protocol to ensure that the client understood that the first test was indeed positive for tuberculosis, so you know, I was discriminated against from the very get-go.

A warrant has been issued to kill the eight-year-old alpaca stud following a £50,000 High Court battle, but his owner Helen Macdonald, 50, insists that the skin tests were flawed

'And then a few months after that we found out that they already knew that there was a problem with this test, so there is no validity to their claims, there is a new test called Actiphage which looks for the embobis in the blood stream.

'What we've always been asking for is testing that's appropriate for an alpaca, and let's have a better answer because clearly he produced an antibody response to the tuberculin four years ago or he wouldn't be standing here today.'

Environment Secretary George Eustice refused to overturn the decision to destroy Geronimo, saying: 'Every livestock farmer has to get used to their share of tragedy and loss.'

WHAT IS BOVINE TB? Bovine tuberculosis is a disease of cattle that can also infect badgers, deer, goats, pigs, dogs and cats. The disease is caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium bovis. This is related to the microbe that causes tuberculosis in humans. Bovine tuberculosis is typically transmitted aerially through coughs and sneezes. It causes fever, coughing, weight loss, pain, diarrhoea and ultimately death. Badgers are the most significant wildlife reservoir for the bacterium. In the United Kingdom, most bovine tuberculosis outbreaks occur in the South West and the West Midlands. Advertisement

Ms Macdonald and her family lost a final attempt on Thursday to save Geronimo from being destroyed.

The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) now has 26 days to carry out the court order.

Stanley Johnson today told Sky News he was 'backing Geronimo' because he thinks 'he deserves another test, it's as simple as that'.

He added: 'Given that their animal has been alive and apparently thriving for the last four years, given the doubt that there was as to whether or not this sort of false positive or real positive, surely it makes sense to invoke another test procedure.

'And I think that Helen explained to me when I spoke to her last Saturday that yes there is another test which could be done, I think it was called Actiphage and that might reveal what she firmly believes and certainly people I've spoken to say, ''Why on earth would a diseased animal live for another four years?'' '

When asked if he would pick up the phone and ask Boris Johnson to do something about it, he replied: 'No, I don't think it's right for me as an ordinary citizen to kind of invoke some privileged access mechanism and say, ''I say...''

'In any case that puts him in a difficult position. He's got to weigh the evidence, George Eustice has to weight the evidence, people have to weigh the evidence and my opinion is just one of many opinions, I feel free to make it.'

As the life of Geronimo hangs in the balance, alpaca owners are calling for urgent talks with the Government.

The British Alpaca Society said the current stand-off between Defra and Ms Macdonald has 'considerably undermined confidence' in the voluntary bovine TB testing regime in the UK.

In a statement, Duncan Pullar, chief executive of the society, said: 'The unique circumstances that have developed relating to Geronimo clearly show the testing system is not working as well as it should, and it is a matter of concern that Defra do not appear to want to learn from what is going on.

Ms Macdonald has received backing from the Prime Minister's father Stanley Johnson, who today reiterated his support, but revealed that he had not phoned his son over the issue because he doesn't wish to 'invoke some privileged access mechanism' to advance his opinion

Geronimo had been given the vaccine tuberculin which, Ms Macdonald says, produced a false positive

'Defra will not allow further testing on Geronimo. There is no science to explain the effects of multiple priming on the outcomes of the Enferplex test in alpacas and no research has been carried out.

'Four years on from the tests Geronimo is healthy, as are the alpacas which have been sharing his paddock, and indeed the alpacas that travelled from New Zealand with Geronimo on the same or contiguous crates.

'The British Alpaca Society is concerned that George Eustice is not being properly briefed.

'The skin test he downplays is also used in the UK on alpacas and cattle, and is approved by the UK Government who recognise an 80% sensitivity.'

The society highlighted concerns to Defra about the potential adverse effects of multiple priming before an Enferplex test in alpacas in 2016 and again specifically in Geronimo's case in March 2018.

'To date, no evidence has been produced to explain the effects of this practice on test results,' Mr Pullar said.

'We endorse the request for a further test of Geronimo. To date, such requests have been declined by Defra.

'Alpaca breeders and owners would welcome the opportunity to learn from Geronimo and cannot understand why the Government would not wish to do so as well.'

On Monday, the Government insisted all the evidence on the animal's condition had been 'looked at very carefully'.

Demonstrators in Westminster, central London, during a protest march against the decision to put down Geronimo, the alpaca which has tested positive for tuberculosis. Picture date: Monday August 9,

On Monday, around 30 people - including fellow alpaca farmers who had lost animals in similar circumstances - gathered outside Defra's headquarters in Smith Square, Westminster, to march to Downing Street

The Prime Minister's official spokesman said: 'We know how distressing losing animals to TB is for anyone. That is why the Environment Secretary has looked at this extremely carefully and interrogated all the evidence.

'The fact remains that Geronimo has sadly tested positive twice using a highly specific and reliable and validated test.

'This is something the Environment Secretary has looked at very carefully.'

On Monday, around 30 people - including fellow alpaca farmers who had lost animals in similar circumstances - gathered outside Defra's headquarters in Smith Square, Westminster, to march to Downing Street.

Speaking from her farm in South Gloucestershire, Ms Macdonald criticised the Government for refusing to change its mind.

'Unfortunately they are still misquoting data,' she said.

'What they did to Geronimo was not a validated test - they knew what they were doing.

'We are just asking to have him tested with something appropriate. I get they have policy to follow but there are other ways, and they don't have to kill him. He is safe in isolation here.

'They've always been happy with that and he's not a public health risk. They won't test his friends, so they are obviously not worried that he is going to give them TB.

'No-one has died here from TB in four years, so I just don't understand why it has to be this drastic.'

Ms Macdonald said that when Defra officials do attend her farm to euthanise Geronimo she will not break the law.

At her farm in Wickwar, friends, family and supporters have joined her to protest against Geronimo's impending fate.

As well as alpacas, badgers have been a victim of the fight against bovine TB, with mass culling employed to stop the spread since 2013, sparking a huge public backlash.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Legendary New Zealand cricketer Chris Cairns is reportedly on life support after collapsing in Australia amid a freak medical episode that’s left fans fearing the worst.

Cairns, 51, suffered an aortic dissection in Canberra last week, according to multiple media reports, and has since undergone several operations.

But a number of media outlets – including the New Zealand Herald – have reported Cairns has not responded to treatment.

Legendary New Zealand cricketer Chris Cairns (pictured) has reportedly collapsed after suffering an aortic dissection in Canberra last week

Several media outlets have reported the legendary right-hand batsman and fast-medium bowler is currently on life support after the freak medical episode

The former Black Cap is due to be transferred to a specialist hospital in Sydney.

The major medial emergency was caused by a tear in the innermost layer of the body's main artery that branches off the heart.

If blood is able to flow through the outside layer of the large blood vessel's wall, aortic dissection can be deadly.

The right-hand batsman and fast-medium bowler is credited as one of the most talented all-rounders of his generation.

Cairns played 62 test matches, 215 one day internationals, and two T20's for New Zealand between 1989 and 2006.

He is the son of Black Caps legend Lance Cairns.

Cairns, a former Black Cap, is due to be transferred to a specialist hospital in Sydney soon

The 51-year-old had been living and working in Canberra with his wife and their two children for several years before he collapsed last week

The born-and-bred Kiwi went on to commentate for Sky News and has been the chief executive of SmartSportz, a company that produces virtual sport.

The 51-year-old had been living and working in Canberra with his wife and their children for several years before he suddenly collapsed last week.

In 2015, Cairns emerged on the right side of two prominent British trials following his victory in a libel case against Indian cricket administrator Lalit Modi in 2012.

The cricketer was found not guilty of perjury and perverting the course of justice charges in relation to match-fixing allegations.

However the allegations had a severe impact on the cricketers life, with Cairns describing his reputation as 'completely scorched' by the legal saga.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patricia 'Pat' Hitchcock has died at the age of 93.

The actress was director Alfred Hitchcock's only child and had roles in his movies including Strangers on a Train, Stage Fright and Psycho.

She passed away at home in Thousand Oaks, California, on Monday, her youngest daughter Katie Fiala told The Hollywood Reporter.

Screen legend: Patricia 'Pat' Hitchcock, who had roles in several of her director father Alfred's hit films, has died at the age of 93 (pictured in 2001)

Pat's biggest role in her father's films was in 1951's Strangers On A Train where she played Barbara Morton, the younger sister of Ruth Roman's character Anne Morton, who watches Bruno Antony (Robert Walker) strangle a woman at a party.

She'd previously played a classmate of Jane Wyman's character in 1950 movie Stage Fright and later briefly appeared in Psycho in 1960 as an office worker.

Pat, who studied at RADA in England and performed on Broadway as a teenager, also appeared in 10 episodes of CBS' Alfred Hitchcock Presents from 1955-60.

Roles: The actress starred as Barbara Morton in 1951 film Strangers On A Train (pictured on set of the movie with her father in 1951)

The late actress went on to appear on TV movies including The Life of Riley, My Little Margie and The Case of Thomas Pyke. While in the 70s she had roles in several shows such as Skateboard, and Ladies of the Corridor, according to Variety.

As well as starring in movies, Pat also worked on Broadway and starred in play Solitaire in 1942 and Violet in 1944. She also appeared in The Higher Ground in 1951.

Speaking about appearing in her father's films in 1984, she told The Washington Post that she'd be called in 'whenever they needed a maid with an English accent'.

She continued: 'I was brought up rather as an English child, so I knew what was expected, and I pretty much always did it. You didn't speak unless spoken to, but it didn't bother me or have any repercussions. I didn't know anything else.'

On camera: Her character Barbara, the younger sister of Ruth Roman's character Anne Morton, watched Bruno Antony (Robert Walker) strangle a woman at a party (pictured the scene)

Family: Pat and her parents - Alfred and Alma - had moved to the US in 1939, when she was 11, and she had spent two years at boarding school from the ages of eight to 10 (pictured in 1942)

Treading the boards: The actress also had several roles in theatre productions, including a part in Violet when she was a teenager (pictured in rehearsals for the comedy with dad Alfred)

Pat also revealed a little about how her father worked, adding that she wished her father had 'believed in nepotism. I’d have worked a lot more.'

She continued during the interview: 'But he never had anyone in his pictures unless he believed they were right for the part.'

Pat also discussed working with her famous father in 2004, saying that there wasn't anything 'unusual' about it.

According to THR, she told the TV Academy website The Interviews: An Oral History of Television: 'There wasn’t anything unusual about it. Just like with [any other actor], we would discuss the scene and do it. We didn’t try out stuff.'

Parts: Pat also briefly appeared in Psycho in 1960 as an office worker (pictured in the movie)

Working together: Pat discussed working with her famous father in 2004, saying that there wasn't anything 'unusual' about it (pictured together in an undated photograph)

Pat and her family had moved to the US in 1939, when she was 11, and she had spent two years at boarding school from the ages of eight to 10.

She went on to marry businessman Joseph O'Connell Jr in 1952 at St Patrick's Cathedral in New York and they had three children - daughters Mary, Tere and Katie.

After her marriage, Pat was an executive producer on documentary The Man on Lincoln's Nose, which was directed by Daniel Raim. This was released in 2000 and about late production designer Robert F. Boyle, who had worked with her father.

Professional: Pat, who studied at RADA in England, also appeared in 10 episodes of CBS' Alfred Hitchcock Presents from 1955-60 (pictured on the Strangers On A Train set in 1951)

Personal life: Pat married Joseph O'Connell Jr in 1952 and they had three children - daughters Mary, Tere and Katie (pictured with her family including Alfred and Alma in 1959)

Pat also co-wrote a book about her mother Alma Reville in the early 2000s called Alma Hitchcock: The Woman Behind the Man.

Alma, who died in 1982, worked as a film editor and screenwriter and was married to Alfred for 54 years.

In 2012, British screenwriter Sacha Gervasi directed biopic Hitchcock about the couple with Anthony Hopkins playing Alfred and Helen Mirren portraying Alma.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Women are being drawn in to gambling addiction by a flood of adverts on daytime TV, MPs and campaigners warned yesterday.

They claimed bookmakers are using ‘predatory’ adverts to entice stay-at-home mothers, part-time workers and the unemployed to gamble.

Yesterday Foxy Bingo boasted to its investors that its customers’ losses had jumped 50 per cent in the first six months of this year compared to last year.

The figures helped parent company Entain, which also owns Ladbrokes and Coral, to quadruple its profits to £91million.

They claimed bookmakers are using ‘predatory’ adverts to entice stay-at-home mothers, part-time workers and the unemployed to gamble [File photo]

In a statement for investors, it credited its TV campaign as helping to drive the success.

Jackpotjoy Bingo is the sponsor of ITV’s afternoon panel show Loose Women, while Gala Bingo sponsors afternoon quiz show The Chase.

Bingo has been labelled a ‘gateway’ to more serious forms of gambling and bookmakers have been accused of cross-selling higher-risk slot games, where players can lose hundreds of pounds per minute.

The Daily Mail has campaigned against predatory gambling firms but while bookmakers have reduced the number of adverts around live sport, there are still numerous adverts on daytime radio and TV.

Labour MP Carolyn Harris, chairman of the all-party parliamentary group on gambling, said: ‘Vulnerable women are watching these programmes with predatory advertising that promises them companionship. Really they are taking advantage of women.’

The Daily Mail has campaigned against predatory gambling firms but while bookmakers have reduced the number of adverts around live sport, there are still numerous adverts on daytime radio and TV [File photo]

A senior female Tory MP, who asked not to be named, added: ‘Bingo is absolutely the gateway to women getting into online gambling.’ Ministers are considering tighter rules on advertising on TV and social media as part of the review into the 2005 Gambling Act.

Earlier this year the NHS’s top gambling expert, Dr Henrietta Bowden-Jones, told MPs it was ‘the norm’ to see suicidal women addicted to betting in her clinic.

A Gambling Commission survey found that 20.6 per cent of women had gambled online in the last four weeks, up from 13.5 per cent in 2016.

The Betting and Gaming Council, which represents the industry, said: ‘The Government states the rate of problem gambling is 0.5 per cent and has been stable for the last 20 years. For women, a recent Gambling Commission report says the rate is 0.1 per cent.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The boyfriend of British hiker Esther Dingley has been questioned at length after he discovered her body on Monday.

Dan Colegate, 38, concentrated on the rocky terrain near where part of Esther's skull had been found last month, police captain Jean Marc Bordinaro said, while maintaining that the most likely theory is that Esther died in an accident.

Colegate, who is not a suspect, found Esther's body about 437 yards (400m) from the remote peak of Pic de la Glere which straddles the French Spanish border in the Pyrenees. Her skull had been found 656 yards (600m) away further south down a twisting path that experienced hikers have described as 'treacherous'.

Esther, 37, went missing on November 22 while out on a solo hike in the Pyrenees.

Searches for her were called off due to bad weather but resumed in the spring. After the snow in the vast search area melted, Colegate covered hundreds of miles looking for the body of his girlfriend.

'As the person who discovered the corpse of a missing person, he was questioned again at length,' The Sun quoted 'an investigative source' as saying.

'It was routine. There is so far zero evidence of a crime'

Esther's body has now been taken to the French city of Toulouse to be examined by pathologists.

Dan Colegate (right), the boyfriend of British hiker Esther Dingley (left), has been questioned at length after he discovered her body on Monday. Police said the questioning was routine

Esther's body was found 437 yards (400m) below Pic de la Glere by her boyfriend Mr Copeland on August 9 - approximately 109 yards (100m) from where part of her skull was found 18 days earlier

This is a map showing Esther's route from when she parked her campervan in Benasque, Spain, on November 16 to August 9 when her remains were found 437 yards (400m) from Pic de la Glere

Forensics teams are also examining Esther's phone in the hopes it could reveal clues about the nature of her death.

As Esther's boyfriend, Colegate was among the first people authorities investigated after she was reported missing.

Data from his mobile phone along with credit card transactions confirmed that he had not left the village of Larroque-sur-l'Osse, 100 miles north of where Esther was found.

In an exclusive interview with MailOnline Captain Bordinaro defended his search team over their failure to locate the body ahead of Ms Dingley's 38-year-old partner.

Police sources and the French prosecutor responsible for the case have blamed recent poor weather for the failure to locate the body in rough terrain.

Public prosecutor Christophe Amunzateguy said high winds and rain prevented the use of drones and a helicopter in the search.

Captain Bordinaro, head of the police in St Gaudans, said Mr Colegate was best placed to locate the skeletal remains on the 2300metre high peak.

'Dan had paced the area up and down, taking Esther's abilities into account,' he said.

'He is a good hiker, a professional, and he has hiked in the Alps before.'

Last month, human remains later confirmed to be Esther's were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain , just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish

The camper van used by Esther Dingley and her boyfriend on the European tour remains in a compond belonging to the Spanish Civil Guard, in Besanquein, The Pyrenees

He blamed 'terrible weather' for failing to find Esther's corpse before it was pinpointed by Mr Colegate.

'We had already searched this area this winter with a helicopter and on foot, but we had been hampered by snow, our search was unsuccessful especially since it is very rugged terrain.

'In the past few weeks, we haven't been back to look specifically in this area. The Spanish investigators had surveyed this sector, but on the Spanish side.

'Esther's Dingley's body was found at the northern slope of Pic de Gléré.

'Her skull was discovered not far from the Port of Gléré, about 100 meters from where the rest of the body was found. It is a very hilly area.

'The most probable hypothesis is that the skull was moved by an animal.'

Search teams directed to the area by Mr Colegate on Monday found Ms Dingley's grey rucksack and a water bottle. Her yellow tent has not been found.

Police recovered her mobile phone - a £270 Redmi Note 9 Pro - and sent the camera to forensic officers for examination.

The phone was switched off for much of the walk to conserve battery, but police hope pictures stored in the memory and signals sent from the device may hold clues to the case.

A source told the Sun: 'Phones are always crucial to solving cases like this. This is why the device will be picked over by the forensics officers working on the case.

'As far as the ongoing investigation is concerned, it is easily the most important bit of equipment.'

The Oxford graduate had set out to hike alone from the Porte de la Glere to the Port de Venasque, a trek which follows the border between France and Spain.

The couple, both Oxford graduates, had been travelling around Europe in a camper van for years after quitting their careers and Durham home

She parked the couple's campervan in a car park in Benasque, Spain, on November 21 and started the solo hike from the Spanish town of Benasque to Pic de Sauvegarde, a mountaintop in the Pyrenees.

Her last contact with anyone was when she sent Mr Colegate a selfie picture from the Pic de Sauvegarde mountain on November 22.

She was seen by several witnesses including an Olympic Spanish skier asking for some fruit hiking on the path leading up to the summit.

From there she planned to walk between Port de la Gléré and Port de Venasque - a route of some eight miles - before hiking back down from the mountains.

She turned her phone off after that to save the battery and was planning to spend that night at the Refuge de Venasque in France, which is unmanned.

In her last known message, sent to Colegate on November 22, Esther wrote: 'Might dip into France. Hoping Refuge Venasque has a winter room. Keep you posted when can. Love you xxx'

No one knows if she stayed there and no one has reported seeing Esther alive after that.

Mr Colegate, who was staying at a farm in Gascony, France, raised the alarm on November 25, three days after he received her Whatsapp.

Police from Spain and France took part in the search in an area covering almost 700 miles.

Soldiers from the High Mountain Gendarmerie Platoon from Luchon as well as local hikers and mountain guides took part in the search.

But with the area blanketed by snow the search was called off until Spring and warmer weather had melted the snow along the twisting trails.

The couple, both Oxford graduates, had been travelling around Europe in a camper van for years after quitting their careers and Durham home.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pregnant Princess Beatrice appeared in good spirits as she celebrated a friend's birthday with Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi in London on Friday.

The Queen's granddaughter, 33, who is expecting her first baby with the Italian property developer this autumn, opted for a floral jacket paired with a chic Gucci bag as she attended the lunch.

Mother-to-be Beatrice was joined by her stylist and friend Lady Emily Compton, who gave the royal's wardrobe a chic overhaul in 2019 with the help of her partner Olivia Buckingham.

She was seen chatting with friends over some food before leaving with Edo, 38, with the group topping off the birthday celebrations with a huge bunch of multi-coloured balloons.

Beatrice's appearance comes days after Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank made their way to Balmoral to join their beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse.

Pregnant Princess Beatrice appeared in good spirits as she celebrated a friend's birthday with Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi in London on Friday

The Queen's granddaughter, 33, who is expecting her first baby with the Italian property developer this autumn, opted for a floral jacket paired with a chic Gucci bag

The royal wore her auburn hair loose as she showed off her burgeoning baby bump in a loose fitting black summer dress, which she teamed with a pair of flat black pumps.

Edo opted for a smart suit, dressed down down with a pair of casual white trainers and a white t-shirt.

Edo was seen giving Lady Emily Compton, the daughter of the Marquess of Northampton, a friendly hug as they stood outside the restaurant chatting before leaving.

Fashionista Emily is thought to be responsible for Beatrice's change in style, having previously been criticised for her daring dress sense - including that bow hat she wore to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge 's wedding in 2011.

Meanwhile Edo donned a smart suit for the outing, dressed down down with a pair of casual white trainers and a white t-shirt

Edo was seen giving Lady Emily Compton, the daughter of the Marquess of Northampton, a friendly hug as they stood outside the restaurant chatting before leaving

The royal wore her auburn hair loose as she showed off her burgeoning baby bump in a loose fitting black summer dress, which she teamed with a pair of flat black pumps

Speaking to Vanity Fair, a source said: 'Beatrice is thrilled with how it’s working out with her new stylists.'

'She dresses herself for work and on a day-by-day basis, but they have been helping her with some more high profile events. The three of them have struck up a great friendship.'

Beatrice made her first official outing since announcing they're expecting as she was seen cradling her baby bump at the Wimbledon Tennis Championships last month.

Friday's lunch comes after Beatrice celebrated her own birthday, which husband Edo marked with a sweet snap of the couple.

The proud husband Edoardo posted the previously unseen black and white photograph of the couple on his Instagram page.

Beatrice appeared to be deep in thought as she chatted with her husband and friends after the lunch

Beatrice was seen looking at her phone after leaving a birthday lunch with friends in London last week

Alongside the picture, which shows a beaming Beatrice nestling into her husband on a trip to the beach, Edo gushed: 'Happy Birthday my love. I love you with all my heart'.

The post came weeks after the couple celebrated their first wedding anniversary together.

Edo and Beatrice tied the knot at Royal Chapel of All Saints, in the grounds of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson's home of Royal Lodge, in Windsor Great Park, in July last year.

The couple were surrounded by close family including the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank also attended, as did Edo's son Christopher, known as Wolfie.

The pregnant royal chatted with friends before leaving the restaurant on Friday afternoon (pictured left and right)

She was seen chatting with friends over some food before leaving with Edo, 38, with the group topping off the birthday celebrations with a huge bunch of multicoloured balloons

As they celebrated the anniversary in June, Edo hailed his wife as the 'kindest, loveliest and most beautiful person in the world' in a gushing Instagram post.

Sharing a sweet selfie taken on a day out in the country, he wrote: 'I can’t believe it has been 1 year. Every second of every day since has been so full of joy, happiness, laughter and love.

'You are the kindest, loveliest and most beautiful person in the world. Thank you my darling for every second.'

Edoardo is the son of former Olympic skier Count Alessandro Mapelli Mozzi and Nikki Shale. He is a count himself, and had been a friend of the York children for some time before getting engaged to Beatrice.

Last week, the Duke of York's younger daughter arrived at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday.

Her father Prince Andrew arrived last week, travelling by car with his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Ms Roberts.

The 61-year-old was already on his way to Scotland when the legal summons landed at his Royal Lodge home in Windsor. However, with the legal action hanging over him the prince could be in for some awkward discussions with his mother.

Miss Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. A lawyer described the legal action as a 'grenade waiting to go off'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the survivors of the Plymouth gun rampage ventured out into the street moments after being shot to place a blanket over the bodies of a murdered father and toddler.

Despite her own injuries, Michelle Parsonage braved being targeted again by gunman Jake Davison to cover the bodies of Lee Martyn and his three-year-old daughter Sophie who had been shot dead.

Mrs Parsonage, 53, was later taken to hospital after sustaining wounds to her hand and arm after Davison had fired through the door of her home.

Her 33-year-old son Ben was also injured but both are expected to make a full recovery.

Michelle Parsonage (pictured) ventured out into the street moments after being shot to place a blanket over the bodies of a murdered father and toddler

Despite her own injuries, Michelle Parsonage braved being targeted again by gunman Jake Davison to cover the bodies of Lee Martyn and his three-year-old daughter Sophie (pictured) who had been shot dead

Mrs Parsonage, 53, was later taken to hospital after sustaining wounds to her hand and arm after Davison (pictured) had fired through the door of her home

A witness told MailOnline today: 'She's a very courageous woman because the gunman had only seconds left the street and headed into the park.

'She herself had already been shot and wounded yet she put her life on the line to make sure the father and daughter killed had some dignity.

'Her door had been shot through but I saw her come back out of the house and lay a bedsheet or blanket over their bodies before going back inside.

'The gunman was still going at this point and there were still gun shots ringing out.'

The witness, who asked not to be named, revealed how he watched Davison, a loner who suffered from mental health issues and who had built up a hatred of women, target some of those killed.

He said: 'The man and his little girl had tried to make a run for it but the gunman hit him in the back from about 20-30ft away.

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife Becky works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts

'As he slumped down to the ground, he tried to shield his daughter and kind of fell down on top of her to try and give her some sort of protection.

'But the gunman walked up to both of them and fired a couple of shots at them at close range.

'He stood there momentarily until someone at the Parsonage's home opened their front door to see what was going on and the gunman swung round and fired a few shots at them.

'I was watching out the window and he momentarily caught sight of me and so I ducked down out the way.

'My wife was about to open the door to see what was going on but I grabbed her and told her to get upstairs to safety.

'By this point I was on the phone to a police controller and telling them what was going on.

'I saw the gunman head down towards the park and just as he was out of sight, Michelle came out with the blanket.'

The back of Plymouth gunman Jake Davison's house is pictured today as the police cordon was lifted

A light was on in one of the windows at Davison's home in the quiet road in Plymouth on Sunday

The witness continued: 'After some minutes, the police told me on the phone that it had come to and end, that the situation was now under control.

'I then walked to where I'd heard the shots in the park. I saw a man lying face down in the park.

'There wasn't any blood I could see but he was motionless, almost like he was asleep.

'I instinctively thought to see if he needed help but I then thought to better not move him. I knew he'd gone.

'The reports I've read since mentioned the gun used was some kind of shotgun. It didn't look like that, it looked to me to be a semi-automatic rifle.

'It had a handle at the top of the barrel and he was able to fire a number of shots seemingly without having to re-load.'

Jake Davison's mother Maxine was the first to be killed. She and other relatives are claimed to have begged the police and NHS to help him with mental health problems

Mr Washington (pictured above) had been out walking with his 'beautiful' huskies, who rushed back home to raise the alarm with concerned family members

66-year-old Kate Shepherd was Davison's final victim, and was gunned down by Blush hair salon in Plymouth

Davison shot dead his mother Maxine first of all during his killing spree on Thursday evening in the Keyham district of Plymouth before shooting and killing Mr Martyn and his daughter Sophie, who had been pushing a toy pram up the street.

Davison then aimed and shot at Ben and Michelle before walking out of a cul-de-sac and shooting dead dog walker Stephen Washington, 59.

His last victim was 66-year Kate Shepherd, who was shot dead outside the Blush hair salon, before he turned the gun on himself and took his own life.

It emerged on Friday Davison had his gun taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault made two-months previously.

But the gun was returned to him in early July after he attended an anger management course and was classed by police as fit again to hold the weapon.

The matter is being investigated by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Johnny Depp said that he's being boycotted by Hollywood amid 'an unpleasant and messy situation' in his split with ex-wife Amber Heard.

The 58-year-old actor spoke with The Sunday Times about his new drama Minamata, which has not yet secured a U.S. release.

The Kentucky-born actor chalked up the professional difficulties to the 'absurdity of media mathematics' in the wake of a 'surreal five years' following his 2016 split with Heard amid allegations of domestic violence.

The latest: Johnny Depp, 58, said that he's being boycotted by Hollywood amid 'an unpleasant and messy situation' in his split with ex-wife Amber Heard, 35. He was snapped last year in Zurich, Switzerland

The actor, who's played roles such as Edward Scissorhands, Willy Wonka and Jack Sparrow, last year lost a libel case against the outlet The Sun over their reporting of the split, labeling him a 'wife-beater.'

Amid the headlines, MGM has suspended the release of Minamata, which is directed by Andrew Levitas and in which Depp plays the role of photojournalist W Eugene Smith, in his 1970s work in Japan.

Last month, Levitas wrote a letter to MGM accusing it of 'burying' the motion picture as result of Depp's legal issues, Deadline reported. The movie was acquired by MGL last fall, via its American International Pictures, after its February 2020 debut at the Berlin International Film Festival.

Depp told The Sunday Times: 'Some films touch people and this affects those in Minamata and people who experience similar things. And for anything … for Hollywood’s boycott of me? One man, one actor in an unpleasant and messy situation, over the last number of years?'

Details: The actor last year lost a libel case against the outlet The Sun over their reporting of the split, labeling him a 'wife-beater'

Depp plays the role of photojournalist W Eugene Smith in Minamata, which details his 1970s work in Japan

Depp, who was replaced in the Fantastic Beasts anthology last year by Warner Bros., said he was 'moving towards' bringing 'things to light.'

Amid the career crisis in the U.S., Depp is set to be honored by Spain's San Sebastian film festival next month, and the Czech Republic's Karlovy Vary International Film Festival later this month.

The Karlovy Vary International Film Festival stated it would 'recognize and pay tribute to the acclaimed actor’s extensive career and lasting legacy on the film industry globally.'

For the San Sebastian film festival, Depp is set to be given the Donostia Award for his 'outstanding contributions to the film world.'

Amid the career crisis in the U.S., Depp is set to be honored by Spain's San Sebastian film festival next month, and the Czech Republic's Karlovy Vary International Film Festival later this month

That decision came under scrutiny from female filmmakers organizations in Spain.

The country's Association of Female Filmmakers and Audiovisual Media's president Cristina Andreu last week told the AP that the decision 'speaks very badly of the festival and its leadership, and transmits a terrible message to the public: "It doesn’t matter if you are an abuser as long as you are a good actor."'

Depp in March was denied an appeal in the Heard case, with a British court saying his efforts had 'no real prospect of success.'

He also remains in litigation in the states in a $50 million suit against Heard, which has been delayed until next year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lupita Nyong'o was seen hosting a special screening of the soon-to-be-released horror film Candyman at a theater in Peachtree Corners, Georgia on Sunday.

The 38-year-old actress appeared to be enjoying her time at the venue while speaking to an audience during the event, and she was later pictured spending time with her relatives Achieng' and Fiona.

The forthcoming feature serves as a direct sequel to the 1992 film of the same name and is currently set to be released to the public later this month.

Leading the event: Lupita Nyong'o was seen hosting a special screening of the upcoming horror film Candyman in Peachtree Corners, Georgia on Sunday

Nyong'o sported a stylish leopard-printed dress and a pair of black high-heeled shoes while presenting the upcoming film.

Her beautiful dark brown locks had been arranged intricately prior to the presentation of the horror feature.

The Academy Award-winning actress accessorized with a single bracelet, a set of rings and a pair of matching hoop earrings.

At one point, the Black Panther star was seen wearing a stylish pair of eyeglasses while she addressed the audience.

Looking great! The Academy Award-winning actress sported an eye-catching leopard-print dress during the event

Family matters: The performer was joined at the event by her relatives Achieng' and Fiona, with whom she posed for a picture

Nyong'o's appearance at the event comes prior to the premiere of two major film projects with which she was involved.

The performer is currently set to feature in the forthcoming spy film The 355, where she will play an MI6 agent named Khadijah.

Also set to appear in the Simon Kinberg-directed film are actresses such as Jessica Chastain, Penelope Cruz and Diane Kruger, among others.

The concept for the film was worked out by its director and the Zero Dark Thirty star during the filming of X-Men: Dark Phoenix.

Staying busy: Nyong'o is currently set to appear in one of the main roles in the upcoming spy film, The 355

The cast was brought together in 2019, and filming started in July of that year.

Production moved through several different locations before additional shots were finished the following year.

Although the upcoming film was supposed to have its major debut this past January, it was delayed due to the ongoing state of the global pandemic.

The 355 is currently set to have its premiere on January 7th, 2022.

Delay: Although The 355 was set to have its premiere this past January, it was pushed back as a response to the ongoing state of the global pandemic

Nyong'o will also appear in the forthcoming Marvel feature, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, which serves as a sequel to the original 2018 film.

The feature began being actively developed shortly after the release of the first movie, and director Ryan Coogler signed on to helm the follow-up that October.

However, the project entered an uncertain state after Chadwick Boseman, who starred as the titular character, suddenly passed away in August of 2020.

After a period of restructuring, the film was confirmed to still be in development, and Nyong'o was confirmed to be reprising her role as Nakia in the sequel.

Doing it again: Nyong'o will also reprise her role as Nakia in the upcoming Marvel feature Black Panther: Wakanda Forever; she is seen alongside Chadwick Boseman in the original 2018 film

Other returning cast members include Danai Gurira, Letitia Wright and Martin Freeman, among others.

Tenoch Huerta was in talks to join the list of performers as one of the film's antagonists.

Filming initially began this past June, with principal photography primarily taking place in Atlanta, Georgia.

Black Panther: Wakanda Forever is currently set to be made available to the public on July 8th, 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She made her film debut with a small role in the Kevin Smith black comedy horror film Tusk, when she was just 15-years-old.

Fast forward seven years and Lily Rose Depp has added nine more movie roles to her resume, with two new films set to drop next month at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival.

And on Sunday, as the weekend was winding down, the daughter of actor Johnny Depp and singer and model Vanessa Paradis looked to be in casual mode during a food run in New York City.

On the go: Lily Rose Depp, 22, stepped out for a food and water run in New York City on Sunday

Depp, 22, flaunted her petite 5ft3in curves in cutoff jean shorts that were worn over a purple bodysuit.

Being that she was on the go at the height of summer, the A Faithful Man star kept the accessories to a minimum, while wearing a pair of white running sneakers and stylish sunglasses.

The French-American actress and model looked to be in a hurry, considering she grabbed her lunch items to go and hurried out of the store and back onto the busy streets of Manhattan.

Depp kept part of her focus on her phone, which at times appeared to be used as a source for music.

Casual mode: The actress and model showed off her petite 5ft3in curves in cutoff jean shorts that were worn over a purple bodysuit

Despite being delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic, Depp was able to finally finish up shooting two films that are now in post-production.

First, there's the British comedy Silent Night, which centers around a Christmas dinner amongst an extended family. It also stars Keira Knightley, Roman Griffin Davis, Matthew Goode, Annabelle Wallis and Kirby Howell-Baptiste.

Silent Night is slated to make its world premiere at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival in September.

New roles: The daughter of actor Johnny Depp and singer and model Vanessa Paradis has two new films slated to premiere at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival in September

Depp scored one of the leading roles in the Irish-Polish drama film Wolf, which will also make its debut at next month's Toronto International Film Festival.

The story focuses on a boy who suffers from species dysphoria, a real illness where people believe they're an animal trapped in a human body.

The film is set in clinic and follows Jacob, a young man, played by George MacKay, who thinks he's a wolf, according to the director and writer Nathalie Biancheri. It also stars Paddy Considine, Eileen Walsh, Fionn O'Shea, Lola Petticrew and Senan Jennings.

Along with her burgeoning career as an actor, Depp has also been busy as a brand ambassador for Chanel since 2015.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been readjusting to life back in the UK after her stint in the Love Island villa.

And Sharon Gaffka looked sensational as she headed to dinner at Ours restaurant in Kensington, London, for a girls' night out with friends on Sunday.

The beauty, 25, cut a stylish figure in a pair of wide-leg orange trousers which she styled with a white shirt.

Poser: Sharon Gaffka looked sensational as she headed to dinner at Ours restaurant in Kensington, London, for a girls' night out with friends on Sunday

Sharon appeared to be in good spirits ahead of her night out and ensured to work all her angles for the camera.

The beauty kept things comfortable in a pair of white trainers and accessorised with a stylish gold necklace and large watch.

She wore her locks down and styled straight, letting her tresses bounce off her shoulders as she strutted along the street.

Glowing: The beauty, 25, appeared to be in great spirits as she smiled for the cameras

Standout: Sharon looked effortlessly stylish in her orange trousers and white shirt ensemble

Sharon's outing comes after she and Hugo Hammond sent the rumour mill into overdrive as many fans suspected them of rekindling their former romance.

The pair looked cosy at the dinner table as Hugo placed his arm around the back of the civil servant's chair while they posed for a photo during a night out last week.

Since leaving the villa, Sharon has revealed her shock that candid discussions she had about her race and sexuality were cut from the show.

The Young Women's Trust ambassador told Metro Online last week that Faye Winter, 26, had asked her if she was bisexual.

Glam: Sharon wore her locks down and added a full face of stunning makeup for the night out

Fashion: The beauty kept things comfortable in a pair of white trainers and accessorised with a stylish gold necklace and large watch

Cute: The pair looked cosy at the dinner table as Hugo placed his arm around the back of the civil servant's chair while they posed for a photo

To which she replied: 'It's something that I've explored but I've never been in a relationship with a woman.'

During her time on the show, it was made known in a game that she had previously had a threesome involving another woman.

Sharon, said that the aired scenes only scratched the surface of the discussion of modern dating and her sexual experiences on the show, and it is now apparent that the rest of the scenes from the conversation were left out.

'A lot of the conversations I had about modern dating on the show were never aired, but I was very open about sexuality and being a mixed-race woman in modern dating.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Cure bassist Simon Gallup has announced that he has quit the rock band with a 'slightly heavy heart.'

The musician, 61, broke the news on his personal Facebook page on Saturday night, which left fans devastated.

Keeping the announcement short, Simon wrote: 'With a slightly heavy heart I am no longer a member of the Cure ! Good luck to them all ...'.

End of an era: The Cure bassist Simon Gallup (right) announced on Facebook on Saturday that he is quitting the band (pictured with frontman Robert Smith in 2014)

Breaking the news: Keeping the announcement short, Simon wrote: 'With a slightly heavy heart I am no longer a member of the Cure ! Good luck to them all ...'

One fan asked if the decision was health-related, to which Simon replied: 'I’m ok… just got fed up of betrayal.'

Other music lovers were heartbroken at Saturday's shock news, with one comparing it to their parents divorcing.

'I'm so sad. It's like my parents were getting divorced. If you are happy with this decision then we fans are happy for you too,' the Cure lover penned.

Way back when: Frontman Robert Smith branded the bassist as the 'heart of the band' and 'his best friend', to NME in 2019 (Robert, left, and Simon, right, pictured above in 1989)

The English band, formed in 1978, have yet to comment on Simon's departure but frontman Robert Smith, 62, told The Irish Times three years ago that if Simon left, 'it wouldn’t be called the Cure.'

Robert also branded the bassist as the 'heart of the band' and 'his best friend', to NME in 2019.

'For me, the heart of the live band has always been Simon, and he’s always been my best friend. It’s weird that over the years and the decades he’s often been overlooked.

'He doesn’t do interviews, he isn’t really out there and he doesn’t play the role of a foil to me in public, and yet he’s absolutely vital to what we do,' he said.

Rock stars: The Cure released their debut album Three Imaginary Boys in 1979 and it wasn't long after that Simon joined the West Sussex band (pictured above in 1997)

The Cure released their debut album Three Imaginary Boys in 1979 and it wasn't long after that Simon joined the West Sussex band.

The rock star appeared on all three LPs in their Dark Trilogy - Seventeen Seconds (1980), Faith (1981) and Pornography (1982).

He temporarily left the band as a result of tensions with Robert but rejoined in 1984 and remained as their bassist before announcing his exit.

Robert admitted to New Zealand presenter Zane Lowe back in June that the band had recorded two new albums, despite their latest dating back to 2008.

Hinting it could be their last work, he said: 'I can’t think we’ll ever do anything else. I definitely can’t do this again.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pictures reveal the dramatic moment a suspected British spy was led away in handcuffs by police outside his home near Berlin after being accused of selling secrets to Russia.

David Smith, 57, who worked as a guard at the British embassy in the German capital, was arrested at his flat in Potsdam after a long running investigation by security services in Germany and the UK.

And more details about his past emerged - including his Ukrainian wife and a past job in the RAF.

German prosecutors said the Briton, who has been held on remand, is suspected of being a secret service agent and spying for the Russian intelligence service since at least November.

Before his arrest, he allegedly passed on documents he had received while at work over to the Russians, prosecutors said.

Pictures, taken by a neighbour from a nearby balcony, show Smith dressed in a blue t-shirt with his hands in cuffs in front of a uniformed and plain clothes officer.

The neighbour, who asked not to be identified, said she took the picture shortly after 3pm on Tuesday.

She said it was 'obvious' that Mr Smith was handcuffed in public and that this was an 'unusual' practice for German police.

David Smith, 57, (left in the blue t-shirt) worked as a guard at the British embassy in Berlin and was arrested at his flat in Potsdam after a long running investigation by security services in Germany and the UK

She said: 'He appeared to be in a plain silver van which was in a parking lot in the street.

'There were a lot of police and another man in civilian clothes. They were talking between themselves a lot.

'They took him out of the van and he was standing there, and then he got him back in the van.

'A short time later they took him out of the van again and led him around the corner to the area beside the flat.

'It was obvious he was in handcuffs. It is very unusual for German police to put people in handcuffs in public.

'That is when we heard some of the officers talking and saying that that they were going to have search the apartment.

'There was another black civilian van at the scene as well as a normal marked police car. Then after a short time he was returned to the van.'

The neighbour added: 'I just thought it was very strange. This is a quiet area and it is unusual to see anyone being arrested.'

The neighbour, who asked to not be named, took the picture from a balcony in Potsdam

Last night it emerged that Smith, 57, once served in the RAF before becoming a private security contractor.

He married a Ukrainian woman from Odessa around 20 years ago and they had a daughter together. The couple are understood to have separated.

A Home Office source told MailOnline that Smith worked as a G4S-style guard at the Berlin embassy.

The suspect 'on at least one occasion passed on documents he acquired as part of his professional activities to a representative of Russian intelligence,' the federal prosecutor's office said in a statement.

The Briton then received an unknown amount of cash in return, the statement said, adding that investigators have searched his home and office.

Smith was reportedly being monitored by MI5 as his alleged activities 'had been known about for some time' and it was not a 'snap arrest', according to Sky News.

The suspect worked as a 'local hire' at the embassy, which is a scheme available for UK citizens who want to work in Germany. It means that he was not a diplomat and therefore he does not have diplomatic immunity.

Pictures of Smith's flat purportedly show bookshelves crammed with Russian language books and military histories including two books about Hitler's feared SS 12th Panzer Division which committed war crimes in World War Two.

A large Russian red, white and blue flag on a pole could be seen today propped up in the corner of Mr Smith's living room with a smaller one on the floor beside a TV.

Soviet military caps showing hammer and sickle emblems on a red star surrounded by a wreath were also visible from the window.

Other memorabilia adorning the flat includes insignias of the Russian Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific fleets, and a Russian military insignia - not fully visible - which partially reads 'technical battalion'.

Neighbours rarely saw Smith, but one said he once told her he had a military past.

The woman called Nina, who lives on the estate, said: 'He would talk about being [in the] army and things like that but never showed us medals.

'He seemed like a friendly man and loved learning about history such as that of Russia.'

On Wednesday afternoon, Smith appeared before an investigating judge at the federal court, who decided to keep him remanded in custody, reports Bild.

The Attorney General stated: 'On at least one occasion he forwarded documents that he had obtained in the course of his professional activity to a representative of a Russian intelligence service. In return for his information transfer, S. received cash in so far unknown amounts.'

As a security guard at the British embassy, Smith would have more access than other members of staff, Dr Victor Madeira, author of 'Britannia and the Bear: the Anglo-Russian intelligence wars', told MailOnline.

First images have emerged revealing the inside of suspected Kremlin spy David Smith's flat in Potsdam, Germany, which features a large Russian flag in the corner (left)

There is a Soviet officer's hat on top of his book case, with Russian-themed memorabilia on the top shelf along with a badge of the Ukrainian special police

Several Cyrillic-language books adorn the shelves, alongside insignia of the Russian Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific fleets

The British embassy 'spy' could have done a 'lot of damage', says intelligence expert It has been revealed that the British man arrested in Germany on suspicion of spying for Russia and handing over documents for cash while working at the British Embassy in Berlin was a security guard. The 57-year-old suspect, identified as David Smith, was arrested on Tuesday in Potsdam, west of Berlin, based on cooperative investigations by German and British authorities. As a security guard at the British embassy, Smith would have more access than other members of staff, Dr Victor Madeira, author of Britannia and the Bear: the Anglo-Russian intelligence wars, told MailOnline. For instance, Smith could have access to security patrol schedules, how to arm and disarm alarm systems as well as emergency contact numbers for all staff, Dr Madeira said. 'He could potentially even have access to classified areas, depending on his own security clearance,' Dr Madeira, a Contributing Author at The Cambridge Security Initiative, told MailOnline. German online magazine Focus Online reported that he provided the Russians with documents containing information on counterterrorism. Dr Madeira, speaking about those reports, said: 'The reports that Smith passed on counter-terrorism documents suggests that Moscow could be trying see how much the UK is helping Germany tackle Russian assassinations on their soil. 'Russia could also be trying to find out what the UK and Germany may be discussing about counter-terrorism more generally, like the impact on Europe of the unrest in Afghanistan.' He explained: 'The information doesn't have to be specific to Russian activities in Germany to be of great interest to Moscow - information can be weaponised for influence operations of every kind.' Before his arrest, Smith worked as a local staff member, otherwise known as a 'local hire' at the embassy, which is a scheme available for UK citizens who want to work in Germany. It means that he was not a diplomat and therefore he does not have diplomatic immunity. Foreign embassies in most countries rely in part on these 'local hires' to fill a variety of roles. The positions are often advertised on generic job search websites in the host country - and the identity of the employer is kept vague until applicants pass an initial screening process. Local hire positions in embassies are usually in fields such as media affairs, maintenance or visa processing which do not usually give access to classified information - or if they were, it would be limited. But Smith could have been able to provide valuable information to Russia, such as WiFi passwords and staff lists including their addresses and mobile phones, Dr Madeira said. He could also have been able to form profiles of diplomats and MI6 officers stationed in Berlin. Dr Madeira said 'one of the biggest problems we have in the West is that we confuse seniority with access'. He said: 'Just because someone is 'just' a driver, 'just' a messenger, is utterly irrelevant. Just because someone is a local hire and therefore not formally a foreign service officer or a diplomat, that doesn't mean that the person couldn't have done a lot of damage. 'Anything - especially with cyber being so critical nowadays - from WiFi passwords, any sort of administrative lists like staff lists, addresses, mobile phones could be accessible. 'That would make it easier for the Russian intelligence services to track those mobile phones. 'They would be able to identify who is a genuine diplomat and who is not.' Dr Madeira warned: 'There's a real range of damage that a person like this could do. 'Let's not confuse seniority, title or status with access. It's incredible what someone who is teed up to look for certain things can pick up. 'It's a well-established, tried and tested method. Pretty much everyone does it. 'Every country will try and recruit someone working in a hostile embassy.' Advertisement

For instance, Smith could have access to security patrol schedules, how to arm and disarm alarm systems as well as emergency contact numbers for all staff, Dr Madeira said.

'He could potentially even have access to classified areas, depending on his own security clearance,' Dr Madeira, a Contributing Author at The Cambridge Security Initiative, told MailOnline.

German online magazine Focus Online reported that he provided the Russians with documents containing information on counterterrorism.

Dr Madeira, speaking about those reports, said: 'The reports that David [Smith] passed on counter-terrorism documents suggests that Moscow could be trying see how much the UK is helping Germany tackle Russian assassinations on their soil.

'Russia could also be trying to find out what the UK and Germany may be discussing about counter-terrorism more generally, like the impact on Europe of the unrest in Afghanistan.'

He explained: 'The information doesn't have to be specific to Russian activities in Germany to be of great interest to Moscow - information can be weaponised for influence operations of every kind.'

Germany's Foreign Ministry spokesman Christofer Burger said the German government took the spying allegations 'very seriously' and would follow the case closely, adding that spying on allied states on German soil is unacceptable.

Russia's embassy in Berlin said today: 'The Russian Embassy in Germany to date does not have any official information received from the German side on this issue.

'The embassy does not comment on press reports.'

Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) and Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) did not immediately reply to requests for comment.

A Western security source said the motivation of the British man was likely money. As a locally engaged staffer, he did not have access to highly classified material, the source said, adding Britain's MI5 counter-intelligence service was involved in catching him.

The Briton's arrest is the result of a joint investigation by the Metropolitan Police's Counter Terrorism Command and their German counterparts. The investigation was 'intelligence-led', which means that investigators would have taken their time to gather evidence.

Foreign embassies in most countries rely in part on these 'local hires' to fill a variety of roles.

The positions are often advertised on generic job search websites in the host country - and the identity of the employer is kept vague until applicants pass an initial screening process.

Local hire positions in embassies are usually in fields such as media affairs, maintenance or visa processing which do not usually give access to classified information - or if they were, it would be limited.

But Smith could have been able to provide valuable information to Russia, such as WiFi passwords and staff lists including their addresses and mobile phones, Dr Madeira said.

He could also have been able to form profiles of diplomats and MI6 officers stationed in Berlin.

Dr Madeira said 'one of the biggest problems we have in the West is that we confuse seniority with access'.

He said: 'Just because someone is 'just' a driver, 'just' a messenger, is utterly irrelevant. Just because someone is a local hire and therefore not formally a foreign service officer or a diplomat, that doesn't mean that the person couldn't have done a lot of damage.

'Anything - especially with cyber being so critical nowadays - from WiFi passwords, any sort of administrative lists like staff lists, addresses, mobile phones could be accessible. That would make it easier for the Russian intelligence services to track those mobile phones.

'They would be able to identify who is a genuine diplomat and who is not.'

Dr Madeira warned: 'There's a real range of damage that a person like this could do. Let's not confuse seniority, title or status with access. It's incredible what someone who is teed up to look for certain things can pick up.

'It's a well-established, tried and tested method. Pretty much everyone does it. Every country will try and recruit someone working in a hostile embassy.'

The British embassy in Berlin is just around the corner from the iconic Brandenburg Gate and a short, 250-metre (273 yard) walk from the Russian embassy, which is on the famous Unter den Linden boulevard.

Before his arrest, he worked as a local hire at the British Embassy in Berlin and allegedly passed on documents he received at work to the Russians, the prosecutors said. Pictured: File image of the British Embassy in Berlin

The Met Police said in a statement: 'A 57-year old British national was arrested by German authorities on Tuesday, 10 August, as part of a joint investigation between the Met's Counter Terrorism Command and German counterparts.

'The man was arrested in the Berlin area on suspicion of committing offences relating to being engaged in 'Intelligence Agent activity' (under German law).

'Primacy for the investigation remains with German authorities. Officers from the Counter Terrorism Command continue to liaise with German counterparts as the investigation continues.

The Met's Counter Terrorism Command is responsible for investigating allegations and matters relating to alleged breaches of the Official Secrets Act.

A UK Government spokesperson told MailOnline: 'An individual who was contracted to work for the government was arrested yesterday by the German authorities.

'It would not be appropriate to comment further as there is an ongoing police investigation.'

In May, Britain set out plans to crack down on hostile activity by foreign states, introducing a proposed law to give security services and law enforcement new powers to tackle growing threats.

Security specialist Edward Lucas likened the arrest to an early spy novel by the British writer John le Carre.

'The fact that the arrest has been made in Berlin suggests it's a non-diplomatic member of the embassy, that's why the German judicial system has been brought to bear on it,' he told Times Radio.

Security specialist Edward Lucas (pictured) likened the arrest to an early spy novel by the British writer John le Carre

If the suspect was a diplomat, the British authorities would have been more involved, he added.

Lucas, a former foreign correspondent with The Economist covering eastern and central European affairs, said the arrest was 'a reminder of how much effort the Russians put in to trying to find out what Western alliances are up to'.

Germany has arrested a number of people in recent years accused of spying for Russia, but the capture of a suspect from a close ally is highly unusual.

In June, a Russian man who worked at a German university was arrested on suspicion of espionage for allegedly passing information to Russian intelligence, German prosecutors said.

The suspect, identified only as Ilnur N., was arrested and his home and workplace were searched.

Federal prosecutors said he worked as a research assistant for a science and technology professorship at a German university. They didn't identify the university or specify where in the country he was arrested.

The man is accused of meeting at least three times with a member of a Russian intelligence service, which prosecutors didn't identify, between October of last year and June. In two of those meetings, he is alleged to have handed over information on the university in exchange for an unspecified amount of cash.

And German prosecutors in February filed espionage charges against a German man suspected of having passed the floor plans of parliament to Russian secret services in 2017.

Moscow is at loggerheads with a number of Western capitals after a Russian troop build-up on Ukraine's borders and a series of espionage scandals that have resulted in diplomatic expulsions.

In June, Italy said it had created a national cybersecurity agency following warnings by Prime Minister Mario Draghi that Europe needs to protect itself from Russian 'interference'.

The move came after an Italian navy captain was caught red-handed by police selling confidential military documents from his computer to a Russian embassy official.

The leaders of nine eastern European nations in May condemned what they termed Russian 'aggressive acts', citing operations in Ukraine and 'sabotage' allegedly targeted at the Czech Republic.

Several central and eastern European countries expelled Russian diplomats in solidarity with Prague, but Russia has branded accusations of its involvement as 'absurd' and responded with tit-for-tat expulsions.

British spy chiefs say both China and Russia have sought to steal commercially sensitive data and intellectual property as well as to interfere in politics, while Russian agents are also accused of carrying out an attack on former Russian spy Sergei Skripal on British soil in 2018.

The Scripals were poisoned after two Russian agents smeared the deadly nerve agent on the door handle of Mr Skripal's home. Pictured: Russian agents Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov in Salisbury

Yulia Skripal (left) and her double agent father Sergei Skripal, 68, (right) were poisoned with novichok on March 4 2019

Beijing and Moscow say the West is gripped with a paranoia about plots. Both Russia and China deny they meddle abroad, seek to steal technology, carry out cyberattacks or sow discord.

The Berlin case has echoes of the shadowy world of espionage practised during the Cold War, when double agent Kim Philby and others in a ring of British spies known as the 'Cambridge Five' passed information to the Soviet Union.

The latest espionage case also comes at a time of highly strained relations between Russia and Germany on a number of fronts, including the ongoing detention of Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny, who received treatment in Berlin after a near-fatal poisoning.

Relations between London and Moscow have been at a low point since the attempted poisoning of former spy Sergei Skripal in British Salisbury in 2018.

The Kremlin has denied any involvement in either case.

Chancellor Angela Merkel's government has moreover worked to maintain a sanctions regime over Moscow's annexation of the Crimean peninsula.

And Germany has repeatedly accused Russia of cyberattacks and cyberespionage on its soil.

Despite the frictions, Berlin has pressed ahead with plans to finish the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, set to double natural gas supplies from Russia to Germany.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The French police chief who led the search for Esther Dingley has revealed how her boyfriend 'paced the area up and down' for days until he found her body.

Captain Jean Marc Bordinaro said Dan Colegate concentrated on the rocky terrain near where part of her skull had been found last month, locating her body about 437 yards (400m) from the remote peak of Pic de la Glere which straddles the French Spanish border in the Pyrenees.

Her skull was found 656 yards (600m) away further south down a twisting path that experienced hikers have described as 'treacherous'.

The body of the 37-year-old has now been taken to the French city of Toulouse where pathologist are checking for broken bones which would support investigators theory that she died after a fall.

Forensic officers are also examining Esther's phone - a £270 Redmi Note 9 Pro - in the hope pictures saved on the memory or signals sent from the device could help police solve the mystery of her death.

Esther's remains and equipment were found by boyfriend Dan Colegate on Monday as he paced up and down for days along the routes the 37-year-old took

Esther's partner Dan Colegate (pictured together) located the body 437 yards (400m) from the remote peak of Pic de la Glere which straddles the French Spanish border in the Pyrenees

Captain Bordinaro said the distance between where the body and skull were found was '109 yards (100m) as the crow flies'. Her remains were discovered by her boyfriend Mr Colegate 437 yards (400m) below the Pic de la Glere on August 9 - approximately 109 yards (100m) from where a fragment of her skull was found 18 days earlier on July 23.

In an exclusive interview with MailOnline Captain Nordinaro defended his search team over their failure to locate the body ahead of Ms Dingley's 38-year-old partner.

Since the snow in the vast search area has melted, Mr Colegate has covered hundreds of miles looking for the body his girlfriend.

Police sources and the French prosecutor responsible for the case have blamed recent poor weather for the failure to locate the body in rough terrain.

This is a map showing Esther's route from when she parked her campervan in Benasque, Spain, on November 16 to August 9 when her remains were found 437 yards (400m) from Pic de la Glere

Esther's body was found 437 yards (400m) below Pic de la Glere by her boyfriend Mr Copeland on August 9 - approximately 109 yards (100m) from where part of her skull was found 18 days earlier

Public prosecutor Cristophe Amunzateguy said high winds and rain prevented the use of drones and a helicopter in the search.

Captain Bordinaro, head of the police in St Gaudans, said Mr Colegate was best placed to locate the skeletal remains on the 2300metre high peak.

'Dan had paced the area up and down, taking Esther's abilities into account,' he said.

'He is a good hiker, a professional, and he has hiked in the Alps before.'

He blamed 'terrible weather' for failing to find Esther's corpse before it was pinpointed by Mr Colegate.

'We had already searched this area this winter with a helicopter and on foot, but we had been hampered by snow, our search was unsuccessful especially since it is very rugged terrain.

'In the past few weeks, we haven't been back to look specifically in this area. The Spanish investigators had surveyed this sector, but on the Spanish side.

'Esther's Dingley's body was found at the northern slope of Pic de Gléré.

'Her skull was discovered not far from the Port of Gléré, about 100 meters from where the rest of the body was found. It is a very hilly area.

'The most probable hypothesis is that the skull was moved by an animal.'

Last month, human remains later confirmed to be Esther's were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain , just south of Bagneres-de-Luchon. The trail is known as Puerto de la Glera in Spanish

The hotel, near the Spanish town of Besanque in The Pyrenees from where Esther set off on her hiking expedition last November before she disappeared

The camper van used by Esther Dingley and her boyfriend on the European tour remains in a compond belonging to the Spanish Civil Guard, in Besanquein, The Pyrenees

The 37-year-old Oxford graduate had numerous pieces of kit with her at the time of her disappearance, including a bright red and grey rucksack and a distinctive yellow tent

Oxford graduate Esther Dingley parked the couple's campervan in a car park in Benasque, Spain, on November 21 and started the solo hike from the Spanish town of Benasque to Pic de Sauvegarde, a mountaintop in the Pyrenees, before she disappeared

Search teams directed to the area by Mr Colegate on Monday found Ms Dingley's grey rucksack and a water bottle. Her yellow tent has not been found.

Police recovered her mobile phone - a £270 Redmi Note 9 Pro - and sent the camera to forensic officers for examination.

The phone was switched off for much of the walk to conserve battery, but police hope pictures stored in the memory and signals sent from the device may hold clues to the case.

A source told the Sun: 'Phones are always crucial to solving cases like this. This is why the device will be picked over by the forensics officers working on the case.

'As far as the ongoing investigation is concerned, it is easily the most important bit of equipment.'

The Oxford graduate had set out to hike alone from the Porte de la Glere to the Port de Venasque, a trek which follows the border between France and Spain.

She parked the couple's campervan in a car park in Benasque, Spain, on November 21 and started the solo hike from the Spanish town of Benasque to Pic de Sauvegarde, a mountaintop in the Pyrenees.

Her last contact with anyone was when she sent Mr Colegate a selfie picture from the Pic de Sauvegarde mountain on November 22.

She was seen by several witnesses including an Olympic Spanish skier asking for some fruit hiking on the path leading up to the summit.

From there she planned to walk between Port de la Gléré and Port de Venasque - a route of some eight miles - before hiking back down from the mountains.

The pass where Esther Dingley went missing was part of an area described as an 'easy' walk for the British hiker by her boyfriend

The 37-year-old from Durham was on a month-long solo trip and was supposed to return on November 24

She turned her phone off after that to save the battery and was planning to spend that night at the Refuge de Venasque in France, which is unmanned.

In her last known message, sent to Colegate on November 22, Esther wrote: 'Might dip into France. Hoping Refuge Venasque has a winter room. Keep you posted when can. Love you xxx'

No one knows if she stayed there and no one has reported seeing Esther alive after that.

Mr Colegate, who was staying at a farm in Gascony, France, raised the alarm on November 25, three days after he received her Whatsapp.

Police from Spain and France took part in the search in an area covering almost 700 miles.

Soldiers from the High Mountain Gendarmerie Platoon from Luchon as well as local hikers and mountain guides took part in the search.

But with area blanketed by snow the search was called off until Spring and warmer weather had melted the snow along the twisting trails.

Colegate has expressed disbelief at the theory that Esther may have died after becoming injured during her solo hike as she was an experienced hiker who should have had no problem with the route she is believed to have taken.

He wrote a 23-page report about Esther's plans to do a circular hike between Spain and France which involved sleeping at a mountain refuge.

He said in his dossier: 'An individual that Esther met on November 19 came forward to say he had specifically suggested this route through France, between Port de Venasque and Port de la Glere, to Esther when he met her. There is no reason to think that Esther did not stick to this plan.'

Esther went missing on November 22 while out hiking in the Pyrenees, and last month, human remains were found by Spanish hikers at Port de la Glere, a mountain pass on France 's border with Spain

Dingley's boyfriend Dan Colegate (left) has expressed disbelief at the theory that Esther may have died after becoming injured during her solo hike as she was an experienced hiker who should have had no problem with the route she is believed to have taken

Dingley (pictured with boyfriend Colegate) was seen by several witnesses including an Olympic Spanish skier asking for some fruit hiking on the path leading up to the summit

In a section titled 'Esther's Planned Onward Route', he suggested she reached the mountain refuge in France and slept there overnight before continuing a hike to return to her initial starting point in Spain.

He said: 'Her onward route would have involved a descent northwards towards the Hospice de France, a flat traverse westwards around the Imperatrice Way, and a climb southwards to the border at Port de la Glere. From the border the route descends back towards Hospital de Benasque.

'This route would have been well within Esther's capabilities for a day hike, in addition to the fact she had a tent, camping equipment and significant experience using it.

'Distance was 16km with 1202 yards (1100m) of ascent, five to seven hours of hiking time. The weather remained excellent that Monday. The route is very obvious on the ground and also from the terrain when starting from Refuge de Venasque.

'It's basically impossible to get lost in good visibility here. The entire route is a well-made and easy to follow path. Although Esther believed and had warned family that there was poor signal in the area, in fact the signal is very good on the French side.

'Within half an hour of leaving the refuge, Esther should have been able to use her phone for most of the rest of the day.'

The couple, both Oxford graduates, had been travelling around Europe in a camper van for years after quitting their careers and Durham home.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A former Royal Marine Commando has shared a picture of Afghans who he says were 'all executed outside their homes in Kandahar on Thursday'.

James Glancy uploaded an image, taken in February, of himself holding recording equipment with a colleague in Afghanistan, along with a group of men clad in the country's military combat uniform.

Replying to his own post revealing the horrific incident, which has been retweeted more than 10,000 times, Mr Glancy also wrote 'the same happened in Spin Baldak', referencing a graphic video showing 'scores of dead bodies on the roads' in the region.

Filmmaker Mr Glancy, who did three tours of Afghanistan and is now director of conservation charity Veterans For Wildlife, had posted: 'The Afghans we were with in February, were all executed outside their homes in Kandahar on Thursday.'

He followed up by responding to a report revealing that the President and Vice President of the country had left the capital.

He accused them of 'Abandoning their people'.

Mr Glancy's stark revelation comes after reports earlier this week revealed Taliban fighters are going door-to-door and forcibly marrying girls as young as 12 and forcing them into sex slavery.

Meanwhile terrified locals who fled the city of Kunduz - captured by the Taliban last week - have told of reprisal attacks carried out by jihadist fighters who hunted down anyone linked to the government and beheaded or executed them.

James Glancy uploaded an image, taken in February, of himself holding recording equipment with a colleague in Afghanistan, along with a group of men clad in the country's military combat uniform

Filmmaker Mr Glancy, who is also director of conservation charity Veterans For Wildlife, followed up by responding to a report revealing that the President and Vice President of Afghanistan had left the capital Kabul. He accused them of 'Abandoning their people'

And today Afghanistan's embattled president left the country, joining his fellow citizens and foreigners in a stampede fleeing the advancing Taliban and signaling the end of a 20-year Western experiment aimed at remaking Afghanistan.

The Taliban, who for hours had been on the outskirts of Kabul, announced soon after they would move further into a city gripped by panic where helicopters raced overhead throughout the day to evacuate personnel from the U.S. Embassy.

Smoke rose near the compound as staff destroyed important documents, and the American flag was lowered. Several other Western missions also prepared to pull their people out.

Afghans fearing that the Taliban could reimpose the kind of brutal rule that all but eliminated women's rights rushed to leave the country as well, lining up at cash machines to withdraw their life savings.

The desperately poor - who had left homes in the countryside for the presumed safety of the capital - remained in their thousands in parks and open spaces throughout the city.

U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken rejected comparisons to the U.S. pullout from Vietnam, as many watched in disbelief at the sight of helicopters landing in the embassy compound to take diplomats to a new outpost at Kabul International Airport.

'This is manifestly not Saigon,' he said on ABC's 'This Week.'

The American ambassador was among those evacuated, said officials who spoke condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss ongoing military operations. He was asking to return to the embassy, but it was not clear if he would be allowed to.

Taliban fighters stand armed with guns in Laghman province after making major gains across Afghanistan in the wake of the US departure

Smoke rises next to the US Embassy in Kabul after Taliban fighters entered the outskirts of the Afghan capital

A Taliban fighter rides a motorbike through a street in Laghman province. A US defense official has warned it could be only a matter of days before the insurgent fighters take control of Kabul

President Ashraf Ghani flew out of the country, two officials told The Associated Press, speaking on condition of anonymity because they weren't authorized to brief journalists. Abdullah Abdullah, the head of the Afghan National Reconciliation Council, later confirmed that Ghani had left.

'The former president of Afghanistan left Afghanistan, leaving the country in this difficult situation,' Abdullah said. 'God should hold him accountable.'

In a stunning rout, the Taliban seized nearly all of Afghanistan in just over a week, despite the billions of dollars spent by the U.S. and NATO over nearly two decades to build up Afghan security forces. Just days earlier, an American military assessment estimated it would be a month before the capital would come under insurgent pressure.

The fall of Kabul marks the final chapter of America's longest war, which began after the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks masterminded by al-Qaida's Osama bin Laden, then harbored by the Taliban government. A U.S.-led invasion dislodged the Taliban and beat them back, though America lost focus on the conflict in the chaos of the Iraq War.

For years, the U.S. has been looking for an exit for the war. Washington under then-President Donald Trump signed a deal with the Taliban in February 2020 that limited direct military action against the insurgents. That allowed the fighters to gather strength and move quickly to seize key areas when President Joe Biden announced his plans to withdraw all American forces by the end of this month.

On Sunday, the insurgents entered the outskirts of Kabul but initially remained outside of the city's downtown. Meanwhile, Taliban negotiators in the capital discussed the transfer of power, said an Afghan official who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals.

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss details of the closed-doors negotiations, described them as 'tense.'

It remained unclear when that transfer would take place and who among the Taliban was negotiating.

The negotiators on the government side included former President Hamid Karzai, leader of Hizb-e-Islami political and paramilitary group Gulbudin Hekmatyar and Abdullah, who has been a vocal critic of Ghani.

Karzai himself appeared in a video posted online, his three young daughters around him, saying he remained in Kabul.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@taliban insurgents were seen rolling into the capital of Afghanistan during a live broadcast today as westerners desperately attempt to flee the embattled nation.

Sky News' chief correspondent Stuart Ramsay reported that he saw a Taliban procession in Kabul, having first heard shouting while filming on a hotel.

He then spotted a group walking with the jihadi group's white flag.

Mr Ramsay said in a broadcast: 'I think it's a procession of the Taliban, yes it is, there's the white flag, and they're coming down the street just next to us.

'They're led by a white flag and they're chanting as they go down... I can't see people with weapons at all - doesn't mean they're not but they're not openly carrying weapons as far as I can tell.

'You couldn't ask for a better illustration of the fact that the Taliban aren't just in Kabul but they're right in the centre of it, they've just walked past the Presidential Palace.'

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace.

Harrowing pictures show people waiting near Kabul Airport's runway to escape from the country's capital - as the Taliban entered the presidential palace

Scenes from the Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul are pictured above

Concerned passengers were also seen inside the Hamid Karzai International Airport earlier today - as news came that the country's president had left, joining his fellow citizens and foreigners in a stampede fleeing the advancing Taliban.

And several hundred employees of the US embassy in Kabul have been evacuated from Afghanistan, a US defense official said Sunday, as the Taliban entered the capital.

The international airport in Kabul is still open to commercial flights, the official said on condition of anonymity, as evacuation efforts accelerated.

Boris Johnson said the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan had 'accelerated' the current situation and claimed that the Government is getting Britons out of the country 'as fast as we can'.

Now, following a meeting of Cobra, Mr Johnson said the situation in Afghanistan remains 'difficult', and the Government's priority is 'to make sure we deliver on our obligations to UK nationals in Afghanistan, to all those who have helped the British effort... over 20 years and to get them out as fast as we can.'

The Prime Minister today said that it is 'clear' there is 'going to be very shortly a new government in Kabul, or a new political dispensation'.

He told Sky News that it was 'fair to say the US decision to pull out has accelerated things, but this has in many ways been a chronicle of an event foretold'.

Taliban are seen inside the presidential palace in Kabul amid a withdrawal of western forces

Pictured: Scenes at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban enter Afghanistan's capital

People wait at the airport in Kabul as the Taliban roll back into the country's capital

Mr Johnson added: 'I think we've known for some time this is the way things were going and as I said before, this is a mission whose military component really ended for the UK in 2014, what we're dealing with now is the very likely advent of a new regime in Kabul, we don't know exactly what kind of a regime that will be.'

Tory MPs blasted the PM and Mr Raab over the escalating crisis and called for British troops to be redeployed.

Tom Tugendhat, Tobias Ellwood and Johnny Mercer, all former soldiers, said the UK needs to take action to push back the Taliban and rescue civilians.

Mr Tugendhat slammed the Foreign Secretary and questioned why Britain had not heard from him 'in about a week'. The Chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee branded it 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez.

Defence Committee chairman Mr Ellwood said the fighting was a humiliation for the West.

'We assembled the most incredible, technologically advanced alliance the world has ever seen and we are being defeated by an insurgency that's armed with AK47s and RPGs.'

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said the Prime Minister needed to set out plans to prevent the fall of the Afghan government turning into a humanitarian crisis, with thousands of displaced people trying to escape the Taliban.

There was particular concern about the plight of those Afghans who had worked with the UK and other Western countries, amid fears they would be targeted by the insurgents.

A Taliban fighter poses with a US-made Afghan air force Blackhawk helicopter at captured Kandahar airfield

A US Chinook helicopter flies over the city of Kabul as diplomatic vehicles leave the compound after the Taliban advanced on the Afghan capital

The Taliban insisted they were seeking a peaceful transfer of power and promised an amnesty for those who had worked with foreign countries or the Afghan government.

However such assurances were met with deep scepticism amid fears they would return to the hardline policies they pursued before they were forced out in 2001 - including the suppression of women and girls.

Mr Tugendhat told BBC News: 'The real danger is that we are going to see every female MP murdered, we are going to see ministers strung up on street lamps.'

Labour called for the urgent expansion of the scheme to re-settle Afghans who had worked with the UK.

Shadow foreign secretary Lisa Nandy said she had been inundated with appeals for help and that the Government had just hours to resolve the issue.

'Some of them have already been killed, others have received threats to themselves and their families.

'We have an obligation as a country to make sure that they are safe,' she told BBC Radio 4's The World This Weekend.

Images show Kabul Airport descending into chaos as the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan continues

The Taliban standing on a roadside in Kandahar after taking over more parts of Afghanistan. The scale and speed of the Taliban advance has shocked Afghans and the US-led alliance that poured billions into the country

The Home Office said it had already resettled 3,300 Afghan staff and their families and was continuing to fulfil its 'international obligations and moral commitments'.

Among senior parliamentarians there was shock at the speed of the Afghan collapse after the West had invested billions in building up the country's armed forces.

In the course of little over a week many cities fell to the Taliban without a fight after tribal elders stepped in to negotiate the withdrawal of government forces in order to avoid bloodshed.

While much of the anger was directed at the US for its decision to withdraw its forces, precipitating the collapse, some MPs expressed concern that Britain could have done more to avert the crisis.

Mr Johnson said however that while the US decision had 'accelerated things', the end was inevitable.

'This has been in many ways something that has been a chronicle of an event foretold.

'We've known for a long time that this was the way things were going,' he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Candace Cameron Bure wished her daughter Natasha a happy 23rd birthday over the weekend, which caused a surprise among her fans.

As the Full House star took to her Instagram to post a picture of the pair, many pointed out that Candace, 45, and her child looked more like sisters than mother-and-daughter.

'Happy 23rd birthday to this beauty,' Candace wrote under the birthday snap, adding: 'I love you my Tashi.'

'You could be sisters!' Candace Cameron, 45, wishes daughter Natasha a happy 23rd birthday... as fans react in disbelief saying it's hard to tell who is who

The duo were both wearing matching outfits in denim jumpsuits, with their hair styled similarly - prompting fans to flood the comment section about how alike they appeared.

One fan wrote: 'You could be sisters! Hard to tell which one is turning 23, if you didn't know already.'

Another comment read: 'Which one?? You could both pass for 23.'

Young: The Full House star took to her Instagram to post a picture of the pair, many pointed out that Candace, 45, and her child looked more like sisters than mother-and-daughter

'My gosh. You look like sisters. Happy Birthday and happy gave birth day to you hot momma,' said another, among many similar messages.

One Instagram users even said the pair looked like 'twins' commenting on their similar hairstyles.

Candace shares Natasha, and sons Lev, 21, and Maksim, 19, with her husband Val Bure, 47, whom she has been married to since 1996.

Natasha has found fame as a YouTuber, where she has 265k subscribers, and often posts about her workout and makeup routines.

Lookalike: Fans were left wondering who was who in Candace's latest Instagram snaps with her daughter (Pictured above in 2014)

Meanwhile her mom recently got herself in hot water thanks to the content on her social media pages.

Last month, she apologized to fans after she was criticized for posting a 'seductive' TikTok video where she posed with a bible while lip-syncing to the Lana Del Rey song Jealous Girl.

In the video, the actress, who is a devout Christian, mouths the lyrics, 'Baby, I'm a gangster too and it takes two to tango / You don't wanna dance with me, dance with me,' while a caption across the video said: 'When they don't know the power of the Holy Spirit.'

However, some deemed the video offensive prompting the Fuller House star to take down the video on her Instagram feed, saying it was not her intention for the clip to be deemed as 'weird' or 'seductive.'

Full family: Candace shares Natasha, and sons Lev, 21, and Maksim, 19, with her husband Val Bure, 47, whom she has been married to since 1996 (all pictured above in 2014)

'I just came home and read a lot of messages that were not happy with my latest Instagram post that was a TikTok video,' Candace said in her apology.

'And I usually don't apologize for these things, but a lot of you thought it was weird and I'm sorry. That was not my intention,' she added.

'I was using a very specific clip from TikTok and applying it to the power of the Holy Spirit, which is incredible. So many of you thought I was trying to be seductive, which clearly means I'm not a very good actress because I was trying to be strong, not sexy. So I guess that didn't work, but I deleted it.'

Some fans commented that the post seemed 'sexy' which they felt was inappropriate considering she was holding up a copy of the Bible.

Candace had tried to pin it on her daughter Natasha who posted a similar video, saying she was trying to follow her lead.

'Maybe I was just trying to be too cool or relevant in a Biblical way that didn't work," she explained in her Instagram video.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lady Kitty Spencer shared an unseen wedding photo as she wished dress designer Domenico Dolce's a happy birthday in a gushing Instagram post.

Princess Diana's niece, 30, tied the knot with Michael Lewis, 62, in Rome in late July, in a lavish weekend-long wedding complete with fireworks, a £20,000-a-night venue and a wardrobe full of custom D&G gowns.

Dolce & Gabbana co-founder Domenico Dolce, who turned 63 on Friday, worked on Kitty's wedding wardrobe.

Sharing a picture of one of her dress fittings with Domenico on Instagram, Kitty marked his special day by saying he had made her 'dreams come true'.

Lady Kitty Spencer shared an unseen wedding photo as she wished dress designer Domenico Dolce's a happy birthday in a gushing Instagram post

The night before the wedding, Kitty wore a baby-blue tulle gown and cape embroidered with cross-stitched flowers also made for her by Dolce & Gabbana. This is the dress she wears in the black and white photo shared on Instagram

'Happy happy birthday to the man who makes dreams come true and brings fairytales to life, Domenico Dolce,' Kitty said.

'Thank you for another year of friendship: for our laughter, brainstorming sessions, your brilliant stories and your guidance.

'You are always right and it is my privilege to be guided by your wisdom and vision, I love you.'

Princess Diana's niece, 30, is the global ambassador for Dolce & Gabbana and dressed exclusively in dresses by the Italian design house for her hen do, wedding and honeymoon.

For the three-day wedding, D&G created five different custom creations, including the breathtaking Victorian-inspired lace gown she wore down the aisle.

These were paired with earrings, necklaces and rings from the label's exclusive Alta Gioielleria high jewellery collection.

Prices for these diamond and jewel-encrusted pieces are not publicly available but start from £25,000, and raise to approximately £510,000 for top-of-the-range necklace.

Princess Diana's niece, 30, tied the knot with Michael Lewis, 62, in Rome in late July, in a lavish weekend-long wedding complete with fireworks, a £20,000-a-night venue and a wardrobe full of custom D&G gowns

Fortunately for Kitty, it is highly unlikely she would have paid for the jewels.

'It's most likely she didn't pay for these, the same as when celebrities wear red carpet jewels they are mostly lent rather than purchased,' explained Amber Gordon of UK-based luxury personal shopping and fashion concierge service Tailored Styling, which specialises in finding one-of-a-kind pieces for shoppers.

The same is true of the dresses.

'If she did it certainly would not have been the amount a regular client would have paid,' Amber explained. 'Dolce has heavily promoted the content and so are definitely benefitting from the partnership too.'

Kitty spent the days leading up to the ceremony travelling around the Florence region with some of her closest girlfriends.

It is believed the totality of her hen do outfits cost more than £7,500.

Pictured: Domenico sowing one of the sleeves on Kitty's wedding dress. The heiress said the designer made 'dreams come true'

The group enjoyed a sidecar tour of the surrounding wine country as one of their activities, stopping at a Chianti vineyard to try the wine.

They also made the most of Florence's bars and restaurants, sharing photos of their adventures on social media.

Kitty wore several stunning outfits for her pre-wedding celebrations, including a D&G printed charmeuse polka dot dress, £1,800, which she wore with a now discontinued 'devotion' bag in wicker and calfskin, thought to be worth £2,800.

Another evening, the bride-to-be stepped out in a D&G leopard print dress, thought to be worth £1,500, that fit her like a glove.

No expense spared: Kitty's stunning wardrobe, which is thought to have been worth more than £2.5million. The highlight was this magnificent Victorian-inspired wedding gown by D&G

D&G global ambassador Kitty Spencer dressed exclusively in dresses by the Italian design house for her hen do, wedding and honeymoon. Pictured, in a custom dress worth in the region of £60,000 (left) for lunch on Sunday and a £2,350 dress for dinner on Monday

She carried her essentials in a £1,400 'devotion' crossbody bag in quilted nappa leather.

For the piece de resistance, Kitty's rehearsal dinner and wedding day outfit, including her delightful wedding dress, were estimated at an eye-watering £2m.

On the day itself Kitty wore three ever-more breathtaking dresses featuring yards of lace, silk and tulle.

The star of the show was the high-necked Victorian-inspired lace gown worn for the ceremony, which was made over six months.

It was followed by a double organza hand-painted silk gown embellished with flowers and crystals, and a glitzy gold evening dress worn to party the night away.

The night before the wedding, Kitty wore a baby-blue tulle gown and cape embroidered with cross-stitched flowers also made for her by Dolce & Gabbana.

It was followed by a double organza hand-painted silk gown embellished with flowers and crystals. Each look was finished with exquisite jewels worn on the ears and neck

Amber estimates each of these creations would have cost in the region of £60,000, if not more.

Each ensemble was finished with pieces from the high jewellery collection. It is not possible to put a price on each piece but the three necklaces could be in the region of £500,000 each.

Even if the four sets of earrings were on the cheaper end of the pricing scale, this would bring the total value of jewellery to somewhere in the region of £2million.

The day after their wedding, Kitty and Michael invited friends and family back to the castle to enjoy a meal in the grounds.

The bride wore her fifth custom D&G gown for the event. This one, which is also estimated to cost in the region of £60,000, featured intricate handmade flower appliqué and a structured bodice.

Unlike the other wedding weekend dresses, this one was not full length, allowing Kitty to show off her £575 D&G Nappa leather sliders with baroque logo.

She also wore a pair of £219 D&G sunglasses when arriving at the venue.

Once again she was adorned with a glittering necklace, again estimated to be in the region of £500,000, and a pair of matching earrings.

On Monday Kitty continued the fun at an al fresco lunch with friends - and showcased yet another bright and breezy D&G ensemble.

The socialite joined pals Pixie Lott, designer Jade Holland Cooper and her husband Superdry founder Julian Dunkerton, for a meal at an upmarket restaurant with stunning views over the city.

For the outing Kitty opted for the label's Camellia-print ruffled silk-blend midi dress, which retails for £2,350. The typically feminine dress has a retro-inspired feel and is trimmed with organza ruffles along the crossover V-neckline and midi hem.

Kitty swept her blonde locks back into a ponytail, giving a glimpse of the glittering £25,000 necklace with multi-coloured gems hanging around her neck.

She added a favourite pair of red D&G slip-on mules with a gold logo on the toe.

The bride wore the same outfit for dinner with Michael and her family that night.

Newlywed Kitty looked every inch the high-end holidaymaker as she and Michael arrived on the Amalfi Coast on Tuesday to kick start their honeymoon.

Kitty breezed into the five-star Positano hotel in a £1,500 printed cotton-poplin D&G midi dress decorated with the brand's signature medieval-inspired 'Carretto' print.

The frock has a nipped-in waist and falls to a full, pleated skirt with delicate mother of pearl buttons.

She accessorised with a £975 embroidered D&G straw beach bag, £925 D&G sandals and finished the look with a pair of sunglasses, thought to cost £237 from D&G.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pete Davidson reportedly called it quits with his girlfriend of five months Phoebe Dynevor recently.

So naturally his co-star Kaley Cuoco felt the need to give him a hug of support during their latest day on set.

The 35-year-old actress and 27-year-old actor had big smiles on their faces as they shared an embrace while filming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City on Sunday night.

Sweet: Kaley Cuoco and Pete Davidson had big smiles on their faces as they shared an embrace while filming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City on Sunday night

Claims: This comes amid news that Phoebe Dynevor and the 27-year-old actor have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating (pictured at Wimbledon in the UK in July)

The castmates posed for cute snaps together while filming Alex Lehmann's latest flick as they have been working on the project together in recent weeks.

Kaley looked cute in a yellow gingham patterned midi dress along with white sneakers.

Her signature blonde locks were worn down as her bangs hung just above her eye and she showed off her natural looks with complementary make-up.

Just the two of us: The castmates posed for cute snaps together while filming Alex Lehmann's latest flick as they have been working on the project together in recent weeks

Pete kept it casual in a grey long-sleeved striped shirt with black jeans and matching sneakers.

According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

In June the producer shared a post to Instagram announcing news of the new romantic comedy with the SNL star. 'This one's gonna be real cute...' she gushed.

Back-to-back: Kaley looked cute in a yellow gingham patterned midi dress along with white sneakers

Since then the bombshell has teased photos of the pair working together.

Cuoco teased a black and white photo from the set of their film with the caption, 'You're gonna love them.' Underneath the image she wrote their characters' names, 'Sheila and Gary.'

Over the weekend it was reported that the SNL star had split with Phoebe Dynevor after five months of dating.

Pals: Pete kept it casual in a grey long-sleeved striped shirt with black jeans and matching sneakers

The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon.

However a source has now claimed that the duo have split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship.

A source told The Sun: 'Pete and Phoebe's romance was a real whirlwind and from the start they were both totally committed.

Co-stars: Kaley recently teased a black and white photo from the set of their film with the caption, 'You're gonna love them'

'It was pretty telling when Phoebe headed to Croatia with her mates this week rather than going to see Pete in America.

'It was wild while it lasted... But the distance has put a strain on them. They will remain close but unless something drastic changes their relationship won't recover.'

The source continued that both of the stars have very busy schedules at the moment, with Phoebe filming Bridgerton series two in the UK and Pete working on Saturday Night Live in the US as well as filming a movie called Meet Cute.

All over? The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon (pictured at the tennis)

It is also thought that travel restrictions have added a further pressure to their romance as it isn't easy to just 'jump on a plane' and see each other.

MailOnline has contacted Phoebe and Pete's representatives for further comment.

Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April.

In exclusive pictures obtained by MailOnline the duo were seen enjoying a stroll in Stoke-on-Trent during his visit to the UK.

Busy: A source has claimed that the duo split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship and added that they both having busy schedules making it hard to see each other (Phoebe is pictured on Bridgerton)

It has been previously reported that Pete fell for her after watching her raunchy love scenes on Bridgerton.

The Saturday Night Live star is said to have told pals he thought the actress was 'hot as hell' over her character Daphne's intimate scenes with Simon, The Duke of Hastings (Regé-Jean Page).

A Los Angeles based friend of Pete's told The Mirror: 'Pete just loved Bridgerton and just got totally tripped out by Phoebe.

'She was totally his type - fresh faced, youthful, innocent looking beauty.

'We all joked with him about the naughty scenes, and of course he confessed he found them hot. He binge watched the show and felt it was his destiny to meet her.'

Cosy: Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April

Sun: It comes after Phoebe enjoyed a girls' trip to Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week

MailOnline contacted a representative for Pete Davidson for comment at the time.

The reports of their break-up come as Phoebe enjoys a sun-soaked break in Croatia with her co-star Sabrina Bartlett.

In snaps shared on Instagram, the actress wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with pal, 29, who plays Siena Rosso in Bridgerton.

The pair also enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

Filming on the second series of Bridgerton was recently delayed yet again after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

Farewell: Phoebe is currently working on series two of Bridgerton (pictured with Regé-Jean Page who bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Boris Johnson has insisted that taking action to tackle climate now is far cheaper' amid claims his green drive will hit poorer Britons in the pocket.

The Prime Minister used a social video video last night to back his targets - including making the UK 'net zero' in terms of emissions by 2050.

Critics have warned that that target could cost £1.4trillion and a senior minister admitted yesterday that families will bear some of the cost.

Among the plans in place are banning the sale of new petrol and diesel cars from 2030 and scrapping gas boilers in just four years' time.

It came after a new UN climate report painted a bleak picture of the future without immediate action.

In the video, Mr Johnson said: 'It's far cheaper and more effective to act now to avoid incalculable (environmental) damage in the future, and economic (damage) as well.

'Here in the UK we have proved we can do it, we have halved emissions in the last three decades, even though our country has grown much richer.'

It came as it was revealed ministers are examining the idea of a £4,000 'clean heat grant' that would help pay for new green boilers from next April.

The Prime Minister used a social video video last night to back his targets - including making the UK 'net zero' in terms of emissions by 2050.

It came after a new UN climate report painted a bleak picture of the future without immediate action. Pictured are people fighting forest fires in Greece this week.

How much will new green projects cost Britons? Boris Johnson's green projects could end up costing Britain's households more than £28,000 each over the coming decade if they are fully implemented. The Prime Minister is considering a range of eco-friendly policies during his tenure such as a ban on new fossil-fuelled cars including hybrids by 2033. £15,000 : Extra average cost of buying a new electric vehicle is £44,000 compared to £29,000 for a new medium-sized car

: Extra average cost of buying a new electric vehicle is £44,000 compared to £29,000 for a new medium-sized car £10,500 : Extra cost of energy efficiency measures, such as improving insulation and installing low carbon boilers. A new gas-fired boiler costs about £1,500 with installation, compared to up to £11,000 for an air source heat pump

: Extra cost of energy efficiency measures, such as improving insulation and installing low carbon boilers. A new gas-fired boiler costs about £1,500 with installation, compared to up to £11,000 for an air source heat pump £2,400 : How much a 'snack tax' would cost the average family of four over a decade if implemented - which is £60 per person per year

: How much a 'snack tax' would cost the average family of four over a decade if implemented - which is £60 per person per year £200 : Average bill for new light fittings after the ban on sales of halogen bulbs from September, with an average of 4.4 new fittings each.

: Average bill for new light fittings after the ban on sales of halogen bulbs from September, with an average of 4.4 new fittings each. TOTAL: £28,100 Advertisement

The Telegraph said it was among options being considered, which include new taxes.

Mr Johnson set out four main areas to focus on:

Coal - outlawed entirely for power generation by 2040

Cars - outlawing fossil fuels for transport

Cash - Richer nations like Britain, often the higher emitters, committing money to clean up the planet tot he tune of $100billion a year.

Trees - Restore the natural habitat and end 'the massacre of the forests'

The pledge has caused fury in Tory circles, with MPs warning that the additional costs will hit lower earners in the Conservative-voting Red Wall. It has also reportedly led to clashes between the Prime Minister and his Chancellor Rishi Sunak.

Kent MP Craig Mackinlay has launched a group to to push back at plans he argues could be could 'completely kill us off politically'.

He and others argue they will hit poorer voters in former 'Red Wall' areas who voted Conservative for the first time in 2019.

Business Secretary Kwasi Kwarteng said last night ministers 'want to try and help people make that transition' when asked about the expense to consumers of scrapping gas boilers.

Yesterday a major UN climate report put huge pressure on Governments to take more action to cut emissions in the run up to international Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow in November.

The study, which focuses on the physical science of climate change, forms the first part of the IPCC's sixth assessment report, and is even clearer on the impact humans are having on the planet than the last such analysis in 2013.

It draws on more than 14,000 scientific papers to reach its conclusions and has found it is 'unequivocal' that human activity is warming the world.

Rapid and widespread changes to the land, atmosphere and oceans have occurred - from temperature increases to sea level rises - that are unprecedented for many centuries or even many thousands of years.

The report makes clear that human-caused climate change, which has pushed up global temperatures by 1.1C, is driving weather and climate extremes in every region across the world.

There are already more frequent and intense heatwaves and heavy rainstorms in many places, including northern Europe, as well as droughts and cyclones.

A new group is being set up by Kent MP Craig Mackinlay to push back at plans to outlaw sales of new petrol and diesel cars and replace gas boilers within the next 20 years. Chancellor Rishi Sunak (left) is said to be looking at ways to ease the pressure on poorer families of the transition.

Humans are also very likely the main driver in the global retreat of glaciers, declines in Arctic sea ice, and rising sea levels.

Sea level rises are speeding up, with the oceans rising by 3.7mm (0.15 inches) a year in recent years, and are set to continue to rise this century whether emissions remain high or fall dramatically.

Changes to oceans, sea levels and melting permafrost and glaciers are irreversible for decades, centuries or even millennia as a result of past and future warming.

And cities are at particular risk as the climate warms, experiencing hotter temperatures in heatwaves and flash flooding from heavy rain.

The study also warns that unlikely events such ice sheet collapses, abrupt changes to ocean circulation - which drives weather patterns - and much higher warming cannot be ruled out.

But the report, which assesses the potential impact of a range of five future scenarios from very low emissions to very high pollution, highlights the impacts of the choices the world makes now.

Temperature rises have a good chance of remaining below 1.5C in the long term if carbon emissions are cut to net zero by 2050, followed by efforts to take more carbon dioxide out of the air than is put into the atmosphere, along with deep cuts to other greenhouse gases.

Cutting methane - produced by oil and gas drilling and agriculture, particularly livestock farming - could help curb rising temperatures, as well as improving air quality, the report said.

But scientists who worked on the report said current pledges of action on emissions put the world on a pathway that could lead to 2.7C of warming by the late 21st century - or higher if the pledges were not delivered on.

Sea levels would rise by around 28-55cm (11-22 inches) by 2100 in a very low emissions scenario, but by significantly more if emissions stayed high.

Every additional 0.5C temperature rise leads to clear increases in the intensity of heatwaves, rainstorms and flooding, and droughts in some regions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twenty-five soldiers were killed during a rescue mission that saved 100 citizens from wildfires ravaging forests and villages in Algeria.

The country's president announced the deaths on Tuesday night, tweeting that soldiers had rescued residents in two areas of the mountainous Kabyle region.

Four other soldiers sustained serious burns, and seven others also had burns, the Defence Ministry said.

Dozens of blazes sprang up on Monday in the Kabyle region and elsewhere, with authorities sending the army to help citizens battle the blazes and evacuate. Bulldozers were brought in to cut firebreaks into thick forests.

Multiple fires were burning through forests and devouring the olive trees, cattle and chickens that provide the livelihoods of families.

Interior Minister Kamel Beldjoud traveled to Kabyle, the traditional home of the Berber, to assess the situation and suggested 'criminal hands' might be responsible.

'Thirty fires at the same time in the same region can't be by chance,' Beldjoud said on national television, although no arrests were announced.

Twenty-five soldiers were killed during a rescue mission that saved 100 citizens from wildfires ravaging forests and villages in Algeria

The country's president announced the deaths on Tuesday night, tweeting that soldiers had rescued residents in two areas of the mountainous Kabyle region. Pictured: An injured man in Tizi Ouzou, one of the most populous cities in the Kabyle region

Dozens of blazes sprang up on Monday in the Kabyle region and elsewhere, with authorities sending the army to help citizens battle the blazes and evacuate. Bulldozers were brought in to cut firebreaks into thick forests

Algeria's president announced the deaths on Tuesday night, tweeting that soldiers had rescued residents in two areas of the mountainous Kabyle region. Four other soldiers sustained serious burns, and seven others also had burns, the Defence Ministry said

Other northern areas of Algeria also had active wildfires. Prior to the announcement of the soldiers' deaths, the Civil Protection authority said on Algerian radio that seven people had died, six in Kabyle and a man in his 80s trying to save his animals in the Setif region to the east.

It counted 41 blazes in 18 wilayas, or regions, as of Monday night, with 21 of them burning around the Kabyle capital of Tizi Ouzou.

The online media outlet TSA said up to 11 people had been killed in the blazes, including those in Kabyle. Many started on Monday, spurred on by high temperatures and wind.

A 92-year-old woman living in the Kabyle mountain village of Ait Saada said the scene Monday night looked like 'the end of the world.'

'We were afraid,' Fatima Aoudia told The Associated Press. 'The entire hill was transformed into a giant blaze.'

Like older adults quoted by Algerian media, Aoudia compared the scene to bombings by French troops during Algeria's brutal independence war, which ended in 1962.

'These burned down forests. It's a part of me that is gone,' Aoudia said. 'It's a drama for humanity, for nature. It's a disaster.'

A 92-year-old woman living in the Kabyle mountain village of Ait Saada said the scene Monday night looked like 'the end of the world'

Multiple fires were burning through forests and devouring the olive trees, cattle and chickens that provide the livelihoods of families. Pictured: Medics evacuate during a wildfire in the Kabyle region

Interior Minister Kamel Beldjoud traveled to Kabyle, the traditional home of the Berber, to assess the situation. 'Thirty fires at the same time in the same region can't be by chance,' Beldjoud said on national television, although no arrests were announced

The Kabyle region, 100 kilometres (60 miles) east of Algeria's capital of Algiers, is dotted with difficult-to-access villages and water is in short supply during the hot season. Pictured: A man looks on as smoke rises from a wildfire in the Kabyle region

Despite the damage, the multiple blazes in the North African country were limited in scope compared to the blazes ravaging Greece's second-largest island of Evia and other areas.

Climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms.

A worsening drought and heat - both linked to climate change - are driving wildfires in the U.S. West and Siberia. Extreme heat is also fuelling the massive fires in Greece and Turkey.

The Kabyle region, 100 kilometres (60 miles) east of Algeria's capital of Algiers, is dotted with difficult-to-access villages and water is in short supply during the hot season. Some villagers were fleeing, while others tried to hold back the flames themselves, using buckets, branches and other means. The region has no water-dumping planes.

A Civil Protection ambulance driver told the AP that the death toll in Kabyle was higher than the six victims cited by the interior minister. The driver asked not to be identified by name because he was not authorised to speak about the situation.

Older adults compared the scene to bombings by French troops during Algeria's brutal independence war, which ended in 1962

Pictured: Residents attempt to extinguish a fire in Tizi Ouzou on Tuesday

Climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Boris Johnson is facing a revolt among Tory MPs in former 'red wall' seats in the north of England over the eye-watering cost of his environmental drive.

Conservatives elected in 2019 in working class areas that had been Labour for generations lashed out in a private WhatsApp group last night over fears their constituents will be left out of pocket.

Mr Johnson has outlined his plans to make the UK 'net zero' in terms of emissions by 2050, including banning petrol and diesel car sales within a decade.

He also plans to outlaw gas boilers in homes and have them replaced with costly green alternatives.

The Prime Minister yesterday argued that acting now was cheaper than delaying the change.

But the MPs, many of whom have been in the Commons for just two years, vented their fury over the cost and the lack of reciprocal efforts from major polluters, in messages revealed by the Sun.

Brendan Clarke-Smith, who represents Bassetlaw in Nottinghamshire, said: 'It's a hard sell asking people to make sacrifices when the rest of the world, China/Russia etc, are carrying on as usual.'

And Ashfield's ex-miner MP Lee Anderson added: 'This will not go down well in Red Wall seats at all.'

Mr Johnson has outlined his plans to make the UK 'net zero' in terms of emissions by 2050, including banning petrol and diesel car sales within a decade.

Brendan Clarke-Smith, who represents Bassetlaw in Nottinghamshire, said: 'It's a hard sell asking people to make sacrifices when the rest of the world, China/Russia etc, are carrying on as usual.' And Ashfield's ex-miner MP Lee Anderson added: 'This will not go down well in Red Wall seats at all.'

Ministers are also said to be considering watering down plans to ban the installation of gas boilers in 2035. They are due to be barred from new homes in just four years' time with all other houses following suit a decade later.

But the Times today suggests that the move could be made an 'ambition', over the cost of green replacements that can reach £12,000.

The Prime Minister used a social video video this week to back his targets - including making the UK 'net zero' in terms of emissions by 2050.

Critics have warned that that target could cost £1.4trillion and a senior minister admitted yesterday that families will bear some of the cost.

It came after a new UN climate report painted a bleak picture of the future without immediate action.

In the video, Mr Johnson said: 'It's far cheaper and more effective to act now to avoid incalculable (environmental) damage in the future, and economic (damage) as well.

'Here in the UK we have proved we can do it, we have halved emissions in the last three decades, even though our country has grown much richer.'

It comes as a new poll shows the vast majority of Britons bellieve that climate change and the threat it poses is real.

YouGov found that almost three-quarters (73 per cent) believes that the impact of environmental damage is not being exaggerated.

Over half (55 per cent) said they were frightened, including 15 per cent who admitted to being 'very' frightened'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The US ambassador and embassy staff are fleeing Afghanistan after taliban forces stormed Kabul.

In a scene mirroring that of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war, a US Air Force helicopter was seen taking off from the US embassy earlier today.

The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital.

Later, the ambassador and the embassy flag were seen at an airport after the insurgents made huge gains across the country.

Smoke was also seen rising from near to the US embassy earlier today as security staff work to burn any important documents, including CIA information, or material that could be used 'in propaganda efforts'. The US flag is soon expected to be lowered, signalling the official closure of the embassy.

It comes as the US steps up its evacuation of Kabul with Taliban fighters quickly moving in 'from all sides'. Shots were heard on the outskirts of the capital earlier today, much earlier than first anticipated, before fighters poured into the city.

US Intelligence officials had expected Kabul to hold out for three months, while UK ministers were hoping they had until the end of the month.

Leaders of the extremist group have today demanded the Afghan government surrender the city to them in a bid to avoid bloodshed - adding the chilling warning 'we've not declared a ceasefire'.

As many as 10,000 US citizens are being evacuated from the city. Around 3,000 US troops are being sent to aid the mission.

Meanwhile, Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, while RAF planes are being scrambled from around the world, to airlift more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul.

It is believed that by Saturday night that the number of UK officials still in Afghanistan had been reduced to the 'low tens' - including ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow.

The UK Government says it aims to get British ambassador Sir Laurie and his remaining embassy staff out by Sunday night - amid fears the Taliban could seize Kabul airport within days.

There are also fears about the safety of thousands of translators who are concerned they may be viewed as 'traitors' by the extremist Taliban.

It is understood the plans is to evacuate the translators and their families, though there are concerns that the evacuation efforts may be hampered if fighters quickly reach Kabul airport.

Taliban officials today demanded foreigners who don't leave to register their presence with Taliban administrators in the coming days. While western countries such as the US and UK have opted to evacuate staff, Russia today confirmed that it did not intend to evacuate its embassy staff in Kabul.

A twin-rotor US Air Force Chinook was seen taking off from the US Embassy earlier today, as the evacuation efforts rapidly pick up pace

The Chinook helicopter was seen taking to the skies above the city - just like in 1975 when a US Marine helicopter was seen evacuating embassy staff from Vietnamese capital (pictured)

The US Embassy in Kabul has been ordered to destroy sensitive materials and evacuate as Taliban fighters move in on the capital

Anti-missile decoy flares are deployed as U.S. Black Hawk military helicopters and a dirigible balloon fly over the city of Kabul, Afghanistan

Security Engineers will stay behind as they continue to burn, shred and pulverize 20 years worth of intelligence stored on electronics and in documents. Pictured: Smoke rises next to the US Embassy in Kabul today

The US Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan has been the intelligence hub of the US's war on terror

Special Forces units are joining 600 British troops from the 16 Air Assault Brigade, including 150 Paratroopers, to begin airlifting more than 500 British Government employees out of Kabul. Pictured: Members of Joint Forces Headquarters get prepared to deploy to Afghanistan

The Taliban is now closing in on the capital of Kabul from all sides, now controlling territories in the north, south, east and west

The UK Government says it aims to get British ambassador Sir Laurie Bristow (pictured) and his embassy staff out by Sunday night - amid fears the Taliban could seize Kabul airport within days

The Fall of Saigon - 1975 Pictures showing US embassy officials being evacuated from Kabul are almost the mirror image of those taken during the 'Fall of Saigon' in 1975. Also known as the 'Liberation of Saigon' by the North Vietnamese, the event saw the People's Army of Vietnam and the Viet Kong capture the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon - now called Ho Chi Min city. During the offensive, US officials were told to evacuate the city. But because of continuing rocket fire on the nearby runways, US officials urged that any evacuation must take place by helicopter. So began Operation Frequent Wind, officially declared by the US radio stations putting Irving Berlin's White Christmas on repeat - the signal for US staff to begin evacuation. The embassy evacuation managed to fly out 978 Americans and about 1,100 Vietnamese citizens. Ambassador Graham Martin was flown out to the USS Blue Ridge, where he pleaded for helicopters to return to the embassy. His pleas were overruled, though many locals were still rescued by sea and boats after. Saigon was later turned over to the Communist Party of Vietnam. Advertisement

As the Taliban advance continues, following the decision by the US to pull its troops out, gunfire was today heard near the presidential palace in Kabul.

The militants were seen in the districts of Kalakan, Qarabagh and Paghman hours after taking control of Jalalabad, the last major Afghan city to fall to the insurgents.

The terror group said in a statement they do not intend to take the capital 'by force' after entering the outskirts of the city.

An Afghan official earlier confirmed Jalalabad fell under Taliban control without a fight early Sunday morning when the governor surrendered, saying it was 'the only way to save civilian lives.'

Its fall has also given the Taliban control of a road leading to the Pakistan city of Peshawar, one of the main highways into landlocked Afghanistan.

Jalalabad is close to the Pakistani border and just 80 miles from Kabul - the Afghanistan capital home to more than four million people and currently the only remaining major city still under government control.

Besides Kabul, just seven other provincial capitals out of the country's 34 are yet to fall to the Taliban.

Concerns are mounting over how long Kabul can stave off the Taliban insurgents as they have captured the northern stronghold of Mazar-i-Sharif, the second-largest city Kandahar and third-largest city Herat all within the last 48 hours.

The Taliban are now closing in on the capital from all sides, controlling territories to the North, South, East and West and advancing to just seven miles south of the city.

Hoda Ahmadi, a lawmaker from Logar province, told The Associated Press that the Taliban have reached the Char Asyab district on the outskirts of the capital, which was gripped by blackouts, communications outages and street fighting overnight Saturday as the country descends into chaos.

A US defense official has warned it could be only a matter of days before the insurgent fighters take control of Kabul.

A Taliban fighter sits inside an Afghan National Army (ANA) vehicle along the roadside in Laghman province on Sunday

Taliban fighters drive the vehicle through the streets of Laghman province Sunday - the same day Jalalabad fell

Residents and fighters swarm an Afghan National Army vehicle on a roadside in Laghman province as the insurgents take control of major cities

Last days of the US Embassy in Kabul: Nerve center of the war on terror is being gutted of all sensitive material as staff and CIA assets The US Embassy in Kabul - the nerve center of the war on terror - is being gutted of all its sensitive material and evacuated in 72 hours, as the Taliban coils around Afghanistan's capital. The Embassy's demise will create an intelligence void that could plunge the US into pre-9/11 blindness, unless it can find another nearby country that will allow it rebuild its spy center. For the past 20 years, the US Embassy in Kabul has gathered vast amounts of information that shaped counterterrorism military actions - such as precision drone strikes - and prevented another 9/11-type attack. The location allowed CIA agents to meet with sources and monitor the Taliban, Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations in the region. 'When the time comes for the US military to withdraw, the US government's ability to collect and act on threats will diminish. That's simply a fact,' CIA Director Bill Burns told Senators in April. Everyone in the Embassy - except Bureau of Diplomatic Security Service agents and top decisionmakers, including the ambassador - will be out of the country before the end of Tuesday. Security Engineers will also stay behind as they continue to burn, shred and pulverize 20 years worth of intelligence stored on electronics and in documents. Embassy or agency logos, American flags 'or items which could be misused in propaganda efforts' are also considered to be sensitive materials and will be destroyed. The military is prepared to lower the American flag flying above the Embassy - at the State Department's order - signaling the Embassy's official closure. Advertisement

Today the Taliban said they aim to take the city, but say they have no plans to take Kabul 'by force'.

Leaders of the extremist group say they don't want a 'single Afghan to be injured or killed' during the hostile takeover - but warned 'we've not signed a ceasefire yet'.

Just last week, US intelligence estimates expected the city to be able to hold out for at least three months.

A senior US official told the New York Times the Taliban have warned the US it must cease airstrikes or else its extremist fighters will move in on US buildings.

Joe Biden has vowed that any action that puts Americans at risk 'will be met with a swift and strong US military response.'

Meanwhile, in the UK, Boris Johnson is facing calls for a last-ditch intervention to prevent the complete collapse of Afghanistan.

The lead elements of the British force sent to evacuate the remaining UK nationals were understood to be in the capital amid fears it could fall within days or even hours.

But amid a hurried scramble for safety, helicopters were seen landing at the US embassy to ferry away remaining personnel.

In the UK, there was deep anger among many MPs at the way - 20 years after the first international forces entered Afghanistan - the country was being abandoned to its fate.

The chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee Tom Tugendhat said it was 'the biggest single foreign policy disaster' since Suez, while Defence Committee chairman Tobias Ellwood said it was a humiliation for the West.

Despite the decision of the Biden administration to withdraw the remaining US troops which triggered the collapse, Mr Ellwood said it was still not too late to turn the situation around.

He called for the despatch of the Royal Navy carrier strike group to the region and urged the Prime Minister to convene an emergency conference of 'like-minded nations' to see what could be done.

'I plead with the Prime Minister to think again. We have an ever-shrinking window of opportunity to recognise where this country is going as a failed state,' he told Times Radio.

'We can turn this around but it requires political will and courage. This is our moment to step forward.

'We could prevent this, otherwise history will judge us very, very harshly in not stepping in when we could do and allowing the state to fail.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kirstie Alley has lambasted new guidelines from a worldwide organisation of doctors that encourages the use of 'gender-inclusive language' such as 'chestfeeding,' 'parent's milk' and 'human milk feeding'.

In a series of tweets on Sunday, the 70-year-old actress claimed the terms were 'degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities'.

She also insisted that she was not speaking from a 'political' standpoint but that she deemed the terminology 'insanity'.

'Gender-inclusive' language has been promoted by various hospitals to accommodate transgender men, who were born female but identify as male, and non-binary people who do not classify themselves as either gender.

'I'm tired of the degrading of women': Kirstie Alley slammed 'insane nullifying' of women's abilities in a row over the gender neutral term 'chestfeeding'

Kirstie began her lengthy Twitter tirade by posting: 'BREAST-FEEDING IS what WOMEN do. Women also bottle feed. Men bottle feed too.

'We do not have to buckle to the insanity of the minuscule minority of lunatics who make us feel guilty for not sharing their insanity. 'Chest feeding?' 'human milk feeding?' WTF STOP IT!!!'

Kirstie then shared a response from a follower who argued, 'Why do you care what other people do? Why are republicans always so concerned with what everyone is doing? They're always up in everyone's business', to which Kirstie responded, 'Blah blah blah blah blah blah blah'.

Clarifying her points, Kirstie continued: 'I'm a little tired of the degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities. Breastfeeding is one of our abilities.

'It's a beautiful and important ability. Knock off the nullifying of women fir the sake of lunatics. Equal rights does not equal insanity.

'We all have opinions. Probably the main reason social media is so popular. Especially on our own sites. I guess it's also inviting other opinions of our opinions but I don't feel obligated to be 'sweet' when people are nasty to me about my own site opinions. BlAh blAh blAh.

'It's our personal responsibility to agree or disagree with concepts. My only point here today is don't let insanity force you to pretend like you agree with the insanity. It's part of the insanity to shame you into agreement.'

Insane: Kirstie insisted that she was not speaking from a 'political' standpoint but that she deemed the terminology 'insanity'

Kirstie, a vocal supporter of Donald Trump, went on to state that her views have been shared by both republican and democrat friends.

She wrote: 'My views of this BS are not political. I have plenty of friends from both political persuasions who SHARE the view of the INSANITIES being shoved down our throats by pervs trying to degrade our society. Don't be afraid to disagree with people who seek to pervert workable morals.'

Kirstie - who boasts 1.5 million Twitter followers - then shared a response from a follower that read: 'No one asked you to speak for cis women's breasts or bodies in general. This is about feeding babies, something that isn't even a concern of yours or your titties.'

The Cheers star fired back: 'I don't need to speak for 'cis' women. I am a woman and feel comfortable just calling myself a woman and having a woman's point of view. I don't need to be ASKED to speak Deb. We handled that pretty well in 1920.'

Speaking out: In a series of tweets on Sunday, the 70-year-old actress claimed the terms were 'degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities'

Kirstie concluded: 'For the record I don't care what people call themselves or categorize their identity. Just leave mine alone. I'm happy with woman, mother, actress, sister, daughter, grandma and gurley to name most of my handles.'

Kirstie's comments come after the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine urged the use of 'gender-inclusive language' such as 'chestfeeding,' 'parent's milk' and 'human milk feeding' in new guidelines.

Guidelines published on July 29 read: 'ABM recognizes that not all people who give birth and lactate identify as female, and that some of these individuals identify as neither female nor male.'

The document was co-authored by eight doctors, with contributor Dr. Laura Kair of the UC Davis Children's Hospital, releasing an accompanying a statement, in which she said 'language has power.'

The statement read: 'The language that we use should be as inclusive as possible when discussing infant feeding. When working with patients it is best to ask them their affirmed terminology.

'When communicating medical research, language should accurately reflect the population studied so as not to mask research needs.'

Shared views: Kirstie, a vocal supporter of Donald Trump, went on to state that her views have been shared by both republican and democrat friends

Kirstie's comments come after a slew of Hollywood stars spoke out about concerns over the suppression of speech surrounding the trans debate.

Last year, JK Rowling was subjected to bitter attacks from transgender activists following the publication of her latest novel, Troubled Blood.

The novel was published under Rowling's pseudonym Robert Galbraith and features a 'transvestite serial killer', which sparked furious backlash online a day before the book's release on September 15.

A collection of over 50 actors, writers, playwrights, journalists joined together to pen a letter in response to 'hate speech' directed against the author.

Signatories of the letter include Booker winner Ian McEwan, actor Griff Rhys Jones, actress Frances Barber and playwright Sir Tom Stoppard.

It was was triggered in response to the hashtag #RIPJKRowling trending at number one on Twitter and said Rowling was a victim of 'an insidious, authoritarian and misogynistic trend in social media'.

The letter wrote the hashtag declaring her dead on social media was 'just the latest example of hate speech directed against her'.

Following her ordeal, JK called for an end to the 'climate of fear' around the trans debate after being sent 'heart-breaking' letters from women who had irreversible gender reassignment surgery.

The Harry Potter author, 56, said she 'had a huge postbag' with hundreds of letters following her comments over the summer, adding that 90 per cent of them were in support of her stance.

Speaking out: Kirstie's comments come after a slew of stars spoke out about concerns over the suppression of speech surrounding the trans debate after there were calls to 'cancel' JK Rowling over her stance

She told Good Housekeeping magazine: 'Many women are concerned about the challenges to their fundamental rights posed by certain aspects of gender identity ideology.'

JK called for 'a more nuanced conversation' about the 'huge increase' in the number of girls and young women seeking to transition.

She added: 'I've had a huge postbag since speaking up on this issue and more than 90 per cent of the letters and emails have been supportive.

'My correspondence have included medical staff, social workers, prison workers, workers in women's refuges and members of the LGBT community, including trans people.'

She said people were 'afraid to speak up' and called for a 'more nuanced conversation' around women's rights.

Controversial: In June, JK sparked controversy when she questioned the use of the phrase 'people who menstruate' instead of the word 'woman'

It came after JK sparked controversy when she questioned the use of the phrase 'people who menstruate' instead of the word 'woman' and went on to insist that the concept of sex is real.

Reacting to an article, she tweeted to her 14.5m followers: 'I'm sure there used to be a word for those people. Someone help me out. Wumben? Wimpund? Woomud?'

Her stance led to a massive backlash with criticism coming from fans and Harry Potter stars including Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson, Rupert Grint, and Eddie Redmayne.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Helen Flanagan fought back tears as she admitted on her Instagram Story on Sunday that her anxiety is overwhelming her after she secretly moved house recently.

The 31-year-old went on to tell her fans she couldn't cope with the unpacking of all her boxes, which she still has stacked up in each room and a sickness bug left her weak and unable to look after her children properly all weekend.

The Coronation Street star's confession came as she disclosed that she had privately suffered from Hyperemesis gravidarum during all three of her pregnancies.

Troubled: Helen Flanagan looked to be on the brink of tears in an Instagram Story on Sunday after admitting her anxiety left her struggling to cope with moving house and sickness bug made her unable to look after her children properly

Woeful: The Coronation Street star's revelation came as she told fans she'd been secretly suffering from Hyperemesis gravidarum during her last pregnancy

Helen touched her face and stroked her hair and looked to be on the verge of tears as she revealed on Instagram: 'I'm trying to get on top of the house. I've actually moved house recently which is exciting but it has been stressful.

'I haven't shared it on my social media. I don't know,' she continued.

'It might sound really silly to a lot of people but sometimes sharing some things on Instagram makes me feel a bit anxious.

'Anyway we've been moving house the last few weeks really and I'm not going to lie. I do feel a bit overwhelmed.

'Every single room is like towers of boxes and I can't find anything and organisation is not my strong point.

Stressed: The 31-year-old also said she can't cope with all the unpacking of boxes, which she still has stacked up in each room

Downcast: Helen touched her face and stroked her hair anxiously and looked in the verge of tears

'So yeah any tips on organisation or when you've moved house on how to basically just get it together. I feel like I just don't even know where to start really.'

Helen shares daughters Delilah, three, Charlie, four months, and Matilda, six, with footballer fiancé Scott Sinclair, 32, and earlier told viewers she'd 'had a horrible sickness bug all weekend', which left her struggling to look after her children.

'Scott's been away all weekend with football and my mum's been away. Looking after three young children with the bug has been hard,' she said.

'Girls have argued the whole time and Charlie has wanted to be held all the time. Not being a misery but showing a bit of reality.'

Helen also told her followers that she had suffered from the HG illness - Hyperemesis gravidarum - during all three of her pregnancies.

Glum: Helen, who is engaged to footballer Scott Sinclair, 32, told of her moving angst after she had earlier told her viewers she'd 'had a horrible sickness bug all weekend'

Symptoms include severe nausea, weight loss, vomiting and dehydration due to a rise in hormone levels.

She said: 'I had HG in all three pregnancies and when I have a sickness bug it does bring it all back. HG is not morning sickness and it's not something you can just get on with.

The former I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here campmate advised fans that telling someone with HG to eat a ginger biscuit doesn't help.

'I get a lot of direct messages from other women on HG. It's a comfort to know you're not just on your own.'

'For me it lasted around three months. Medication worked with Delilah. Nothing worked with Charlie.

Tough time: She said, 'I had HG in all three pregnancies and when I have a sickness bug it does bring it all back' (pictured with son Charlie and fiancé Scott)

'The worst was 100-per-cent not being able to look after the girls. What worked for me was lots of rest, lots of help with children.'

'I moved in with my mum for three months as Scott had football. Even though you can't face it eating little and often.

'Sipping lemonade worked for me. Medication worked with Delilah. I was ill with girls and a boy. The HG got stronger though in each pregnancy.

'Your babies are always so worth it and more. Just thought I'd share as I do have a lot of women messaging me about it and you do feel very on your own when you go through it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stacey Solomon shared a sweet photo of her growing baby bump on Instagram on Sunday.

The expectant mother-of-three was glowing as she posed for two mirror selfies in her unborn daughter's stunning nursery while cradling her blossoming belly.

The Loose Women presenter, 31, looked incredible as she modelled floral maternity underwear and a white lace-trimmed crop top.

Sweet: Stacey Solomon, 31, looked radiant as she shared a sweet photo of her growing bump on Instagram on Sunday

The auburn beauty wore her locks in a Rapunzel-style side braid and beamed as she wore a pared-down makeup look.

Stacey posed in front of her awaited daughter's eye-catching pink flower wall and large white mirror, also sharing a peek of the dreamy baby pink and white crib and princess-style wardrobe in the background.

She captioned the lovely pictures: '33 of You and Me Just because I don’t want to forget one bit, and I love my pants today I love you so much already little one.

'Not long till I get to meet you… Now, as much as I love it, I really need to take this plait out I can’t believe it’s still hanging on in there literally by a thread Happy Sunday Everyone...'

Glowing: The expectant mother-of-three was glowing as she posed for two mirror selfies in her unborn daughter's stunning nursery cradling her blossoming belly

Her bump photos come as she expressed her reassurance about her baby's health after she attended a hospital scan last week.

The pregnant mother took to Instagram to tell her fans last Sunday: 'Baby is exactly where she needs to be today despite my tummy size' - which is currently measuring at 2 per cent instead of the expected 20 per cent for her gestation.

Stacey had been told by her followers that her bump seems 'small' for how far along she is.

Reassured: Stacey has told fans she feels reassured about her baby's health after she attended a hospital scan last Sunday

She uploaded a video of her ultrasound scans and pink flowers to her Stories with the caption: 'Lots of people have said my bump is very small, and it really is measuring at 2 per cent instead of 20 per cent + but thankfully baby is exactly where she needs to be today despite my tummy size...'

The former X Factor star, who is expecting her first daughter with Joe Swash, 39, warned her well-intentioned followers: 'Every pregnancy, every bump and every baby is different.'

'And as kind as people are I think sometimes it's important to remember when telling someone they look "big" or "small" or anything in between it can be so worrying for the mummy growing a human and worrying why they look so different to someone else.'

Relief: The expectant mother-of-three took to Instagram to tell her fans: 'Baby is exactly where she needs to be today despite my tummy size' - which is currently measuring at 2% instead of the expected 20% for her gestation

'And can be really scary...'

She continued: 'I know people don't mean any harm by saying "you're so petite and tiny" but it definitely has played on my mind a lot and made me worry I wasn't growing properly...'

Stacey also apologised to her followers for not being very active on the social media platform, posting a sweet photo of her bump with her hand resting on top.

Sweet: Stacey also apologised to her followers for not being very active on the social media platform, posting a sweet photo of her bump with her hand resting on top

Her story read: 'Good morning Sorry I've been so quiet we've spent the weekend checking in on princess pickle...'

'All is ok', she continued. '

And we got to see her this morning to double check everything...'

'Feeling so grateful that she's happy, comfy and safe in there Hope you're all ok... Happy Sunday'.

She spent the weekend preparing a very pink and flowery nursery with Joe and her youngest son Rex, two.

Last week, the Loose Women star revealed that she won't be returning to the show until after Christmas and will be taking a lengthy maternity leave as she gears up to welcome a baby girl with her fiancé.

Speaking during Friday's show - when fellow panellists Nadia Sawalha, Kaye Adams and Linda Robson threw her a baby shower live on air - the soon-to-be mother-of-four was asked by Linda, 63: 'How long are you gonna be off for? Just wondering when you're coming back.'

Maternity leave: Stacey Solomon has revealed she won't be returning to Loose Women until after Christmas and will be taking a lengthy maternity leave

Stacey replied: 'I'll probably come back after Christmas I reckon. I've never had a proper maternity leave.'

The former X Factor star, who is expecting her first daughter with Joe, 39, did promise her castmates that she would make sure to bring her little girl into the studio beforehand.

When asked by Linda: 'You've got to come back before with the baby,' Stacey replied: 'Oh god as soon as she's born.'

Stacey said: 'I'll probably come back after Christmas I reckon. I've never had a proper maternity leave'

Kaye, 58, then added: 'It will be nice for you to have a period of time where you can just concentrate on the family.'

During the impromptu baby shower, Stacey was presented with a variety of gifts and snacks - including her go-to pregnancy craving, raw cauliflower with mango chutney, mayonnaise and curry powder - and donned both a sash and tiara.

Stacey also explained that she is 'mindful' of every moment in her fourth pregnancy as it's likely this will be the 'last time' she has a child.

Mindful: Stacey also explained that she is 'mindful' of every moment in her fourth pregnancy as it's likely this will be the 'last time' she has a child

Stacey and Joe - who have been together since 2015 and became engaged on Christmas Eve - are set to tie the knot next July after postponing their wedding due to the pandemic.

She and Joe share two-year-old son Rex, while Stacey also has Zachary, 13, and nine-year-old Leighton from previous relationships.

Elsewhere, Stacey has been putting her DIY skills to the test since moving into her new dream home with her blossoming family, and on Wednesday gave fans a peek of her unborn daughter's new nursery.

Emotional, Stacey wrote: 'I could honestly cry, it's such lovely flooring. And just makes it feel so much bigger and cleaner in here... I went for a white herringbone laminate so I can mop it and keep it nice and clean in here. I just love it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Civil service union chiefs blasted a Cabinet minister last night for suggesting staff should have their pay cut if they refuse to return to Whitehall.

They accused ministers of ‘dreaming up a rufty-tufty strategy’ that was ‘devoid of any basis in reality’ to force civil servants back into their offices.

Mandarins are also said to have considered stripping civil servants of their London weighting – a salary boost worth around £4,000.

But Dave Penman, general secretary of the FDA – the union representing senior civil servants, accused ministers of making ‘reckless’ and ‘cowardly’ attacks.

Civil service union chiefs blasted a Cabinet minister last night for suggesting staff should have their pay cut if they refuse to return to Whitehall (stock image)

He said it would be a ‘legal minefield’ to withdraw London weighting and said those proposing it had ‘no idea how this works in reality’.

The PCS, the union for those in government departments, has warned of potential strike action if the Government tries to dock civil servants’ pay.

A Government spokesman said yesterday there were ‘no plans to change terms and conditions around London-based pay’.

Ministers have also been told they could face a legal backlash if they slash pay for staff who refuse to return to the office.

Employment lawyer Max Winthrop, a senior partner of Short Richardson and Forth Solicitors, told the Mail: ‘Removing benefits as a threat to get people back into the office seems to me to be certainly difficult, if not unlawful, and a recipe for litigation in tribunals.’

But senior Conservative backbencher Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown said civil servants ‘certainly shouldn’t be getting London weighting if they aren’t coming into the office’.

But Dave Penman (pictured), general secretary of the FDA – the union representing senior civil servants, accused ministers of making ‘reckless’ and ‘cowardly’ attacks

He said he suspected ‘a lot of people are not as productive at home’, and that while he was not opposed to flexible working, staff should be encouraged to spend some days each week in the office.

He added: ‘I would have thought that if you have got a civil servants’ job, you should be expected to come back a few days a week.

‘And I would certainly think that that should be linked in some way to bonuses, because I don’t think that you are as productive at home as you are in the office.’

But Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran, who chairs the all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus, said: ‘The Government should be careful not to penalise people simply for being cautious and continuing to work from home where possible.

‘At a time when cases remain high, we should be focusing on keeping transmission down, not demanding that employees rush back to the office.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An experienced detective accused of forging a signature on a witness statement during a probe into the brutal killing of a mother-of-five has denied taking a 'shortcut' during the investigation.

Detective Constable Robert Ferrow, 50, of Hampshire Police, is accused of faking a witness' signature while assisting with the investigation into the death of Lucy-Anne Rushton, who was murdered by her estranged husband Shaun Dyson in 2019.

Ferrow, who has 18 years' experience as an officer, is standing trial at Winchester Crown Court charged with forgery, to which he has pleaded not guilty.

Today he denied taking a 'shortcut' and denied forging signatures as he faced questions from the prosecutor.

The detective of Hampshire police, is accused of faking a witness' signature while assisting with the investigation into the death of Lucy-Anne Rushton, who was killed by her estranged husband Shaun Dyson (pictured together) in 2019

Detective Constable Robert Ferrow, 50, is accused of forging a signature on a witness statement during the probe into the killing of the mother-of-five. Pictured: Ferrow leaving court

This week prosecutor Robert Bryan told jurors that the case concerned a witness statement given by Ashley Grace-O'Neill, a friend of Dyson, to Ferrow on June 23 2019, the day Ms Rushton was found at her home in Andover, Hampshire.

Mr Bryan said Mr Grace-O'Neill was at Andover police station giving his witness statement on June 23 2019.

After speaking to the detective for up to two hours, Mr Grace-O'Neill asked if he could return the next day.

Ferrow said he needed to copy various text messages that Mr Grace-O'Neill had provided screenshots of into the statement before it could be submitted, the jury was told.

According to Mr Grace-O'Neill, the court heard Ferrow said: 'Because I am only copying it out and you will be able to read it at a later date, do you want to sort of sign a couple of pages and I will write it out?'

The witness agreed but told Ferrow he still wanted to return and read the statement to check it was accurate, and the detective agreed.

However Mr Grace-O'Neill returned the following day asking to read his statement but no-one was able to help, the court heard.

When he eventually saw the statement he said that some pages that had been completed had not been signed by him, the prosecution alleges.

'Those not made by him had been forged,' prosecutor Robert Bryan told jurors.

Ferrow has argued that Mr Grace-O'Neill signed more than enough pages and that two spares were left over.

Shaun Dyson was jailed for life to serve a minimum of 17 years at Winchester Crown Court in December 2019 for the murder of his estranged wife Ms Rushton at the family home in Andover, Hampshire, while children were at the property

Ferrow, who has 18 years' experience as an officer, is standing trial at Winchester Crown Court charged with forgery

But Mr Bryan suggested that Ferrow's conduct 'strikes right at the heart of justice'.

He added: 'The fact is Mr Ferrow you simply got yourself into a position which you should not have got yourself into by using blank sheets of paper and you miscalculated and you signed them yourself.'

Ferrow denied this was the case, repeating that there had been enough signed blank pages for all the text messages.

The officer was charged with making a false instrument with intent for it to be accepted as genuine, under the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981, following an investigation between August 2019 and July 2020 by the IOPC.

Ferrow denies forging Mr Grace-O'Neill's signature.

The trial continues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Move aside, Spot! Xiaomi launches a $1,540 CyberDog as a cheaper rival to Boston Dynamics' $74,500 four-legged robot dog

Chinese tech giant, Xiaomi, has unveiled its new quadrupedal robot, CyberDog, in a thrilling new video. It's unclear what Xiaomi envisages for CyberDog, but the company says it's an experimental, open-source machine...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Prince Charles has been pictured heading to Royal Deeside where he could be set for an awkward encounter with Prince Andrew after the Duke of York was hit with a bombshell lawsuit accusing him of rape earlier this week.

Prince Charles, 72, was accompanied by his wife Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall as senior royals gather at The Queen's Scottish estate in Balmoral, Aberdeenshire in the wake of the sex abuse allegations lobbied against disgraced Prince Andrew.

The Prince of Wales had been touring Scotland as part of his latest round of royal engagements, but is understood to be heading to his Birkhall estate, next to Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire, with the family facing fresh crisis.

The Duke of York, 61, had already arrived in Balmoral where he faced his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, on Monday after news of the sensational law suit broke.

It has since emerged that the disgraced royal is unlikely to attend Her Majesty's Platinum Jubilee celebrations, marking her 70th year as head of state, next summer should he still be embroiled in the incendiary civil case launched by Virginia Roberts in New York earlier this week.

The news comes as the head of Scotland Yard, Dame Cressida Dick, warned British police would assist any enquiries into the Duke's sex abuse allegations.

Prince Charles, 72, has been spotted alongside Camilla heading towards his Birkhall estate near Balmoral, where he could be set for an awkward encounter with Prince Andrew, after the Duke of York faced fresh rape accusations earlier this week

Prince Charles is understood to be heading to his Birkhall estate, next to Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire, with the family facing fresh crisis over Prince Andrew's fresh 'rape' accusation

Other members of the royal family are already congregating at Balmoral Castle, Aberdeenshire (pictured). The Queen, on her first trip to the castle after the death of her husband Prince Philip, arrived this week to a guard of honour in a small ceremony outside the castle gates

Her Majesty The Queen, 95, arrived for her traditional summer holiday at Balmoral on Monday. She is seen here during an inspection of the Balaklava Company, 5 Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland at the gate

The Met TWICE ruled out a criminal investigation into claims Jeffrey Epstein paid Virginia Roberts $15,000 to fly to the UK for sex with Prince Andrew - will the third review have the same result? Scotland Yard has repeatedly been criticised over its decision not to carry out a full criminal investigation the bombshell allegations first made in 2015 by Virgina Roberts. She claims that at 17-years-old she was flown to London by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein and coerced into having sex with the Duke, three times. It was claimed UK incident took place at the Kensington town house of Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's former lover and a close friend of the Duke. Andrew is also accused of having sex with Virginia in New York and on Epstein's private island in the Caribbean, nicknamed 'paedo island' because of the scale of Epstein's abuse there. The prince strenuously denies her claims, and said previously he doesn't remember meeting Virginia despite a photograph existing of them together. Other alibis he gave included being in Pizza Express in Woking with his daughter. Virginia said he was sweaty during sex - Andrew said this wasn't possible because he stopped sweating during the Falklands War. Epstein killed himself in his US prison cell while awaiting trial for new sex offences. Review one (2015) Deputy Assistant Commissioner Dean Haydon made the initial decision to shelve the complaint by Miss Roberts - now Giuffre - six years ago. At the time he was the commander in charge of specialist crime investigations. Virginia alleged Epstein paid her $15,000 to have sex with the Duke in London. Andrew and the then 17-year-old were also photographed together with his arm round her waist with Ghislaine Maxwell grinning behind them. The Duke's supporters have repeatedly claimed the photo is fake and edited, which he suggested himself in his disastrous Newsnight interview in 2019. Review two (2019) The Met confirmed in August 2019 a second review had been carried out and was made by Alex Murray, now the Met Police Commander for Specialist Crime. It was sparked when court documents associated with a defamation case between Giuffre and Maxwell revealed that a second girl, Johanna Sjoberg, who gave evidence alleging that Andrew had placed his hand on her breast while in Epstein's mansion posing for a photo with his Spitting Image puppet. Commander Murray defended his position not to launch an inquiry. The force added officers had spoken to other law enforcement agencies but have 'not received a formal request asking for assistance'. He remains in charge of specialist crime, and is expected to carry out the third review ordered by Cressida Dick today. Advertisement

Senior royal sources told the Telegraph that Andrew may have his military titles stripped and will not be present at his mother's Platinum Jubilee celebrations next June should the rape accusations linger.

A royal aide said: 'He will not be able to take part in Trooping the Colour next year if the Epstein scandal is still hanging over him, an no one can see this going away soon.

'He will have to be replaced. How could he possibly retain his military titles?'

Charles had previously warned Andrew would be consigned to the wilderness – whatever the outcome of the lawsuit he now faces – because of the reputational damage done by his links to paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

The future king is among the senior royals who have privately expressed concern over the handling of the Duke of York's latest legal crisis as it emerged it could overshadow the Queen's historic Platinum Jubilee.

A source told The Times: 'The prince loves his brother and has the ability to have sympathy for the slings and arrows that his brother endures, whatever the reasons may be.'

The source added: 'However, this will be unwelcome reputational damage to the institution.

'He has long ago concluded that it is probably an unsolvable problem.'

The Daily Mail understands that both Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team.

More than 48 hours after Virginia Roberts Giuffre's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp.

On Monday, Prince Andrew arrived in Balmoral for a summer holiday with the Queen – just 24 hours after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse.

The beleaguered royal and his ex-wife Sarah, Duchess of York, drove into the monarch's private Scottish estate for their annual August jaunt while his lawyers held crisis talks over the case launched by Virginia Roberts Giuffre.

She alleged she was sexually abused by Andrew when she was 17 and that he knew she was the teenage victim of sex trafficking.

Miss Roberts claims she was forced to have sex with him and was 'lent out for sexual purposes' by paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Yesterday a lawyer described the legal action as a 'grenade waiting to go off'.

Andrew, 61, has yet to make any public comment about the lawsuit and instead travelled to Scotland with his ex-wife, Sarah Ferguson.

The Queen's second son stepped back from royal duties over his relationship with late financier Epstein and insiders said the lawsuit effectively ended any ambition he held of a return to public life.

Andrew, who normally flies to Aberdeen by private jet for his visits to Balmoral, appeared to have taken steps to avoid photographers this time after apparently flying to a different airport, or even driving the whole way.

The pressure on Prince Andrew to co-operate with the FBI was further cranked up today as the head of Scotland Yard said British police are ready to help foreign detectives and ordered a fresh review into the Duke of York's sex abuse allegations, declaring: 'No one is above the law.'

Dame Cressida Dick revealed a third review into the claims that Jeffrey Epstein trafficked a 17-year-old girl to the UK for sex with Andrew is underway.

But she insisted no Metropolitan Police formal investigation into the royal is taking place with the American authorities currently treating him as a witness rather than a suspect.

The Met has already twice ruled out a full investigation into claims young women and girls were alleged to have been targeted, trafficked, groomed, or abused in the UK by Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell .

One of those victims, Virginia Roberts, claims she was forced to have sex with Andrew at Epstein's behest three times, including once at Maxwell's London mews house, and paid $15,000 after being flown to the UK on her billionaire captor's private jet, nicknamed the 'Lolita Express'.

Andrew has been accused by Ms Roberts of 'publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein's sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein's victims' and then refusing to cooperate with the FBI, who he has been encouraged to speak to for years.

The Prince of Wales (above) had been touring Scotland as part of his latest round of royal engagements, and was pictured at Scrabster Beach in Thurso, Caithness last month

Prince Andrew has been spotted arriving at Balmoral Castle accompanied by his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson - as he prepares to face the Queen a day after being sued in New York for allegedly sexually abusing Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts

Andrew, who was driving a Range Rover, held a stern expression while the Duchess of York appeared to be holding conversation while sat in the back seat

Andrew's arrival at Balmoral comes as the lawyer for Epstein victim Virginia Roberts accused the Prince of 'ignoring' him after a civil suit was filed against him Monday. The Duke of York has always vehemently denied charges made by Virginia Roberts

How Prince Andrew, 61, can still be tried for sex abuse claims in civil case even if he never steps foot back in America Prince Andrew is under no obligation to travel to America to defend himself against the allegations - which he has repeatedly denied - because courts can't extradite citizens in civil cases. But legal experts say if he choses not to take part in the case, he could still face a trial in the civil courts in his absence. Before it reaches that stage, however, experts say that the Duke could instruct US lawyers to try and strike out Ms Roberts' law suit by claiming it to be 'spurious'. If a judge throws out the case, then Prince Andrew will not need to attend anyway. But if a judge decides the case should be heard, then a civil jury is likely to be called, according to Aamer Anwar - a civil rights lawyer and activist from Scotland. Mr Anwar says that if the Duke choses not to appear, the trial could go ahead in absentia - his absence. If the jury rules in Ms Roberts favor, Mr Anwar says Prince Andrew could be forced to pay damages 'into the millions and millions of dollars'. After looking at any possible US assets, Mr Anwar says the courts could then apply to claim assets in Britain through the UK courts - in a way similar to how foreign assets are seized in high profile divorce cases. He also believes that any judgment against Prince Andrew in the US could put pressure on UK authorities to take action - with one of the sex abuse claims made by Ms Roberts allegedly taking place in London. Advertisement

Ms Roberts, now known as Virginia Giuffre, is now suing Andrew in a New York court for alleged 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, claiming she thought she'd be murdered by Epstein if she didn't sleep with Andrew.

When asked about the decision to sue Andrew in the US, Dame Cressida told LBC: 'Nobody is above the law. As a result of what's going on I've asked my team to have another look at the material.'

And giving tacit confirmation the Met would work with US law enforcement, including the FBI, if needed, she said: 'We are of course open to working with authorities overseas, we will give them every assistance if they ask us for anything within the law obviously'.

The review is likely to involve detectives from the Met's Specialist Crime unit looking at the force's existing case files 'in consultation with the CPS' – but not interviewing alleged victims, witnesses or suspects or looking for new lines of inquiry.

The Duke of York is out in the cold today as it was reported that his older brother Prince Charles believes his brother will never return to public life.

The Daily Mail understands that both Charles and Prince William have doubts about the way such serious allegations have been dealt with by Andrew and his legal team.

Legal experts said the civil case could drag on for years and threatened to be a millstone around Andrew's – and the Royal Family's – neck for years to come.

A US lawyer warned the lawsuit would be devastating for the prince's reputation and could force him to answer questions about his own sexual history, as well as his relationship with Epstein.

Miss Roberts' legal team could interrogate Andrew over whether he had faced any allegation of sexual misconduct or impropriety in the past, a US lawyer told the Daily Mail.

They would also be entitled to demand access to any communications between him, Epstein and the convicted sex offender's alleged 'madam', socialite Ghislaine Maxwell. The lawyer, who asked not to be named, said: 'It will be a train wreck for him. This case is a grenade waiting to go off.'

Andrew has 21 days to respond to Miss Roberts' claim and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without the need for a trial, which would be potentially disastrous for his reputation.

It would raise the prospect of the ninth in line to the throne being branded a sex offender, and facing a demand for damages which could run into millions of pounds.

Such an outcome would cause enormous personal distress to the 95-year-old Queen but would also leave an indelible 'stain' on the reputation of the Royal Family, according to one royal expert.

Last night Buckingham Palace declined to comment and referred all inquiries to the Duke of York's legal team.

In the legal claim, lawyers said Epstein, Maxwell and the prince had all forced Miss Roberts to have sex with Andrew against her will after she was trafficked to London.

They alleged Andrew also sexually abused the teenager at Epstein's mansion in New York and at his private island in the US Virgin Islands, Little Saint James.

The legal document, filed to a court in New York, said Miss Roberts, now 38 and a married mother-of-three known by her married name Virginia Giuffre, had suffered 'severe and lasting' damage.

The lawsuit went on: 'In this country no person, whether president or prince, is above the law, and no person, no matter how powerless or vulnerable, can be deprived of the law's protection.

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, also both fear the scandal could irrevocably damage the reputation of the monarchy, insiders say (file image)

Princess Eugenie and her husband Jack Brooksbank pictured on their way to Balmoral to join her beleaguered father Prince Andrew after a bombshell US lawsuit accused him of sex abuse

Pictured: Princess Eugenie arrives at Balmoral castle on August 11

The Duke of York's younger daughter will be at The Queen's Scottish Highlands holiday home amid crisis talks for the senior royals after Virginia Roberts, a victim of paedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, accused him of rape in court documents filed on Monday

'Twenty years ago Prince Andrew's wealth, power, position, and connections enabled him to abuse a frightened, vulnerable child with no one there to protect her. It is long past the time for him to be held to account.'

Miss Roberts' lawyer David Boies told Channel 4 News he had made repeated attempts to contact Andrew about the case, but claimed the prince and his lawyers had 'stonewalled' and ignored him.

Prince Andrew has ex-wife Fergie at his side after Duchess is brought back into royal fold As Prince Andrew is again hit by accusations of sexual abuse from Jeffrey Epstein victim Virginia Roberts, he appears to have an unlikely companion at his side. In one of the most dramatic cases of royal redemption, the Prince's ex-wife Sarah Ferguson is accompanying him to Balmoral where he will face his mother for the first time since a civil suit was filed against him in New York. Fergie was exiled from the firm following her divorce from Andrew in 1996. The Duchess of York has however become a lodger at her ex-husband's Royal Lodge home in Windsor, and has slowly but surely been welcomed back into the fold. And last week, the Mail revealed that Fergie had been invited to stay at the Queen's Scottish retreat this summer. There will also be a major difference because, unlike previous visits, when she had to make a quick getaway before Prince Philip arrived, the Duchess can stay at Balmoral for as long as her ex-husband It is believed The Queen has appreciate the loyalty that Sarah has demonstrated to the Royal Family since her divorce and has been impressed by the close relationship she has maintained with Andrew, 61. The Duchess has also said she is '100 per cent' certain that Andrew is telling the truth about his part in the scandal surrounding convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. She told the Financial Times: 'I want him [Andrew] to come through this. I want him to win.' When asked why she was sure of his probity, she replied: 'No question. I know everything about him. I think he is an extraordinary person.' The Duchess said she and Andrew, who split in 1996, were 'the happiest divorced couple in the world', living under the same roof at Royal Lodge, Windsor, but with their own rooms. 'We support each other like pillars of strengths,' she added. Advertisement

Mr Boies said: 'We've made every effort to reach out to him to hear his side of the story to understand whether he has anything that he can say that would put his actions in context.

'And he has simply ignored us, and he can do that, but he can't ignore judicial process.

'This is now a matter for the courts to decide. And it would be very ill advised I think for anyone to sort of thumb their nose at a federal court. If he did, obviously there would be a default judgment entered against him, which I think no one really wants to have happen.'

He added: 'They just have totally stonewalled, they have refused to provide any explanation, they refuse to engage in any discussions, they refuse to provide any facts. They've even refused to respond to any of the allegations that been made in any reasonable way.'

Referring to the now-infamous photograph of the prince with his arm around Miss Roberts, he said a jury would have to consider if Andrew had been truthful about whether they had met. Her case is a civil lawsuit seeking unspecified damages – not a criminal case.

But experts warned evidence uncovered during civil proceedings could potentially be used by criminal authorities.

Andrew has previously denied any wrongdoing and strongly maintained his innocence, claiming to have no recollection of having ever met Miss Roberts.

Prince Charles, 72, and William, 39, were instrumental in forcing Andrew to step back from royal duties in 2019 in the wake of the disastrous BBC interview he gave in an attempt to clear his name.

A royal insider told the Mail yesterday: 'The family find themselves in an extraordinarily difficult and sensitive situation given the nature of the allegations.

'They are limited in what they can say publicly and now that the Duke of York is no longer a working royal they are actually rather limited in what control they can exert over the situation privately.'

Last night, sources close to the prince's family expressed growing frustration with his legal team for the policy of continued silence.

The duke is said to have personally instructed criminal defence solicitor Gary Bloxsome, of City firm Blackfords, to help mastermind his response to Miss Roberts' allegations.

Mr Bloxsome, a 40-year veteran of the company, has defended British troops against war crimes allegations, as well as footballers in assault cases.

However, a source close to Andrew's family told the Mail earlier this week: 'We are beginning to question the tactics of Blackfords.

Not to put out a statement reiterating or expanding on his denial may work in a restricted, legal sense, but in the court of public opinion his reputation is being shredded.'

Miss Roberts' attorney, David Boies, revealed that he anticipates the case could be heard in New York as early as the 'middle of next year'.

The Queen, 95, is due to celebrate her historic Platinum Jubilee with a series of major public celebrations in June.

Asked if he felt the lawsuit would be enough to get the ninth in line to the throne to answer questions about the allegations, Mr Boies told Sky News: 'Prince Andrew is going to have to now. He can't ignore the process.'

Mr Boies has previously accused Andrew and his legal team of 'stonewalling' both Miss Roberts and the FBI, which is investigating the crimes of Andrew's friend Epstein. The prince has said he has offered to co-operate with FBI.

Mr Boies also confirmed new evidence and new witness statements will form part of their case when it comes to court for trial, which he believes will throw further doubt on the Duke of York's account.

It is believed he was referring to Johanna Sjoberg, the only other woman to have publicly accused Andrew of sexual misconduct.

Sources have denied claims Andrew was summoned by his mother for crisis talks.

The lawsuit - filed on Roberts' 38th birthday - claims that she was 'loaned' to the British royal and forced to have sex with Andrew three times on the orders of Epstein, fearing she would be killed if she disobeyed.

More than 48 hours after Virginia Roberts Giuffre's attorney in the US began civil proceedings accusing the 61-year-old royal of 'rape in the first degree', sexual battery and sexual abuse, there has been no reaction from Andrew's camp. Pictured: Johanna Sjoberg who has publicly accused Prince Andrew of sexual misconduct

Ms Sjoberg, now 43, had previously been unable to sue because of the amount of time since the alleged attack. But a pending US law change could now allow her to bring her ­allegations to court.

In her civil lawsuit filed in New York on Monday, Miss Roberts – who has accused Andrew of having sex with her on three occasions when she was aged 17, knowing that she had been trafficked by Epstein – claims his actions amounted to 'rape in the first degree'.

He has 21 days to respond and if he fails to do so, she could ask the court to find in her favour without a trial.

It would raise the prospect of Andrew facing demands for damages.

But if he does decide to come out fighting he could face having to give an account of his dealings with Epstein, as well as his previous sexual history.

Lawyers could also demand access to any communications with Epstein, as well as their mutual friend Ghislaine Maxwell.

She is due to go on trial later this year for allegedly acting as his 'madam' and helping to traffick vulnerable young victims.

But the prince can – and this is the most likely option for his team – also ask the court to dismiss the case as groundless or try to challenge it on other legal grounds.

Virginia Roberts on Monday filed a civil suit against Prince Andrew, formally accusing him of sexually abusing her while she was being trafficked by billionaire paedophile Jeffrey Epstein.

Over 15 pages of court documents filed at New York's southern district court, the 38-year-old makes claims that the Duke of York 'committed sexual assault and battery' against her while she was aged just 17.

The Duke of York has always vehemently denied all charges made by Roberts.

Roberts has requested 'punitive damages' be awarded by a judge and demanded a 'trial by jury' for the 'physical, psychological' injuries she says she suffered.

The US legal heavyweight who took on Microsoft, George Bush and represented Harvey Weinstein: David Boies is representing Virginia Roberts in Prince Andrew civil law suit When it comes to US lawyers, few are bigger than David Boies. The 80-year-old is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew. It is a case that will have the world's attention. But it won't be the first time Mr Boies has been in the media spotlight. One of his long-term clients was Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood film producer, who was found guilty of sex offences in February 2020, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison. But while his professional relationship with Weinstein proved somewhat of a PR disaster for Mr Boies, he maintains a stellar reputation. Famously, he represented the plaintiff in the famous case of Hollingsworth v. Perry. The judgment invalidated California's Proposition 8 - the law banning same-sex marriage. David Boies, 80, is representing Virginia Roberts in her US civil case against Prince Andrew Mr Boies also represented Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore in his fight against Republican candidate George Bush. The 2000 case saw a court decide on a controversial recount on the votes in Florida after claims the counting machines had missed votes. The courts eventually decided that Bush had fairly won Florida - giving him enough electoral college votes to take the Presidency. However, perhaps Mr Boies' biggest case was United States v. Microsoft Corp. The case saw the U.S. government accuse Microsoft of illegally maintaining its monopoly in the world of computers. Mr Boies initially represented the US Department of Justice in the case. After initially deciding in favour of the DoJ, the case was taken to appeal and eventually ended in a settlement between Microsoft and the US government. Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gurkhas have been pictured on day six of their hunger strike outside Downing Street as a minister revealed he is 'not entirely sure' who from the Government has spoken with the group.

The Nepalese-born soldiers are campaigning for equal pensions for Gurkhas who retired before 1997 and are not eligible for a full UK armed forces pension.

The Support Our Gurkhas protesters reached their sixth day of not eating on Thursday, while demonstrating opposite Downing Street.

Schools minister Nick Gibb was asked on Thursday morning about what the Government is doing to help the Gurkhas.

Nepalese-born Gurkhas staging a protest outside Downing Street (above) are pictured entering their sixth day of hunger strike

The Support Our Gurkhas protesters are campaigning for equal pensions for Gurkhas who retired before 1997 and are not eligible for a full UK armed forces pension

He told Sky News: 'We do take very seriously the issue of pensions for Gurkhas.

'The Gurkhas' pension scheme, we've increased it between 10% and 25% since March 2019, we've added another £25 million in terms of providing health for Gurkhas in Nepal.

'Ministers are of course in touch with and will be in touch with those people who are concerned about pensions for Gurkhas - they are a very important part of the British Army and we've always taken very seriously the welfare and the pension of Gurkhas who have served in our armed forces.'

Serving Gurkhas, and those with service on or after July 1, 1997, could opt to transfer into the Armed Forces Pension Scheme.

The change was brought in after an amendment to immigration rules in 2007, backdated to July 1997, meant more retired Gurkhas were likely to settle in the UK on discharge, whereas the previous pension scheme had lower rates as it had assumed they would return to Nepal where the cost of living was significantly lower.

Dhan Gurung, 59, from Basingstoke, who has been protesting from his wheelchair in Whitehall said he received £20 in monthly pension whereas British counterparts received £400 or more

Change was brought in after an amendment to immigration rules in 2007, backdated to July 1997, meant more retired Gurkhas were likely to settle in the UK on discharge, whereas the previous pension scheme had lower rates

Dhan Gurung, 59, from Basingstoke, who has been protesting from his wheelchair in Whitehall near the gates to Downing Street, said: 'When I retired from the British Army, my pension was £20 a month, whereas my British counterpart received £400 or more.

'What a trick by the Government, it makes me hurt still.

'There are 5,000 veterans in Nepal living in poverty. They are working in dangerous, difficult and dirty jobs to feed their families.'

The veteran also said he and his fellow demonstrators had been 'harassed' by police, who then dismantled a gazebo.

A Metropolitan Police spokesman said that on Tuesday, officers had 'engaged with the crowd and the gazebo was removed. No arrests were made'.

Dhan Gurung also said he and his fellow demonstrators had been 'harassed' by police, who then dismantled a gazebo

When asked to confirm that ministers have been in touch with the protesting group, Mr Gibb added: 'I'm not entirely sure who has met who but I do know that we are always keen to speak to people who are concerned about the welfare of our Gurkha regiment and the pensions arrangements for those soldiers.'

On Wednesday, Labour's shadow defence secretary Stephen Morgan wrote to the Government urging it to 'engage constructively' with the Gurkhas.

In a letter to Defence Secretary Ben Wallace, Mr Morgan said it had been 'over two years since the Government announced that they intended to increase pension rates for the Gurkha Pension Scheme', and over five years since the UK and Nepalese governments agreed to set up 'a process of dialogue on issues of concern to the Gurkha veteran community'.

He added: 'I would urge you to meet with these veterans, as I have in the past and will do so again this week. No veteran of the British Army should have to resort to a hunger strike to be heard.'

Gurkha men, recruited from the rugged Himalayan country of Nepal, have a reputation as hard and loyal fighters, and are known for the trademark curved kukri blades they carry sheathed on their belts

The Gurkha men, recruited from the rugged Himalayan country of Nepal, have a reputation as hard and loyal fighters, and are known for the trademark curved kukri blades they carry sheathed on their belts.

Around 200,000 Gurkhas fought in both world wars, and they have also served in places such as Hong Kong, Malaysia, Borneo, Cyprus, the Falklands, Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan.

Those who served from 1948 to 2007 were members of the Gurkha Pension Scheme until the Labour government of the time eliminated the differences between Gurkhas' terms and conditions of service and those of their British counterparts.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Holidaymakers are paying millions for Covid tests that are not being checked for potentially dangerous new variants.

They spent more than £26million on PCR swabs after arriving in England during July, research suggests today.

But only 293 of the 4,998 samples that came back positive were sequenced – meaning they were analysed for possible mutations of the virus – even though ministers insist it is crucial for tracking the pandemic.

The analysis of official figures carried out by the Liberal Democrats means each sequenced test cost passengers the equivalent of £90,000.

It comes amid growing anger at the huge cost of Covid tests for families taking foreign breaks or visiting relatives overseas this summer.

Holidaymakers are paying millions for Covid tests that are not being checked for potentially dangerous new variants

Ministers have been forced to cut the cost of the testing packages while the Competition and Markets Authority watchdog investigates ‘excessive’ charges by the 400-plus firms offering the tests.

Britain is among the most expensive destinations in the world for PCR tests, according to insurers – with the swabs adding an average of £552 to the price of a trip to an amber-list country for a family of four. Lib Dem health spokesman Munira Wilson said: ‘Testing at borders is crucial to ensure potentially dangerous new variants do not arrive in the UK, yet this isn’t the reality on the ground.

‘Travellers are paying through the nose for a system that isn’t doing its job. The Government is not only dragging its feet over the cost of PCR tests but isn’t even using most of them to track new variants. They must cap the cost of PCR tests for travel and ensure that as many as possible are sequenced for new variants.’ The party’s analysis of NHS Test and Trace data found 355,994 PCR tests were taken by arrivals into England between July 1 and 21.

At an average cost of £75 per test – which double-jabbed travellers from amber nations must take two days after arrival – the total spent on the tests was estimated at £26.7million. Overall, 4,998 came back positive over the three weeks analysed. Only 293 (5.9 per cent) of these were sequenced in the hunt for new variants.

Last week Transport Secretary Grant Shapps used the need for sequencing to justify the requirement for travellers to use PCR swabs instead of cheaper lateral flow tests, telling Sky News: ‘PCR tests... will help out clinicians and scientists work together to keep a very close eye on variants.’

Only nine of the 217 recent positive tests from travellers returning from Portugal were sequenced, along with ten from France, 12 from Greece and 15 from Italy.

The tiny proportion of tests being sequenced is the latest farce in the travel testing saga that has left millions of families out of pocket and put many Britons off flying this summer, devastating the airline industry and overseas resorts.

The Mail revealed last week that some Government-approved providers were charging five times as much for a single PCR test as budget carriers were charging for flights to Europe. A Mail campaign has called for travellers to be able to take lateral flow tests on arrival in Britain, or for VAT to be scrapped on PCR tests.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They welcomed their first child - a boy named Sonny - six weeks prematurely last August.

And Coronation Street star Sam Aston and his wife Briony have revealed that it was 'a bit of a shock' and 'stressful' when their little one arrived early.

Speaking to Ok! the pair told how the yoga instructor stayed in hospital for nine days after her labour while her little one was tube fed and recovered from jaundice.

Candid: Coronation Street star Sam Aston and his wife Briony have revealed that it was 'a bit of a shock' and 'stressful' when their son Sonny arrived six weeks prematurely last August

Sam, 28, - who has played Chesney Brown in Corrie since 2003 -, said: 'It was a bit of a shock for me. Everyone at work knew he wasn't due until September.'

Briony, 26, added: 'It was hard at the time but looking back now I'd do it all again tomorrow. It was so nice to get home though.'

Their situation was made even more difficult due to the fact that Sam was only allowed to visit the pair in hospital for one hour a day due to the pandemic.

Firstborn: Speaking to Ok! the pair revealed that the yoga instructor stayed in hospital for nine days after her labour while her little one was tube fed and recovered from jaundice

Sam explained: 'An hour felt like 10 minutes, especially early on as Briony was emotional as I was trying to be there and spend time with Sonny.'

Briony added that having time constraints on their time together was the most 'stressful' part and that she would usually 'sob for an hour' and then Sam would have to leave.

The couple added that his development has caught up in the last year and his breathing has returned to normal.

Sam and Briony tied the knot in 2019, two years after the couple announced their engagement.

Doting parents: Sam, 28, - who has played Chesney Brown in Corrie since 2003 -, said: 'It was a bit of a shock for me. Everyone at work knew he wasn't due until September'

The couple first announced they were expecting a boy when speaking with OK! magazine, saying: 'We're having a boy! It was a massive surprise when we found out, as there are loads of girls in our families, so we were adamant we were having a girl.'

The new mother often shares insights into her life and how she is coping with the arrival of her son.

Late last year Briony conducted a Q&A session on her Instagram story, answering questions from her 13,000 followers.

When asked to share her 'last photo', Briony posted a candid snap of herself breastfeeding Sonny, which she captioned 'tired but besotted'.

Loved-up! It comes after late last year Briony shared a selection of her son Sonny's milestone moments on her Instagram Stories during a Q&A

In the image, Briony flashed a smile for the camera while her young son fed.

Briony also shared a picture moments after Sonny's birth as she cradled him on her chest while lying in a hospital bed following her labour.

She wrote: 'My amazing midwife actually got videos/photos of him being born and I can't help but look back at them most days.

'It helps me process just how miraculous the human body is. But there definitely TMI so this is the first suitable photo. [sic]

Briony also posted the 'first picture' of Sonny, which was an ultrasound scan at seven weeks and five days, she quipped: 'Technically this is it - our little blueberry'.

Also included in the series of photographs was the first time Sam held his son in his arms, as Briony wrote: 'Ohh good one! This is the first photo I have from when he's a day old, Sam might have some from earlier. But look at how tiny Sonny's head was.'

Last month Briony proclaimed motherhood has turned her into a 'lioness' shortly before sharing a breastfeeding snap.

The new mum proudly shared an image while feeding Sonny and then shared a snap of his feet alongside a message about an exchange she had with a midwife.

Milestone moments: Briony, who welcomed her son prematurely, asked her followers which photographs they would like her to share on the page

In the touching caption which marked World Prematurity Day, she penned: 'Before we left the hospital after having Sonny, a midwife said to me “Briony, do you realise that the minute you leave this hospital you’ll become a lioness?”...

'And I can honestly say never before have I felt so powerful, protective and proud, and never has a sentence been so true. My boy, my cub, my premature baby'.

Briony revealed that Sonny's birth was 'calm' despite him being born six weeks premature. They had been trying for a baby for little over a month before getting the result and Briony revealed that nothing prepared her for the joy of parenthood.

She said to her social media followers in August: 'Nothing could have truly prepared me for your entrance into this world'

'A journey of complete surrender and the most intense surges of energy I have ever felt in my life. But I understand now that it had to be this way. How else could my heart come to live outside of my body?'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

This Morning chef Clodagh McKenna tied the knot with her Downton Abbey beau Harry Herbert at a traditional church wedding on Saturday, with guests including actor Richard E Grant and presenter Laura Whitmore taking to social media to share snaps of the big day.

The Irish chef, 46, looked radiant in her angelic lace gown at her wedding ceremony held at Highclere Castle, better known as the fictional Downton Abbey and birth place of her now-husband, 62.

Stars who made the exclusive guest list have been sharing a glimpse inside the stunning day, which saw the couple marry at the parish on Harry's estate, Church of Saint Michaels and All Angels, before throwing a lavish party for friends and family.

Among the guests was former Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne who attended the nuptials with his fiancée Thea Rogers and their one-month-old son Beau.

The newlyweds could be seen drinking pints of Guinness and riding in a horse-drawn carriage to their reception in the grounds, where guests were treated to a performance from an Irish band.

Meanwhile Clodagh swapped her flowing lace gown for a second dress for the evening event, opting for a sequin number with a revealing scoop back.

This Morning chef Clodagh McKenna tied the knot with her Downton Abbey beau Harry Herbert at a traditional church wedding on Saturday, with guests including actor Richard E Grant and presenter Laura Whitmore taking to social media to share snaps of the big day

Snaps of the table settings at the reception revealed delicately drawn place names which were covered in illustrations of food and details of meals the guests would dine upon (left), meanwhile Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's wedding cake baker crafted Harry and Clodagh's stunning dessert (right)

Love Island presenter Laura Whitmore posted a snap as the couple were driven away from their church ceremony to the reception in a horse-drawn carriage

The Irish chef, 46, looked radiant in her angelic lace gown at her wedding ceremony held at Highclere Castle, better known as the fictional Downton Abbey and birth place of her now-husband, 62

Former chancellor George Osborne (right) and fiancée Thea Rogers were pictured with Beau for the first time in public at Highclere Castle, Hampshire

The order of service featured a simple illustration of the stunning church on the Highclere estate in which the couple were married, as well as Clodagh and Harry's names.

In an intimate back-and-white photograph shared by one guest, the couple can be seen inside the church as they make their wedding vows to one another in front of a priest.

Meanwhile actor Richard E Grant shared a video as the pair danced out of the church with one another and greeted guests hand-in-hand with beaming smiles.

Snaps of the table settings at the reception revealed delicately drawn place names which were covered in illustrations of food and details of meals the guests would dine upon.

The order of service featured a simple illustration of the stunning church on the Highclere estate in which the couple were married, as well as Clodagh and Harry's names

In an intimate back-and-white photograph shared by one guest, the couple can be seen inside the church as they make their wedding vows to one another in front of a priest

The bride could be seen raising her arm in elation as she walked out of the church arm-in-arm with her new husband while guests cheered around them

Pink flowers and greenery adorned the tables, which were decorated with matching table clothes and napkins.

Later, the couple tucked into a wedding cake baked by London-based Californian baker Claire Ptak, who is renowned for making Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's cake on their big day.

The four-tiered cake featured an array of white and pink flowers scattered across the top.

While Claire is not a stickler for tradition, she is strident about using ethical, healthy ingredients. Her recipes often use wholegrain flours, less refined sugar and seasonal fruit.

The newlyweds beamed as they joyfully greeted crowds of guests after the church ceremony, which took place on the Highclere Castle estate

Guests shared snaps of the stunning tablescapes, which were decorated with fresh flowers, greenery and ilustrated place settings (pictured left and right)

Meanwhile presenter Laura Whitmore revealed a closer look at the wedding breakfast the guests were dining on, which included oysters, sea bass and berry cheesecake

Later, the newlyweds treated delighted guests to a performance from an Irish band which included a banjo and harpist (pictured left and right)

Later, the bride swapped her stunning floor length floral gown for a modern sequin dress with a scoop back as she took to the dance floor

Videos shared by Love Island presenter Laura Whitmore revealed Clodagh paid tribute to her home country at the event with an Irish band performing to the delight of guests.

Clodagh - who first met Harry in 2017 - wowed in her bohemian-inspired lace dress which featured floral white embroidery around the waist, a V-neckline and elbow-length sleeves.

Meanwhile Harry - who is the Queen's godson - looked dapper in a morning suit which he teamed with a double-breasted cream waist coat and tie and a light blue hue.

A floral corsage was nestled in his blazer lapel and complemented Clodagh's bouquet of flowers.

Congratulations! This Morning chef Clodagh tied the knot with her Downton Abbey beau Harry at a traditional church wedding on Saturday

Stunning: The Irish bride, 46, looked sensational as she waved to her guests

Newlyweds: Clodagh, who met Harry in 2017, wowed in her bohemian-inspired dress which featured floral white embroidery around the waist, a V-neckline and elbow-length sleeves

The newlyweds looked like the picture of happiness as they exited the church venue in a horse drawn carriage which her husband steered.

Meanwhile Love Island presenter Laura, 36, dressed up for the occasion in a one-shoulder dress which contrasted panels of pink and black lace fabric.

It boasted a puffed shoulder and racy thigh-high split. The mother-of-one added height to her frame with black platform heels.

She draped a black handbag from Chanel over her shoulder and accessorised with cat-eye shades and a cream headpiece.

Guests: Love Island presenter Laura, 36, showcased her unique sense of style in a one-shoulder dress which contrasted panels of pink and black lace fabric

Looking good: Laura's figure-hugging ensemble featured a thigh-high split and she styled the look with black heels

Her husband Iain Stirling stood out from the crowd in a green tartan kilt which complemented his knee-high socks, navy waistcoat and blazer.

The politician, 50, looked smart in a navy suit while Thea embraced summer style in a floral dress as they chatted to Harry after the wedding ceremony.

Irish-born cook Clodagh lives in Hampshire's Broadspear House, a 300-year-old cottage nestled on the grounds of Highclere Park with her husband.

Adorable! George Osborne also attended the nuptials with his fiancée Thea Rogers and their sweet one-month-old son Beau

Baby's first wedding! The doting dad appeared to be in great spirits as he chatted outside the church

She lives and works in the property, which was gifted to Harry by his dad Lord Porchester, the 7th Earl of Carnarvon.

Harry is the brother of George Herbert, the current Earl of Carnarvon. While his grandfather discovered the tomb of Tutankhamun in Egypt in 1922.

Harry's family has owned Highclere Castle, where Downton Abbey was filmed, since the late 17th century.

Clodagh regularly shares snaps of her stunning 300-year-old cottage online, with chic modern interiors and a huge kitchen garden.

What an ancestral home! Harry's family has owned Highclere Castle, where Downton Abbey was filmed, since the late 17th century

Home sweet home: The beauty lives in Hampshire's Broadspear House, a 300-year-old cottage nestled on the grounds of Highclere Park with her husband (pictured in their pretty garden)

Clodagh announced her engagement to Harry in October after meeting at a Fortnum & Mason lunch through mutual friends in 2017.

At the time, Harry described the meeting as a 'sliding doors' moment, having been single two years following a 25-year marriage, from which he has three children.

Announcing the engagement on Instagram, Clodagh shared a snap snuggled up with her partner, writing: 'We got engaged! We are over the moon with happiness and thank everybody for the lovely warm wishes.'

And she later told The Today Show on RTÉ One: 'We are so happy, we got engaged about six weeks ago. We moved in together about two and a half years ago.'

TV star: Clodagh is regularly seen on This Morning and back in June, Holly Willoughby managed to reveal the bride's secret wedding cake live on air

Speaking to EVOKE, she previously lauded her fiancé for being 'one of the kindest people' she has ever met in her life.

'He's so lovely and he makes me be a better person. He's made me the happiest I've ever been in my life. I'm so lucky.'

Clodagh's partner Harry's father Henry was a longtime friend and racing manager to Queen Elizabeth II from 1969.

All about the preparations! Clodagh shared a snap of herself to Instagram on Friday as the last minute wedding prep got underway

Her Majesty reportedly called Henry 'Porchie,' affectionately based on his title, Lord Porchester and he is seen appearing in the first two seasons of The Crown played by Joseph Kloska.

Harry is the CEO of the Highclere Thoroughbred Racing syndicate and also works for the Qatari Royal Family. His brother-in-law, John Warren, is the Queen's racing manager.

Old Etonian Harry has remained close to members of the Royal Family, and has been snapped at the races with the late Princess Diana and the Duchess of Cornwall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nicole Scherzinger was seen leaving a taping of The Masked Singer in Los Angeles on Sunday evening.

The 43-year-old performer appeared to be enjoying the spotlight as she wore a glammed-up outfit while taking a solo stroll after finishing up the night's work.

The Pussycat Dolls member has worked on the reality singing competition series ever since its premiere in 2019 and has previously spoken about her enjoyment of being a panelist.

Working hard: Nicole Scherzinger was seen taking a stroll after finishing a taping of The Masked Singer in Los Angeles on Sunday evening

Scherzinger wore a dual-tone green dress that notably featured a sparkling right side and a flat left during the taping.

She paired her outfit with a pair of slightly lighter high-heeled shoes as she took a post-event stroll.

The actress accessorized with several articles of jewelry, including a sparkling ring worn on her left hand.

Her gorgeous brunette hair cascaded onto her shoulders and backside as she made her way around the taping area.

Eye-catching ensemble: The performer sported a green dress and slightly lighter heels for the show's taping

Scherzinger has been involved with The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019.

The show is based on the Korean show King of Mask Singer, which initially premiered in 2015.

The performer regularly appears alongside fellow panelists Ken Jeong, Robin Thicke and Jenny McCarthy in all of the episodes, with Nick Cannon serving as a host.

Joel McHale has appeared in every season of the hit Fox show since its inception.

Sticking with it: Scherzinger has served as a panelist on The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019

During an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Scherzinger expressed that she was heavily invested in The Masked Singer's success for a very personal reason.

She remarked, 'with doing a lot of these talent-searching shows, I do get very emotional because music is the best way of communication and connection to me.'

The actress also gave the media outlet her take on why the program has become so well-known with audiences and lauded the series' unorthodox take on competition shows.

'I think that's what's so bizarre and so special about our show is that you're looking at these crazy costumes and these faces that don't move. And yet you're moved by these contestants, you're moved by their performances,' she said.

Something special: The performer sat down for an interview with Entertainment Weekly where she expressed that the show's viewers were able to be 'moved' by the performances of its contestants

The hitmaker also expressed that she saw The Masked Singer as a way for the performers to let out their deepest feelings without fear of ridicule.

'I feel like with that mask on, it gives them the courage to let go more, but they're really revealing all from the inside out,' she noted.

Scherzinger concluded by expressing that she was happy to be one of the program's main figures and stated that she enjoyed a close relationship with her collaborators.

'It doesn't even feel like a job. It's the best job in the world. I get to go to work with the panelists, who are my close friends that I adore and love,' she said.

Feeling good: Scherzinger also described working on the hit show as 'the best job in the world'; she is seen with Fox Entertainment CEO Charlie Collier in 2019

Earlier in the day, the singer was seen arriving at Jennifer Klein's star-studded Day of Indulgence party in Brentwood.

The performer was first seen exiting a car in which she had ridden to the event before she flashed a wide smile and entered the function's area.

Scherzinger sported a lovely red multi-patterned and sleeved dress that covered much of her toned frame as she arrived at the event.

Showing up: Earlier in the day, Scherzinger was seen arriving at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood. The singer wore an eye-catching and multi-patterned dress while spending time at the event

The singer also sported a stylish pair of heeled shoes that featured bright white straps.

She accessorized with numerous pieces of jewelry that gave her clothing ensemble a bit of shine as she spent time in the California sun.

The performer notably sported a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses and a wide-brimmed hat.

Scherzinger added a little bit of darkness to her outfit with a black leather purse that was slung around her left shoulder.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been soaking up the sun in Ibiza for her sister Jess Wright's glamorous hen party ahead of her wedding to fiancé William Lee-Kemp.

And Natalya Wright showcased her taut abs in a tiny white swimsuit on the White Island on Sunday.

The fashion model, 21, sizzled as she showed off her toned figure in the cross-front ensemble which featured an open portion across her slim stomach.

Wow! Natalya Wright, 21, showcased her taut abs in a tiny white swimsuit on the White Island on Sunday

The brunette beauty added a slew of sparkly accessories to her hen-do look, including a chunky gold chain belt and large silver hoop earrings.

The starlet was giving all the festival vibes with a glitter-embossed touch across her shoulder, collar bone and under her eye.

Natalya added a touch of glamorous makeup to her pretty features, including nude lipstick and plenty of highlighter.

Toned: The fashion model looked stunning as she showed off her toned figure in the cross-front ensemble which featured an open portion across her slim stomach

Festival vibes: The starlet was giving all the festival vibes with a glitter-embossed touch across her shoulder, collar bone and under her eye

The fashion mogul styled her luscious locks in a curly half-up-half-down hairstyle with a diamante-encrusted plait on the top.

Natalya beamed as she was pictured on her girl's holiday alongside her pals at the at idyllic Nikki Beach.

On Friday her bride-to-be sister Jess appeared keen to let her hair down, at times seen dancing at the beachside bar with her pals, who also wore revealing white ensembles for the party.

Stylish: The fashion mogul styled her luscious locks in a curly half-up-half-down hairstyle with a diamante-encrusted plait on the top

Girl's trip! Natalya beamed as she was pictured on her girl's holiday alongside her pals at the at idyllic Nikki Beach

She appeared relaxed as she indulged in rosé and posed for snaps with pals and a group of shirtless men.

Jess was forced to postpone her dream June wedding in Mallorca to William due to the pandemic.

In an interview with Hello! Magazine she admitted she and William had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Postponed: Jess (pictured) was forced to postpone her dream June wedding in Mallorca to William due to the pandemic

Fun: The girl's appeared to let their hair down at the beach club

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

She continued: 'We always wanted to get wed abroad with all our family and friends, but we have explored every option, different dates, different places. A few weeks ago I said to Will: "Shall we have a smaller wedding here in England?"

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there.

'I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wilfred Wong, 56, (pictured) who abducted a child at knife point from their 'screaming foster mum' believes social services are 'infiltrated by satanists', it has been revealed

A conspiracy theorist who abducted a child at knife point from their 'screaming foster mum' believes social services are 'infiltrated by satanists', it has been revealed.

Wilfred Wong, 56, made the wild claims in a series of YouTube videos, which were shown at a jury trial at Caernarfon Crown Court last month.

The bizarre clips have only come to light after reporting restrictions were lifted this week.

Wong and five co-conspirators will be sentenced in September for their part in a chilling scheme to kidnap the child, who cannot be named for legal reasons, from foster care in North Wales last November.



In footage played to the court last month, Wong claimed: 'The family court system (has) been infiltrated by Satanists, as well as social services.

'It enables them to turn upside down the system that is supposed to protect children from abuse into something that protects the abuser and penalises the whistleblower, and gives the child back to the abuser's custody.'

Wong had a website called the 'Coalition Against Satanist Ritual Abuse' (SRA) and has diehard supporters.

Wong, of Camden, also bizarrely claimed Satanists use social services to make money, saying: 'Fostering agencies, care agencies, local authorities and so called experts say that the whistle blowing (person) is not fit to care for the child.

'They make tens of thousands of pounds...it's a gravy train.'

He added: 'It has become so clear that the only way to protect a child from (abuse) is to take the child and flee the country, and hide until the child has grown to adulthood.

Wong and five co-conspirators will be sentenced in September for their part in a chilling scheme to kidnap the child, who cannot be named for legal reasons, from foster care in North Wales last November. Pictured: The moment police officers stopped a car on the M1 during the child kidnap probe

'It's the government's fault for allowing the family courts to be corrupted to this extent.'

In a second video, the jury watched Wong make more outlandish claims, claiming: 'I do surveillance on Satanic covens.

'They like to meet on dates in the Satanic calendar and on the birth dates of their members.'

He told the jury that Satanic Ritual Abuse is a 'much bigger problem than people imagine in the UK', adding: 'Ignorance about this subject is making it easier for SRA to flourish and making it harder for survivors to get support. Many survivors are disbelieved.'

Wilfred (pictured) made the wild claims in a series of YouTube videos, which were shown at a jury trial at Caernarfon Crown Court last month

Wong and his five co-conspirators planned to take the child to southern England and then abroad.

Wong was convicted of conspiring to abduct a child and of possessing a bladed article after the child was taken at knifepoint from its 'screaming and hysterical' foster mum as she returned from the school run in Anglesey on November 4.

Janet Stevenson, 67, and Edward Stevenson, 69, both of Parnell Close, Maidenbower, Crawley, West Sussex, were found guilty at their trial of conspiracy to kidnap on July 23.

Anke Hill, 51, of North Wales, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to kidnap.

A look out called Jane Claire Going-Hill, 59, of Pump Street, Holyhead, who was arrested in a Honda Jazz car at The Antelope pub in Bangor, pleaded guilty last December to conspiracy to kidnap in the same incident.

Wong had a website called the 'Coalition Against Satanist Ritual Abuse' (SRA) and has diehard supporters

Her companion in the car Robert Frith, 65, of Tyn Parc, Holyhead, died in prison last November while on remand for the same charge.

In February this year, another co-accused Kristine Geraldine Ellis-Petley, 58, of Ffordd Tudur, Holyhead, admitted conspiring to kidnap a child.

Karren Natasha Sawford, 48, of North Wales, was cleared of conspiracy to kidnap.

Wong maintained he travelled by train to Bangor for a short break, to do some walking and enjoy the scenery.

He said he had arranged a lift back south with husband and wife Edward, 69, and Janet Stevenson, 67, a counsellor, from Crawley, Sussex.

He had slept under a tree and then crossed into Anglesey, he said. Near the Britannia Bridge he claimed he found some apparently dumped items including a knife, mask and cable ties.

Pictured: Cyttir Lane, Bangor, on which the child kidnap plotters had a getaway vehicle waiting for them

According to him, having got into the back of the Stevensons' car, alongside him were two strangers - a woman and child. 'I didn't have any cause for concern,' he remarked.

Police had stopped the car 200 miles away on the M1 in Northants.

Wong insisted he had been unaware of the kidnapping.

However the court heard how a man had claimed Wong tried to recruit him in a plan to abduct a child.

Prior to the pandemic he had been a self-employed fundraiser for a British charity to provide lawyers for sexually abused and exploited Brazilian children.

He lost his job last July because of the pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new series of Strictly Come Dancing has already been thrown into chaos after professional dancer Nadiya Bychkova tested positive for coronavirus.

The celebrity line-up, so far including the likes of McFly's Tom Fletcher, GBBO's John Whaite, AJ Odudu, Dan Walker, Katie McGlynn, Rhys Stephenson, Sara Davies and Robert Webb, have been released by the BBC over the past week.

But now bosses are panicking after Ukrainian-Slovenian dancer Nadiya, 31, contracted the virus during the first week of filming, meaning many of the cast and crew have to isolate for 10 days, according to The Sun.

Pandemic: The new series of Strictly Come Dancing has already been thrown into chaos after professional dancer Nadiya Bychkova tested positive for coronavirus

A source told the publication: 'This isn't exactly the dream start, obviously BBC bosses are panicking.

'They are taking every caution to be Covid secure, and keep everyone safe, but can't control everything, Nadiya tested positive during one of the first meet-ups, during the studio rig.

'Thankfully none of the celebs have started training yet, but it still means anyone who came into contact with her has been told they must isolate.'

Covid: But now bosses are panicking after Ukrainian-Slovenian dancer Nadiya, 31, contracted the virus during the first week of filming (pictured last week)

Keep dancing: The celebrity line-up, so far including Corrie's Katie McGlynn (left) and Dan Walker (right), has been announced over the past week

The Strictly insider added the Covid scare has heightened fear among bosses that other dancers and celebrities could test positive when the rehearsals start later this month.

The source said the BBC could put 'yet more measures and precautions in place' for the cast's safety and to ensure the show goes ahead without a hitch.

A representative for Strictly Come Dancing declined to comment when contacted by MailOnline.

Nadiya joined the show in 2017 and partnered with EastEnders actor Davood Ghadami, and Blue's Lee Ryan the following year before being paired with footballer David James.

She was a backing dancer last year. Strictly was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

Boxer Nicola Adams and her dance partner Katya Jones were forced to withdraw from the competition after Katya tested positive for coronavirus, while YouTuber HRVY narrowly avoided being axed from the show, after he received a positive test result days before the series started.

Tough: Last series Boxer Nicola Adams and her dance partner Katya Jones were forced to withdraw from the competition after Katya tested positive for coronavirus

Near miss: YouTuber HRVY (pictured with Janette Manrara) narrowly avoided being axed from the show, after he received a positive test result days before the series started

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James has told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.

Still a no-go: Meanwhile, Blackpool has been axed AGAIN due to the ongoing pandemic

But 2021 will include the show's themed weeks - such as movie week, musicals week and Halloween week.

Last year, these were scrapped, proving too complicated to manage amid the pandemic.

The show's Christmas special will also be back, with the show set to start in its usual early-autumn time slot, rather than in October, like last year.

It's said rather than a fewer number of celebs, the full 15 will be taking part again, having cut this to 12 last series.

There are also plans to reinstate the live audience too - another aspect disallowed last season.

'The full fix!' But Strictly will bring back ALL themed weeks, a live audience and the usual 15 celeb contestants [pictured Oti Mabuse and Kelvin Fletcher during Halloween Week 2019]

Isolation will remain in place for the professional dancers. This will see them sent to a hotel near the Strictly studios in Hertfordshire several weeks ahead of the show's return.

The celebs - who will start to be gradually revealed at the end of the summer - will also not have the usual three-week gap between being paired up with their pros and dancing for the first time on live TV.

This has been reduced to one week thanks to logistical factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Education Secretary Gavin Williamson failed history this morning as he claimed he could not remember the results of his own A-levels.

As hundreds of thousands of students received their own grades, Mr Williamson vividly recalled the day 27 years ago and painted a detailed picture of how he received his results.

But pressed on what they actually were, he insisted that his memory failed him, although he acknowledged he did not get top marks.

'I didn't get three A*s, it's fair to say,' he said

'I have forgotten, it is so long ago. It is 27 years ago.

'You probably can't remember what was happening last weekend,' he added to LBC's Nick Ferrari.

Ferrari quizzed: 'Why won't you tell me? Is it a state secret?'

Mr Williamson aged 17 the year before he would take his mysteriously-graded A-levels

Earlier Mr Williamson was able to remember how he went to his sixth form college in Scarborough to pick up the envelope with his grades.

He recalled his 'absolute delight' when he saw the results and realised 'all my dreams of doing social science at Bradford University' had been achieved.

'For a lad growing up in Scarborough, Bradford was the most exotic and exciting place in the whole world,' he said.

'It opened up the pathway to those next steps and I was absolutely delighted.'

Listeners seemed unconvinced he was unable to recall his grades, given his role in Government.

Colin Holmes said: ‘I'm the same age as Gavin Williamson. My memory is generally pretty poor.

Students react receiving their A-level exam results at Kingsdale Foundation school in London

John Ryder did not mince his words appraising Mr Williamson's recall skills over his A-levels

Colin Holmes was similarly unimpressed with the Education Secretary's memory powers

Nursing students leap after pandemic heroics The professionalism shown by nurses during the coronavirus pandemic could be behind a leap in the number of students, leading nurses have said. Ucas figures show the number of students accepted onto nursing courses has increased by 8% from last year, to 26,730. The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) said that the increase is 'encouraging' but warned of significant staff shortages. It said the newest cohort of undergraduate students will not qualify until 2024 at the earliest. RCN director for England, Patricia Marquis, said: 'This latest increase in acceptances to nursing courses is encouraging and is no doubt a result of the high profile and professionalism of nursing staff during the pandemic. 'But record numbers of acceptances does not equate to record numbers of nurses entering the workforce, as many of these students won't qualify until 2024 and beyond. 'There are already significant staff shortages in nursing and it is clear acceptance numbers are not keeping pace with vacancies. 'Pressures of the pandemic have also left nursing staff exhausted. 'This not only puts patient care at risk but means students risk not completing their studies and entering the workforce. 'Ministers must reverse the 3% pay deal if we are to discourage many from abandoning the profession, leaving future nurses without the expert teaching they need.' Advertisement

'I can remember what I got. I can also remember that A* wasn't a thing back then.

John Ryder said: 'How can the Education Secretary forget the answer to such an obvious question to an Education Secretary? Gavin Williamson is incompetent and should be nowhere near education.'

Speaking on Tuesday morning before the results were officially announced, Gavin Williamson defended an increase in the proportion of higher grades, describing an 'exceptional year' and saying students have worked 'incredibly hard' and the results should be 'celebrated'.

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by teachers, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic, following a second year in a row when exams were cancelled due to Covid-19.

The proportion of A-level entries awarded an A grade or higher has risen to an all-time high. In total, more than two in five (44.8%) of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5% achieved the top grades.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Mr Williamson told Sky News 'we very much hope that we will be moving to a system of where we are able to move into the more normal pattern of examinations from next year'.

He told ITV's Good Morning Britain that as the pandemic ends there will have to be a 'glide path back to a more normal state of affairs'.

He said students 'have worked incredibly hard for those grades, wherever they have been, right across the country, and I think we should be celebrating that'.

Asked about concerns over grade inflation for A-levels, Mr Williamson said: 'These grades are absolutely worth so much, they are the key for those youngsters to take that next step.

'But we do have to recognise that, as we come out of this pandemic, we will equally have to take steps and take a glide path back to a more normal state of affairs.'

'This year is a year that we can't truly compare to any other year,' Mr Williamson told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

'No other cohort of students have experienced a situation where they haven't been able to go into the classroom for a sustained period of time, not just once, but actually twice, and we have seen people having different experiences.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gavin Williamson admitted he had limited power to force universities to bring back full-time face-to-face teaching today, amid calls for them to be stripped of funding if they insist on staying virtual.

The Education Secretary faced a barrage of calls to slash cash for higher education institutions which are slow to get students back into lecture theatres and tutorials in September.

But on a media round on the day of the A-level results the Cabinet minister suggested universities consider voluntarily cutting their £9,250-a-year fees if they decide to stay remote.

He told BBC Breakfast: 'I don’t have as many direct powers over universities as we do over schools but the Office for Students, which is the regulator, is clear that we want to have high quality teaching.

'For me an element of high quality teaching is being in the lecture theatre, being with your peers, the socialising and the discussion that goes on there.

'Of course we have all discovered we can do so much of this on Teams and Zoom but there is nothing like being there in person.

'So yes I do want to see that return, I'll be asking the OfS to put as much pressure (as possible) on universities to bring back full face-to-face teaching. That is what students want.'

The OfS, which was set up in 2018, does have powers to fine universities up to £500,000 or deregulate them in cases where it discovers low quality teaching and poor value for money for students.

But these are very much last resort steps taken if there are no improvements following investigations and warnings on a case-by-case basis.

It does not have the power to set blanket quotas for how much of courses are online and in-person.

According to the most recent statistics, universities have an income of some £33.2billion, of which £8.63billion is funded by the government.

New regulations currently being consulted on will give it the power to reduce funding if courses are sub-standard.

Students at Nottingham High School embrace after getting their A level results this morning

Shalayna Morton reacts to her A-level results at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham

Scenes of joy at Newcastle High School For Girls as pupils receive their A Level results today

Williamson fails history Education Secretary Gavin Williamson has claimed that he cannot remember the results of his A-levels. As hundreds of thousands of students received their A-level grades, Mr Williamson vividly recalled the day 27 years ago when he received his results. But pressed on what they actually were, he insisted that his memory failed him, although he acknowledged he did not get top marks. 'I didn't get three A*s, it's fair to say,' he said when pressed by LBC's Nick Ferrari. 'I have forgotten, it is so long ago. It is 27 years ago. 'You probably can't remember what was happening last weekend.' Earlier, however, Mr Williamson recounted how he went to his sixth form college in Scarborough to pick up the envelope with his grades. He recalled his 'absolute delight' when he saw the results and realised 'all my dreams of doing social science at Bradford University' had been achieved. 'For a lad growing up in Scarborough, Bradford was the most exotic and exciting place in the whole world,' he said. 'It opened up the pathway to those next steps and I was absolutely delighted.' Advertisement

Lib Dem campaigner Bruce Hunt said: 'Gavin Williamson saying that Unis should return to in-person teaching and have fees reduced for those who don’t.

'If only he were in some sort of cabinet position to do something about it.'

MP David Davis has also called for more to be done, adding this afternoon: 'I am pleased to see Gavin Williamson agrees with me that universities refusing to bring back face to face teaching should not be able to charge full tuition fees.

'The cut in the maximum must be sizeable, perhaps to £6,000, to properly compensate students.'

It came as the number of students accepted on degree courses rose by five per cent on last year after more pandemic learning.

According to the most recent statistics, universities have an income of some £33.2billion, of which £8.63billion is funded by the government.

A record number of students have been accepted on to UK degree courses this year, Ucas figures show.

In total, 435,430 students have had places confirmed on an undergraduate course in the UK, up 5% on the same point last year, according to data published by the university admissions service.

A record 395,770 students have been accepted on their first choice full-time undergraduate course in the UK, up 8% from 365,500 in 2020.

The figures come on the day that students across England, Wales and Northern Ireland are receiving their A-level results, and students across Scotland are receiving their Highers results.

OfS chairman Lord Wharton said this afternoon: 'With coronavirus restrictions removed, universities are now free to return to in-person teaching and they should have credible plans for this to be restored.

'Universities will be making sensible contingency plans for the possibility of further restrictions and they will want to build on some of the innovations that have served students well during the pandemic.

Mr Williamson seen in Westminster on the morning that A-Level exam results are released.

Students at the London Academy of Excellence Tottenham react to receiving their A-Levels

Nursing students leap after pandemic heroics The professionalism shown by nurses during the coronavirus pandemic could be behind a leap in the number of students, leading nurses have said. Ucas figures show the number of students accepted onto nursing courses has increased by 8% from last year, to 26,730. The Royal College of Nursing (RCN) said that the increase is 'encouraging' but warned of significant staff shortages. It said the newest cohort of undergraduate students will not qualify until 2024 at the earliest. RCN director for England, Patricia Marquis, said: 'This latest increase in acceptances to nursing courses is encouraging and is no doubt a result of the high profile and professionalism of nursing staff during the pandemic. 'But record numbers of acceptances does not equate to record numbers of nurses entering the workforce, as many of these students won't qualify until 2024 and beyond. 'There are already significant staff shortages in nursing and it is clear acceptance numbers are not keeping pace with vacancies. 'Pressures of the pandemic have also left nursing staff exhausted. 'This not only puts patient care at risk but means students risk not completing their studies and entering the workforce. 'Ministers must reverse the 3% pay deal if we are to discourage many from abandoning the profession, leaving future nurses without the expert teaching they need.' Advertisement

'Where some universities plan a mix of in-person and online learning, the OfS’s primary concern will continue to be around course quality and we are clear that – however teaching is delivered – students should receive a good quality experience of higher education.

'In making decisions about how provision will be delivered, universities and colleges must ensure that they keep students properly informed. They should take into account the views of their students when making decisions about how courses are taught.'

Overall, 388,230 people from across the UK have had places confirmed. This is an 8% increase on results day last year.

Ucas figures show that 245,330 18-year-olds from across the UK have been accepted on to degree courses, up 17% on the same point last year.

The number of UK 18-year-olds taking up places has risen to 34.1%, up from 30.2% in 2020.

Overall, the total number of students accepted on to nursing courses has increased by 8% to 26,730.

The figures show that 8,560 students from England have been accepted on to medicine and dentistry courses, up 23% from 6,960 on results day 2020.

Ucas chief executive Clare Marchant said: 'Universities have been flexible with their decisions to accommodate as many students as possible onto their first choice of course.

'Over the following days and weeks, we're ready to help anyone without a place find the opportunity that's right for them in clearing.'

She added: 'After around a decade of widening participation progress, albeit slow, it is disappointing to see it stall, though this should be seen in light of record numbers of students from disadvantaged backgrounds being accepted.'

Overall, the total number of students accepted on to nursing courses has increased by 8% to 26,730.

Meanwhile, the figures show that 8,560 students from England have been accepted onto medicine and dentistry courses, up 23% from 6,960 on results day 2020.

Last week, the Medical Schools Council (MSC), which represents 44 heads of medical schools across the UK, warned that some schools may still struggle to increase the number of students they admit.

Emelia Ambrose, left, is hugged by her friend Mali Jones after opening her A Level results

It came despite the announcement that medicine and dentistry schools will receive funding to expand courses.

Alistair Jarvis, chief executive of Universities UK (UUK), said: 'We are delighted to see that record numbers of applicants have had their places at university confirmed today, after what has been an exceptionally challenging year.

'For those who haven't got the grades they hoped, admissions teams are ready to help everyone with the potential to succeed at university find a place, and will take this year's circumstances into account when making decisions.'

Mr Williamson today defended this year's record high A-level grades after it was revealed nearly half of this morning's results are expected to be A* or A - but the Tory minister admitted there may still not be exams next year with teachers allowed to decide the results again.

The Education Secretary said students 'deserve to be rewarded' after a year of disruption as teachers decided marks for a second year following the cancellation of exams, and said: 'We do expect students to get better grades this year'.

He said: 'This year is a year we can't compare to other years. No other cohort of students have experienced this before, being kept from the classroom not once just twice'.

Mr Williamson has said the Government will consult on a contingency plan 'largely based around' teacher-assessed grades for next year, but with a hope to move back to an examination system.

Despite criticism about grade inflation, Mr Williamson insisted that 'we must support these students in looking to the future' and insisted universities and employers can have 'confidence' in the grades awarded today.

But critics are concerned that middle class parents with 'sharp elbows' might have the upper hand when it comes for appeals, with the 'have nots' suffering disproportionately this year because they are more likely to be marked down and not appeal their results.

Robert Halfon, chairman of the education select committee, said: 'There's likely to be grade inflation. The government has got to make sure the appeals system is fair and easy to engage in and not just accessible to those with barristers for parents.'

Record results for Class of Covid: Two in five A-level pupils got A or A* in teacher-assessed grades today - with FOUR TIMES as many students getting three A*s compared to 2019 (when they last sat exams)

Almost half of all A-level students received A* or A from their teachers today - a new all-time high record - after exams were abandoned for the second year in a row due to Covid-19 with 2022 increasingly likely to be the same.

In total, more than two in five, 44.8 per cent, of UK entries were awarded an A or A* grade this summer - up by 6.3 percentage points on last year when 38.5% achieved the top grades, and one in five of all results was an A*, another record.

And according to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9 per cent of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3 per cent in 2020 and 1.6 per cent in 2019, the last time they sat exams, as critics warned the education system had descended into the 'wild west of grading'.

Overall, the proportion of entries awarded the top A* grade this year has surged to 19.1% - the highest proportion since the top grade was first introduced in 2010.

Girls performed better than boys at the top grades, and female maths students overtook boys for the first time in the number of A* grades achieved, figures for England, Wales and Northern Ireland show.

It came as the total number of students accepted on to UK degree courses has risen five per cent on the same point last year, with 435,430 taking up places so far, initial Ucas figures show, but on the most popular courses up to a third of students may be rejected or have to go through clearing due to the number of people getting the required grades.

Students received their A-Level results today after their learning was disrupted by Covid

A student's placard during a protest against Education Secretary Gavin Williamson in 2020

Hundreds of thousands of students have been given grades determined by their schools and sixth-forms, rather than exams, with pupils only assessed on what they have been taught during the pandemic.

The figures, published by the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ), cover A-level entries from students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Scottish Highers results are also being released on Tuesday.

This year, teachers in England submitted their decisions on pupils' grades after drawing on a range of evidence, including mock exams, coursework and in-class assessments using questions by exam boards.

According to an analysis by Ofqual, some 6.9% of students in England were awarded three A*s this year - compared with 4.3% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2019.

Last summer, the fiasco around grading led to thousands of A-level students having their results downgraded from school estimates by a controversial algorithm before Ofqual announced a U-turn.

This year, no algorithm was used to moderate grades.

Instead, schools and colleges in England were asked to provide samples of student work to exam boards, as well as evidence used to determine the grades for the students selected, as part of quality assurance (QA) checks.

Random and targeted sample checks of evidence were also carried out after grades were submitted.

Ofqual said that student work from 1,101 centres in England - around one in five schools and colleges - was scrutinised by exam boards.

For 85% of the schools and colleges whose students' work was scrutinised as part of QA checks, the regulator said the subject experts were satisfied that the evidence supported the teacher-assessed grades that were submitted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hunter Biden claimed Russians stole another one of his laptops for blackmail while he was close to overdosing in a Las Vegas hotel room, DailyMail.com can reveal.

The alleged incident would mean Hunter lost a total of three computers - the first abandoned at a Delaware computer store and the second seized by federal agents - each likely to hold sensitive information on President Joe Biden and the embarrassing pictures, videos and communications of his son.

The third laptop still appears to be missing – and was taken by Russian drug dealers after they partied with Hunter in Vegas, he told a prostitute in a conversation caught on camera.

After filming himself having sex with the woman using his laptop in January 2019, Hunter left the camera rolling as he recounted a Vegas bender in which he spent '18 days going round from penthouse suite to penthouse suite,' sometimes costing $10,000 a night.

'I spent f***ing crazy amounts of money,' Hunter said. 'I was with these guys. The one guy was, not like you anyway… each night he'd be like 'there's going to be so many people here, crazy f***ing party' and each night it's nobody.'

Hunter Biden claims Russian drug dealers stole another one of his laptops for blackmail while he was close to overdosing in a Vegas hotel room in 2018. Video obtained by DailyMail.com shows Hunter with a naked hooker in 2019, explaining how he believed his laptop was stolen

After filming himself having sex with the woman using his laptop in January 2019, Hunter left the camera rolling as he recounted a Vegas bender in which he spent '18 days going round from penthouse suite to penthouse suite,' sometimes costing $10,000 a night

Throughout the video Hunter and the unidentified hooker appear to be doing drugs off the bedside table

Hunter said it was after that debauched night he realized his computer was missing. 'I think he's the one that stole my computer,' he said

The alleged incident would mean Hunter lost a total of three computers, each likely to hold sensitive information on President Joe Biden

Hunter's claims raise the possibility that he was targeted as a vulnerable conduit to Joe Biden as part of a foreign intelligence operation.

His 2015 Macbook Pro became infamous after he abandoned it at a Delaware computer store two years ago.

DailyMail.com obtained a copy of its hard drive, commissioned experts who verified its authenticity, and exposed evidence of shocking corruption and illegal activity in its contents.

Hunter's claims raise the possibility that he was targeted as a vulnerable conduit to Joe Biden as part of a foreign intelligence operation

A second laptop belonging to the president's son was reportedly seized by federal agents when they raided the office of his friend, disgraced psychiatrist Keith Ablow, last year.

Two sources told NBC that the DEA found the device when executing a search warrant on Ablow's Massachusetts office after he was accused of professional misconduct and had his medical license suspended.

Ablow has not been charged with a crime and the laptop was returned to Hunter's lawyer.

Hunter described how his third laptop was 'stolen' one night during the summer 2018 bender when he almost overdosed on drugs.

'I went out to the hot tub by myself, which hangs over the edge of the f***ing top floor, with glass, it's ridiculous.

'And so I'm sitting there and that's the last I remember. And I don't ever pass out, ever.

'I wake up and the only people that are there are Miguel, the guy frantically running round gathering things up, ok – and Miguel, and Pierce, this guy, his friend.

'They had kicked everybody out. And they had cleaned up the entire place, everything ok? And they were getting ready to leave, and I woke up. And there was this Russian 35-year-old, really nice, pure brunette.

'She refused to leave and they wouldn't call an ambulance. And they didn't know whether I was dead or not, at first.'

Hunter said it was after that debauched night he realized his computer was missing.

'I think he's the one that stole my computer. I think the three of them, the three guys that were like a little group. The dealer and his two guys, I took them everywhere. F***ing everywhere, crazy out of your mind sh**.'

The laptops contain embarrassing pictures, videos and communications of the president's son. 'They have videos of me doing this,' he said, referring to the filmed sex he just finished. 'They have videos of me doing crazy f***ing sex f***ing, you know'

The president's son told the prostitute that the allegedly stolen laptop was also full of compromising sex videos.

'They have videos of me doing this,' he said, referring to the filmed sex he just finished. 'They have videos of me doing crazy f***ing sex f***ing, you know.

'My computer, I had taken tons of like, just left like that cam on. And he would always put in a passcode and all that, you know what I mean? It was f***ing crazy sh**. And somebody stole it during that period of time. He did all this kind of like pretend search and sh**.

The prostitute asked Hunter if he was worried the Russian alleged thieves would try to 'blackmail' him.

Hunter replied: 'Yeah in some way yeah.'

'My dad [inaudible] running for president,' he told her in a hushed voice. 'He is. I talk about it all the time.

'If they do, he also knows I make like a gazillion dollars.'

Hunter appeared to be dismayed that if the video was sold by the alleged thieves to porn or news companies he would be unable to cash in on the explicit videos himself.

In the video Hunter, seen Sunday with his wife Melissa Cohen and their one-year-old son Beau Jr., appeared dismayed that if the video was sold by the alleged thieves to porn or news companies he would be unable to cash in on the explicit videos himself

'I'm worried he gets the money up front and maybe it doesn't do a million dollars, maybe it does three. Maybe nobody wants to see me naked,' he said.

'Maybe it's 'news interest' and because my dad's a public figure they say 'we don't have to pay you anything because you're of interest in regular news.'

'I think you should just beat him to the punch,' the prostitute replied. 'I think you should release your own video.'

Photos on the laptop hard drive obtained by DailyMail.com include pictures of a woman's Russian passport, and photos of Hunter topless pulling the woman's brunette hair while she kneels on a bed.

Other photos show the woman and three young men driving to Hunter's former Hollywood Hills rented home, drinking and partying by the pool, and two women naked with Hunter by the pool.

It is unclear whether the Russian woman and the three men are the same people Hunter accused of stealing his laptop.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A website that uses machine-learning to quickly turn innocuous photos of famous and everyday women into realistic deepfake nudes is racking up howls of outrage—and millions of page views.

The year-old site has garnered more than 38 million hits since the start of 2021, The Huffington Post reported, with five million in June alone, according to BBC News.

HuffPo declined to name the website, but the BBC identified it as Deepsukebe, with both outlets referring to language on the site claiming its mission is to 'make all men's dreams come true.'

On its now-suspended Twitter page, Deepsukebe referred to itself as an 'AI-leveraged nudifier.'

It claims it doesn't save the fake photos it generates, but an 'incentive program' rewards posters who share links of their deepfakes.

Users who get enough people to click on them can 'nudify' more pictures faster. (Users can also pay a monthly fee in cryptocurrency to bypass the limit of one picture every two hours.)

'It's unknown who is behind the site, which is riddled with spelling and syntax errors, just as it's unclear where they are based,' wrote HuffPost tech reporter Jesselyn Cook.

Scroll down for video

DeepSukebe invites users to post photos to be 'nudified,' with a realistic depiction of the subject wearing no clothes. Media reports indicate the site garnered more than 5 million hits in one month

'Last month, the U.S. was by far the site's leading source of traffic, followed by Thailand, Taiwan, Germany and China. Now-deleted Medium posts demonstrating how to use the site featured before-and-after pictures of Asian women exclusively.'

After HuffPost contacted its host provider, IP Volume Inc., the DeepSukebe site went down briefly on Monday.

Scamalytics, an anti-cyberfraud company used by many online dating sites, ranked IP Volume Inc. 'a potentially high​ fraud risk ISP.'

'They operate 14,643 IP addresses, almost all of which are running servers, anonymizing VPNs, and public proxies, the report stated.

While critics worry about deepfakes impact on celebrities and politicians, more than 90 percent of deefakes are of women being co-opted into pornographic imagery



'We apply a risk score of 43/100 to IP Volume inc, meaning that of the web traffic where we have visibility, approximately 43% is suspected to be potentially fraudulent.'

In less than 24 hours, Deepsukebe was back online with a new ISP provider.

The company's logo is a star with an eye in the middle, with the slogan, "We seek truth, we strip fakes, we deny lies."

A statement on the Deepsukebe website claims the nudifier is a 'state of the art AI model' developed with millions of data points and years of research, including months of AI model training.

'DeepSukebe was born by burning huge time & money,' it reads in halting English.

But Roy Azoulay, founder and CEO of Serelay, which verifies video and photo assets, told DailyMail.com the tech used to nudify images the way Deepsukene does is readily available in 'published papers and open-source libraries.'

It's because of that easy availability, that 'there's very little that can be done in the way of protection or keeping this technology out of the hands of malicious users,' Azoulay said.

He said solutions would have to come from lawmakers or moderation by sites like Google, Facebook, Twitter and Telegram.

Facebook blocked the site's URL from its platform after being made aware of its nature, HuffPost reported, and Twitter has suspended its account.

After Huffington Post reported on the site, Deepsukebe's URL was blocked from Facebook and its Twitter page was suspended

Initially, deepfake porn videos primarily focused on female celebrities, as there would have to be a significant amount of available footage of the person to insert them seamlessly into a scene.

But now, deepfake porn stills can be made with just a single image of any female. (Pictures of men are just given female sex organs.)

While fake celebrity nudes are common, 'the vast majority of people using these [tools] want to target people they know,' Deepfake expert Henry Ajde told HuffPo.

And the crisis is growing exponentially: ​​Deepfake research firm Sensity AI reports the number of deepfake videos has doubled every six months since 2018.

Significant attention has been given to deepfakes of politicians and celebrities, but the vast majority target women, according to Sensity AI: Since December 2018, between 90 and 95 percent of deepfakes are fake nudes of women.

'This is a violence-against-women issue,' Adam Dodge, the founder of EndTAB, a nonprofit that educates people about technology-enabled abuse, told Technology Review in February.

'What a perfect tool for somebody seeking to exert power and control over a victim.'

As is often the case, the law is trailing technology: legislators in the US and Great Britain are working to ban non-consensual deepfake porn, but many of their colleagues don't understand the technology or argue proposed regulations are overly broad or unenforceable.

'Black Widow' star Scarlett Johansson says going after perpetrators of deepfake porn is a 'useless pursuit'

'The UK currently has no laws specifically targeting deepfakes and there is no 'deepfake intellectual property right' that could be invoked in a dispute,'according to an opinion piece in the March edition of The National Law Review.

'Similarly, the UK does not have a specific law protecting a person's 'image' or 'personality'. This means that the subject of a deepfake needs to rely on a hotchpotch of rights that are neither sufficient nor adequate to protect the individual in this situation.'

In the US, the 2019 Deepfakes Accountability Act, which addressed both political deepfakes and nonconsensual porn, failed to make it out of committee.

Actress Scarlett Johansson, the target of deepfake porn watched millions of times, argues there's little point going after perpetrators.

'I think it's a useless pursuit, legally, mostly because the internet is a vast wormhole of darkness that eats itself,' she told The Washington Post in 2018.

'​​Obviously, if a person has more resources, they may employ various forces to build a bigger wall around their digital identity,' she added.

'But nothing can stop someone from cutting and pasting my image or anyone else's onto a different body and making it look as eerily realistic as desired. There are basically no rules on the internet because it is an abyss that remains virtually lawless.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rishi Sunak is being urged to deliver a Budget just days before the COP26 summit to stop Boris Johnson making ‘outlandish’ spending pledges at the huge climate change event.

Government insiders revealed that the Chancellor is being privately advised to tie the Prime Minister’s hands by making a financial statement on the eve of the environmental summit in Glasgow this November.

It would be his second Budget in just seven months after the pandemic forced Mr Sunak to postpone the planned 2020 Autumn Statement to March this year.

But a Government source said last night: ‘Rishi is being advised strongly that a second Budget [this year] would be the best thing to do.

'He needs to lock down everything for COP. We can’t have any outlandish, stupid spending commitments at the summit.’

Rishi Sunak is being urged to deliver a Budget just days before the COP26 summit to stop Boris Johnson making ‘outlandish’ spending pledges at the huge climate change event

The revelation comes amid repeated reports of tensions between the PM and his Chancellor over the affordability of Mr Johnson’s plans to spend billions on ‘net zero’ green policies, including persuading people to switch to electric cars and to swap domestic gas boilers for greener heat pumps.

But it also comes after Mr Johnson accused Mr Sunak of a ‘failure of political judgement’ in writing to him to complain about the UK’s chaotic Covid-related travel restrictions – in a letter which was then leaked to the fury of No 10.

And last night, suggestions of a Budget to stymie Mr Johnson sparked a fresh round of infighting between rival camps within the Government.

One staunch Johnson ally pointedly reminded Mr Sunak that it was the PM, not the Chancellor, who was ultimately in charge of the Treasury.

The senior MP said: ‘The Chancellor would be well advised to fix his eyes on the front door of No 10 and read where it says clearly: First Lord of the Treasury.

‘And the resident of No 10 less than two years ago delivered a Conservative Government with a majority of 80.’

But an MP close to Mr Sunak dismissed talk of tension between the pair, saying it was ‘just rubbish’ to suggest the Chancellor now had his eyes on replacing the PM.

The ally said: ‘It is just rubbish to say Rishi is focused on getting rid of Boris. He’s not – he likes doing the job of Chancellor.’

It would be the Chancellor's second Budget in just seven months after the pandemic forced Mr Sunak to postpone the planned 2020 Autumn Statement to March this year

Government insiders revealed that the Chancellor is being privately advised to tie the Prime Minister’s hands by making a financial statement on the eve of the environmental summit in Glasgow this November. Above: Boris Johnson speaking in Camberley in August

The two-week COP26 summit – billed as the most important climate change summit since the Paris Agreement of 2015 – is set to be one of the highlights of Mr Johnson’s premiership.

He has laid out plans to put the world on a pathway to achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2050 and make the UK a ‘world leader’ in green policies.

The gathering will take place against the backdrop of dire warnings that global warming is quickening – with a stark United Nations report last week warning that the planet was likely to warm by a critical 1.5C within the next 20 years, a decade earlier than previously expected.

The two-week COP26 summit - billed as the most important climate change summit since the Paris Agreement of 2015 - is set to be one of the highlights of Mr Johnson’s premiership. Pictured: Boris Johnson at a windfarm in Aberdeenshire

But The Mail on Sunday revealed last month that Mr Sunak had raised objections to the eye-watering cost of Mr Johnson’s environmental ambitions.

The Treasury was already looking for ways to pay back the £400 billion cost of the Covid crisis and a £10 billion annual bill to reform long-term care for the elderly.

Ministers have admitted that tackling climate change will cost families more, but insist that not acting will cost more in the long term.

Since 2017, Budgets were expected to be delivered in November or December each year to give businesses time to implement tax rule changes before the next financial year in April.

However, the last two – in 2019 and 2020 – were postponed until the following spring because of the General Election and the pandemic respectively.

Mr Sunak is also expected to unveil a three-year spending review in the autumn – with October 27 understood to be pencilled in, although the Treasury last night said no date for that had yet been fixed.

Last night, a source close to the Chancellor said the Treasury had not yet ‘taken a decision on whether we will hold a Budget in the autumn, due to the uncertainty of autumn’.

But a Treasury spokesman said: ‘We will set out plans for the spending review in the usual way.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Gogglebox star Ellie Warner has been giving fans an insight into her huge home renovation project, which she's completing with her boyfriend Nat.

The reality star, 28, is doing up her 1930s semi-detatched house in Leeds and has already garnered a staggering 40 thousand followers with her decorating updates.

Self-proclaimed 'lovers of colour & second hand finds,' Ellie most recently wowed her followers with a striking orange radiator in her living room.

DIY team : Gogglebox star Ellie Warner has been giving fans an insight into her huge home renovation project, which she's completing with her boyfriend Nat in their semi-detached house in Leeds

New home: Ellie announced she'd bought her home with Nat back in March and couldn't wait to gush to her followers about the purchase

Ellie wrote on her home account @throughmykeyhole: 'Lil sneaky peak of my living room. Things are starting to take shape now and hopefully I’m gonna have a fully functioning living room after tomorrow night.

'Can’t wait to share it in all it’s glory. The radiators, the paper, the blue I’m just living for it all. Everyone thought I was mad when I said I was getting bright orange radiators but how effing cool are they?!?!'

The Gogglebox star's unique interior taste was certainly eye-catching, with vibrant orange radiators positioned against limited edition coral, blue, brown and cream wallpaper from Graham and Brown.

On the non-papered walls, Ellie contrasted the vibey heating appliance with a subtler grey blue paint from Valspar.

Dining room: Ellie had sourced a gorgeous bespoke table made from reclaimed scaffold boards with two benches that could slide underneath

'Everyone thought I was mad when I said I was getting bright orange radiators but how effing cool are they?!?!' Ellie gushed of her striking lounge decor choices

But it hasn't all been smooth sailing for the couple as they work towards creating their dream home together in Leeds.

Ellie admitted in a seperate post: 'Been at a bit of a stand still the last couple of weeks with working/ things going wrong.

But progress is finally being made this weekend!! Sneaky peak of the colour that’s going in the living room! Hoping to finish all the painting that needs to be done in the living room today.

'Wish me luck on the hottest weekend of the year so far! Already sweating me tits off.'

In their dining room, Ellie sourced a gorgeous bespoke table made from reclaimed scaffold boards with two benches that slide underneath.

The star explained she might also get three chairs to go on one side of the table and save the second bench for when they need extra seating.

Behind the table, Nat had chipped off old plaster from their original chimney to reveal the exposed red brick underneath.

Ellie told her followers: 'Still don’t have a clue what else I’m gonna do in here but I just knew I had to get this out of the way first as it’s such a messy job! I’ve got dust in places I never knew dust could reach.'

Hard at work: Behind the table, Nat had chipped off old plaster from their original chimney to reveal the exposed red brick underneath

Ellie announced she'd bought her home with Nat back in March and couldn't wait to gush to her followers about the purchase.

She wrote at the time: 'Soon to be our home… We're looking at exchanging [at the] end of May/June time. I'm so excited.'

Posting a photo of the 1930s semi-detached house, Northerner Ellie added: 'We're so lucky the current owners have kept it in immaculate condition so we can move straight in and just do things as we go along!'

Before: ' Still don’t have a clue what else I’m gonna do in here but I just knew I had to get this out of the way first as it’s such a messy job! I’ve got dust in places I never knew dust could reach,' Ellie told her followers of the renovation work

Ellie also joked that her partner has banned her from browsing online retailer Facebook Marketplace.

'Nat has banned me from looking on Facebook Marketplace, but can't wait to get in and start making this house our home,' she quipped.

Sharing a second photo hours later, Ellie showed off the property's back garden, thanking fans for their overwhelming response.

She shared: 'This is the view from the back garden! I can't wait to be sat on that patio in the sunshine with a nice cold beveragino!'

Ellie also said her beloved pet dogs would love the outdoor space, but explained she won't be posting any photos of her new home's interiors just yet, out of respect for the current occupants' privacy.

Detailing the home's layout, she continued: '@mickmadgeandmorris are gonna love playing in the garden and brucey bonus it's already doggy secure as the current owners have small dogs too!

'The dorma room is the master bedroom with en suite and hopefully one day when we've saved enough pennies we can extend out the back, bifold doors, velux windows you know the drill!

Ellie, who appears on the Channel 4 show alongside her sister Izzi Warner, has been dating boyfriend Nat for more than two years, and tends to keep her relationship out of the spotlight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her Today show host father Karl Stefanovic is no shrinking violet.

And Willow Stefanovic, 16, proved she's inherited her dad's fun personality on Sunday as she modelled a statement-making outfit on Instagram.

Looking like a TikTok star, the teen posed for a series of mirror selfies wearing a brightly coloured swimsuit layered beneath blue jeans and a mesh singlet.

She's got style! Willow Stefanovic, 16, proved she's inherited her father Karl's fun personality on Sunday as she posed in a statement-making outfit on Instagram

She enhanced her cool look with white sneakers and a pair of retro sunglasses, and styled her hair in two plaits.

Taking a leaf out of her fashion-savvy stepmother Jasmine Yarbrough's book, the youngster accessorised her ensemble with a gold necklace, khaki cap, chunky rings and a pair of drop earrings.

It wasn't long before Jasmine gave her tick of approval, commenting on the post: 'Noice [fire emoji].'

Cool look: Looking like a TikTok star, the teen posed for a series of mirror selfies wearing a brightly coloured swimsuit layered beneath blue jeans and a mesh singlet

Personal style: Taking a leaf out of her fashion-savvy stepmother Jasmine Yarbrough's book, the youngster accessorised with a gold necklace, khaki cap, chunky rings and drop earrings

Willow, who previously went by her first name Ava before opting for her middle name, is the youngest daughter of Karl and his ex-wife Cassandra Thorburn.

Karl and Cassandra are also parents to sons Jackson, 22, and River, 14.

The Nine presenter found love with shoe designer Jasmine in late 2016, after splitting from Cassandra, and the pair were married two years later in December 2018.

Famous family: Willow, who previously went by her first name Ava before opting for her middle name, is the youngest daughter of Karl Stefanovic (left) and his ex-wife Cassandra Thorburn

Married: The Nine presenter found love with shoe designer Jasmine (left) in late 2016, and the pair were married two years later in December 2018. Pictured: with their daughter Harper, one

The couple welcomed their first child together, daughter Harper, in May last year.

Despite their age difference, half-sisters Willow and Harper have forged a close bond.

Last week, Jasmine shared a heartwarming photo on Instagram of Willow walking hand in hand with Harper at the beach, and captioned it: 'Sisters.'

Big sister: Despite their age difference, half-sisters Willow and Harper share a close bond
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gamblers have been losing £6million a day to the betting group which owns Paddy Power and Betfair – helping it to triple profits.

Flutter, which also owns Sky Bet, reported yesterday that losses by its UK and Irish punters jumped by a third to £1.1billion in the first six months of 2021.

The figure helped its profits rocket to £77million compared to £24million in the same period last year – which was then a record.

Outraged MPs and campaigners fighting gambling addiction said Flutter was cashing in on the ‘distress and suffering’ of vulnerable punters and called on the Government to take radical action.

Yesterday industry watchdog the Gambling Commission put out a fresh warning to betting firms to be ‘extra vigilant’ because consumers are ‘vulnerable’ as Covid restrictions are lifted and family finances remain under pressure.

Flutter’s results covered part of the Euro 2020 football tournament when gambling companies were criticised for bombarding fans with adverts on TV and social media.

Irish betting giant Flutter now has 3.3million active customers in the UK and Ireland – up 44 per cent in a year

It comes weeks after the Daily Mail – which has campaigned against predatory gambling firms – revealed that father-of-two Luke Ashton, 40, of Leicester, took his life in April after becoming ‘consumed’ by Betfair betting bonuses.

The Government is preparing to make sweeping changes to the laws governing the industry, with proposals expected later this year.

There are close to 400,000 gambling addicts in the UK – including 55,000 children – and 2million more are at risk of harm.

Ministers are expect to consider proposals such as new consumer ombudsman, bans on VIP bonuses for big losers and an end to football shirt sponsorship. Maximum stakes may also be imposed.

The industry is fending off any changes that could hit profits, which boomed during the pandemic as new punters – bored at home in lockdown – flocked to bet online.

Labour MP Carolyn Harris, chairman of the parliamentary group battling gambling harm, said: ‘I am worried the pandemic has created a new pandemic of gambling addiction.’

Flutter, which owns Paddy Power, Sky Bet and Betfair, customers have been losing £6 million a day to the betting group in 2021 so far

She added: ‘Now is the time for the industry to be held to account for the misery and devastation that they cause to the lives of vulnerable people.’

Bishop of St Albans, Dr Alan Smith, who speaks for the Church of England on gambling issues, said: ‘The lockdown has been a gift to the gambling companies.

'What their eye-watering profits don’t tell is the financial cost to the Treasury caused by gambling-related harms nor the many people whose lives have been devastated by gambling addiction.’

Irish giant Flutter now has 3.3million active customers in the UK and Ireland – up 44 per cent in a year – but it stressed that the average spend had fallen and it was investing significantly in tackling problem gambling.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thousands of civil service jobs could be axed under plans to strip back numbers swollen by Brexit and the Covid crisis, it was revealed today.

The Treasury is demanding plans for reducing the UK Government's headcount are put forward by departments before a spending review in the autumn.

The number of mandarins has increased every year since 2016 as more were taken on to deal with the complex issues that have affected the UK over the past five years.

But a source told the Times: 'Cabinet ministers and permanent secretaries have been told by the Treasury that the headcount is unsustainable and needs to be significantly reduced.'

Chief Secretary Steve Barclay is concerned that all cost savings introduced by the coalition Government between 2010 and 2015 have been reversed in the time since.

It comes as civil servants find themselves at the centre of a furious row over working from home.

Downing Street and trade unions have hit back at some calls for them to return en masse or face punitive action like pay cuts, amid fears for the future of city center businesses.

Chief Secretary Steve Barclay is concerned that all cost savings introduced by the coalition Government between 2010 and 2015 have been reversed in the time since.

It comes as civil servants find themselves at the centre of a furious row over working from home.

Among the firms that have grown the most are the Cabinet Office, which took over many responsibilities from the Department for Exiting the EU (DExEU). But Transport, Education and the Treasury itself have also seen large increases in headcount. have also recorded big rises.

A Whitehall source told the Times: 'What we've seen has been a splurge on staff first for Brexit and then on Covid in response to the immediate pressures facing the government. This is a recognition that this has to be reversed.'

Unions are said to have been told that the redundancies will be achieved by a halt in external recruitment for vacancies.

It comes as civil servants' return to Whitehall faces further delay due to risk assessments for coping with unvaccinated staff.

All Government departments have been told to complete paperwork ahead of the larger scale return of up to 100,000 workers.

They are required to come up with plans on how to make offices safe despite the presence of staff who have not been vaccinated on medical or other grounds.

A source told the Telegraph there are fears 'people might refuse to come in if their colleagues aren't double jabbed'.

Union leaders blasted 'insulting and cowardly attacks' on civil servants after they suggested mandarins who want to continue to work from home should have their pay docked.

The FDA general secretary Dave Penman has demanded reassurances from politicians that it was not Government policy after anonymous briefings on Monday.

One minister suggested to the Mail cutting pay for those who want to continue to work from home, while another told the Times darkly that their promotional opportunities might be hampered.

Downing Street yesterday sided with civil servants, saying there was no plan to cut pay and that civil servants were gradually returning to their offices as planned.

They accepted that flexible working and splitting time between offices and home working would continue.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to put on a stylish display when she steps out.

And Frankie Bridge looked stunning in an all-green linen ensemble as she left the BBC breakfast studios on Monday morning following a TV appearance.

The former The Saturdays star, 32, beamed as she headed to her taxi after filming in London's dreary weather.

Gorgeous: Frankie Bridge looked stunning in an all-green linen ensemble as she left the BBC breakfast studios on Monday

Frankie paired a relaxed fit shirt, that she kept half unbuttoned, with a pair of chic front pleat trousers.

The emerald outfit was cinched in at the waist by two large statement white buttons which fastened with a belted detail.

The singer completed the look with a pair of dusty pink heels and kept off the chill by wrapping a black leather jacket around her shoulders.

Frankie accessorised with a pair of large silver hoops, a daity chain necklace and toted an enviable Louis Vuitton holdall.

Stepping out: Frankie paired a relaxed fit shirt, that she kept half unbuttoned, with a pair of chic front pleat trousers and completed the look with a pair of dusty pink heels

The glamorous outing comes after Frankie opened up on Loose Women last week about how her and her sister have emotionally supported each other in the past.

Speaking to co-hosts Charlene White, 41, Jane Moore, 59 and Brenda Edwards, 52, The Saturdays star began: 'My sister stepped up when I had my breakdown.'

Frankie continued: 'I don’t even remember her being there and I can’t remember I was much conversation.

'I had a panic attack at dinner': The glamorous outing comes after Frankie opened up on Loose Women last week about how her and her sister have emotionally supported each other

'I remember we were out for dinner and I had this panic attack and she just went along with that.'

Frankie suffered a mental health breakdown in 2011 at the age of 23, which resulted in month-long admission at London's Nightingale Hospital.

After Frankie revealed how Victoria had been there for her in a time of need, she then reflected on the times she repaid the favour.

Frankie said: 'I kind of did the same for her with her IVF journey recently. Her husband was in Bermuda and she was here and I went to a lot of appointments with her and there were times when she would cry and I didn’t know how to deal with it.

Bond: Frankie appeared on the panel of Thursday's Loose Women as they discussed sibling relationships, with Frankie detailing her special bond with elder sister Victoria

'I’m a hugger and talk about my feelings but she’s the complete opposite. It’s hard to know how to be there for someone like that.'

Victoria - who welcomed twin boys in October - has been candid with her fertility issues after previously speaking about how she had suffered three miscarriages while trying for a baby.

Frankie added that she and footballer husband Wayne Bridge, 41, always tell their children to always be there for their siblings because of her own experiences.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Well she certainly knows how to get free advertising.

Tyra Banks represented her recently-opened ice cream shop Smize Cream as she wore a T-Shirt representing the new venture while arriving at the star-studded Day of Indulgence party.

The 47-year-old model had all eyes on her while joined by boyfriend Louis Bélanger-Martin at the annual event hosted by film producer Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

Her own best advert: Tyra Banks represented her recently-opened ice cream shop Smize Cream as she wore a T-Shirt representing the new venture while arriving at the star-studded Day of Indulgence party

Out and about: The 47-year-old model had all eyes on her while joined by boyfriend Louis Bélanger-Martin at the annual event hosted by film producer Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday

Her top featured a pink graphic with Tyra made to look like an ice cream coned as she teamed it with black cropped pants and matching sneakers.

She accessorized with plenty of gold including chain necklace featuring a large pendant, hoop earrings and a diamond ring.

Her signature highlighted blonde locks were put in a messy bun as she showed off her natural looks by wearing minimal make-up.

In the details: Her top featured a pink graphic with Tyra made to look like an ice cream coned as she teamed it with black cropped pants and matching sneakers

Vibes: Her signature highlighted blonde locks were put in a messy bun as she showed off her natural looks by wearing minimal make-up

Tyra opened up Smize Cream in Santa Monica, California last month.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Rocking it: She accessorized with plenty of gold including chain necklace featuring a large pendant, hoop earrings and a diamond ring

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shawn Levy recently stated that the highly-awaited fourth season of the hit Netflix show Stranger Things would be 'super worth the wait.'

The program's executive producer, 53, spoke to The Hollywood Reporter and gave his opinion about several projects with which he was heavily involved.

The Night At The Museum director then fielded a question about the sci-fi program and told the media outlet about various aspects of the forthcoming run of episodes, which will premiere next year.

Hyping it up: Stranger Things' executive producer Shawn Levy recently stated that the highly-awaited fourth season of the show would be 'super worth the wait'; he is seen in 2019

Levy began the interview by expressing that he and the show's creators were aware of the hype that has been generated regarding the program and desired to make them available to the public as soon as possible.

He noted, 'We are long-delayed, and the Duffers and I want to share season four with the world as badly as the world wants it.'

The filmmaker noted that the reason that the run of episodes has taken so long to produce is based on the scale that the series' producers had in mind.

'Part of what's taking time is long before Covid and the pandemic existed, season four was built to be by far the most ambitious, cinematic, sprawling and epic season that we've ever done...by a lot,' he said.

Ready to go: The filmmaker noted that the show's producers 'want to share season four with the world as badly as the world wants it'

Great expectations: Levy also expressed that the forthcoming run of episodes would be 'by far the most ambitious, cinematic, sprawling and epic season that we've ever done'

Levy concluded by expressing that the next set of episodes would please fans of the show despite the time that it has taken to make them as fine-tuned as possible.

He expressed: 'the complexity of season four, even before we had the obstacles, hurdles and challenges of a pandemic, is taking a lot of time because it is super worth the wait.'

Stranger Things' fourth run of episodes was originally planned long before it was officially announced that the show had been renewed for another time.

The announcement was made public with a teaser that was released in September of 2019.

Going back: Planning for the fourth season of Stranger Things occurred long before it was officially announced that a new set of episodes was in development

Several new performers were added to the show that year, with numerous others joining during the new season's development process.

Series regulars Millie Bobby Brown, Winona Ryder and David Harbour, as well as many of the returning cast members, are set to reprise their roles from the previous seasons.

New actors on the program include Jamie Campbell Bower and Eduardo Franco, who were added as series regulars.

Performers such as Robert Englund, Myles Truitt and Amybeth McNulty were also cast in recurring roles.

Back at it: Several series regulars, including Millie Bobby Brown and Winona Ryder will return to their roles in the new season

Physical production on Stranger Things' fourth season initially began in February of last year, with filming taking place in Lithuania.

The show's team then moved to Atlanta before shooting was shut down in March due to the onset of the global pandemic.

Filming eventually resumed in later September after numerous delays.

Rolling with the punches: The show's production team resumed production in September of 2020 after filming was shut down due to the onset of the global pandemic

Harbour previously revealed that filming on the new season of the show was set to conclude in August.

A teaser trailer for the forthcoming run of episodes that was released earlier this month revealed that they were set to be made available in 2022.

However, a definitive release date for the fourth season of Stranger Things has not been set as of yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The sister of a British backpacker murdered in Thailand died in a 'double tragedy' while nine weeks pregnant, an inquest has heard.

'No one knows' what caused the death of Laura Daniels, 30, of Norfolk, despite extensive investigations, her family was told at a hearing in Winchester, Hampshire on Wednesday.

She died at Southampton General Hospital on September 16, 2019 - five years after her sister Hannah Witheridge, then 23, was found beaten to death on a Thailand beach.

A post-mortem examination was unable to determine a cause of death for Mrs Daniels, a paediatric nurse who lived in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.

Her death while pregnant was a 'double tragedy', area coroner Rosamund Rhodes-Kemp said as she recorded an open conclusion.

Laura Daniels, 30, of Norfolk, died in Southampton General Hospital on September 16, 2019 - five years after her sister Hannah Witheridge, then 23, was found beaten to death in Thailand

Laura pictured with her husband, Lewis Daniels. An inquest heard that Mrs Daniels had surgery in 2011 for the rare condition trigeminal neuralgia

Speaking at the inquest, she said: 'Given the post-mortem findings it is very difficult indeed to come to any conclusion other than open and that is because no one knows quite why Laura died when she did.

'No one knows, and that must be one of the hardest things for families and friends - for a young person to die and for despite all the investigation, all the inquest process we end up simply not knowing.'

The inquest, which began last month and finished on Wednesday, heard that Mrs Daniels had a complex medical history and had undergone numerous surgeries and treatments at various hospitals over the years.

On September 16, 2019 she was found unresponsive in hospital shortly after speaking to staff and was pronounced dead.

Laura's sister, Hannah Witheridge, was killed in a brutal double murder in a tourist hotspot in Thailand seven years ago while she was just 23-years-old

The bodies of Miss Witheridge and 24-year-old David Miller, from Jersey, were found on the resort island of Koh Tao in 2014

In a heartfelt statement read out by the coroner, her husband Lewis Daniels said: 'Laura was an incredible young lady who had so much desire to continue making the most of her life whilst having to deal with adversity very few people across the world will ever have to experience.'

He described the impact the tragic murder of Miss Witheridge had on the family, and how Mrs Daniels 'spearheaded the fight for justice for her sister'.

He added: 'Life was never going to be easy or the same again, we shared difficult times but we found happiness together.'

Mrs Daniels went on to qualify as a paediatric nurse and the pair were married in 2018.

Her mother, Mrs Witheridge previously wept at one point in the hearing and said: 'You lose one daughter, you don't expect to lose another.'

Her other daughter, Hannah Witheridge, was killed in a brutal double murder in a tourist hotspot in Thailand seven years ago.

The bodies of Miss Witheridge and 24-year-old David Miller, from Jersey, were found on the resort island of Koh Tao in 2014.

They had arrived in Thailand separately and met at the hotel where they were staying.

Two Burmese migrants who were convicted over the killings had their death sentences reduced to life imprisonment in 2020.

Wai Phyo and Zaw Lin had denied killing Mr Miller and raping and killing Miss Witheridge.

Lawyers for the two men had claimed evidence used in the case against them was mishandled and they made confessions under duress that they later retracted, raising questions about police competence and the judicial system in Thailand.

Human Rights Watch at the time called the verdict 'profoundly disturbing', citing the defendants' accusations of police torture that were never investigated and questionable DNA evidence linking them to the crime.

But Thailand's Supreme Court upheld the convictions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ministers were last night branded 'hypocrites' over the cost of Covid travel tests as it emerged they have failed to reduce their own prices for summer.

The Health Department is now charging more than four times what the cheapest private provider is advertising on the Government's website.

A Mail analysis found this ratio has increased from earlier this summer when it was charging double what the cheapest private firm did for a single PCR swab.

Critics last night branded the fiasco 'a national scandal' and said it suggested ministers have no intention of ending 'Wild West' testing costs facing travellers.

It came as Commons transport committee chairman Huw Merriman wrote to Health Secretary Sajid Javid demanding answers about the testing system.

He questioned ministers' justification for forcing holidaymakers into shelling out for pricier PCR tests when only 5 per cent of positive cases are being sequenced for virus variants of concern.

It also emerged that health ministers have not assessed the potential benefits to hard-working families of capping test costs despite pledges to drive down prices.

The disclosure came in the answer to a written parliamentary question from former Tory minister David Davis, who asked health minister Jo Churchill if her department had assessed 'the potential benefits' to British holidaymakers of capping costs.

Ministers were last night branded 'hypocrites' over the cost of Covid travel tests as it emerged they have failed to reduce their own prices for summer [File photo]

She replied: 'The department has not made a specific assessment.' She also insisted testing costs 'have fallen significantly' in recent months. But the Mail's analysis found the Government is continuing to demand £88 for a post-arrival PCR test – the same as it was charging in June.

This is more than four times the £20 being advertised by the cheapest private firms on the Government's list of approved providers.

In June the amount was double what the cheapest private firm was advertised as charging, then £44. It means the Government's prices could add more than £350 to the cost of a foreign break for a family of four to a green or amber list country, as even the double-jabbed are required to take a PCR swab by day two of their return.

And its price for a two-test package, required for non-fully vaccinated people arriving from amber countries, remains £170.

This could add nearly £700 to the cost of a family getaway.

Boris Johnson previously pledged to make it 'as easy as possible' for families to travel abroad this summer. But critics last night said ministers' failure to reduce their prices meant this promise had been broken.

Labour MP and former minister Ben Bradshaw said: 'It is quite clear that despite Boris Johnson's promises, the Government has no intention of doing anything to bring down the cost of tests.

'While separated families can't afford to travel to see one another and thousands of jobs in the travel industry are being needlessly sacrificed, mates of ministers are raking it in with these outrageous prices.'

Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy the PC Agency, said: 'Ministers are absolutely hypocrites. Actions speak louder than words and sadly, as this demonstrates, there have been very few actions by ministers. The PCR testing regime is not only a national embarrassment, but a national scandal.'

Boris Johnson previously pledged to make it 'as easy as possible' for families to travel abroad this summer. But critics last night said ministers' failure to reduce their prices meant this promise had been broken [Stock image]

There is no obligation to choose the Government's post-arrival testing package instead of a private provider's.

Although some private providers are advertised on the Government website as offering single-swab packages for £20, the Mail yesterday revealed how these rates are often not realistically obtainable for many, as when clicking through to each firm's website they are mostly out of stock or only offered in centres, meaning many would have to travel hundreds of miles.

Mr Merriman demanded to know why returning travellers can't take cheaper rapid tests when so few positive cases are being sequenced. He pointed to NHS figures showing sequenced cases fell from 49 per cent during late February to early March.

For the first three weeks of July, there were 6,977 cases with 354 sequenced – just 5 per cent. He also asked why more than 90 per cent of Government-approved private testing companies are yet to be accredited as competent operators.

Only around 38 of the more than 400 firms on the list have been fully approved by the UK Accreditation Service, responsible for vetting the firms.

A Health Department spokesman said: 'Companies that fail to meet the high standards required will be removed from our list of approved suppliers without hesitation.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Muslim cab driver tried to sue a taxi company after he was banned from wearing traditional garments and had to wear 'smart western' clothing under its dress code.

Zulquarnain Ali alleged he was discriminated on the grounds of his religion because he was not allowed to wear his shalwar kameez - a traditional dress worn in South Asian countries - which would allow him to conveniently visit a mosque and pray.

Leeds Taxi Owners Ltd temporarily suspended the veteran hackney carriage driver from its customer booking system when it emerged he was breaching the dress policy by wearing the traditional garments while working.

The taxi firm's customers 'object to drivers in shalwar kameez and want them to be in smart western dress', a tribunal heard.

The shalwar kameez - which is the national dress of Pakistan - consists of loose-fitting trousers and a tunic.

Zulquarnain Ali, who tried to sue Leeds Taxi Owners Ltd after he was banned from wearing traditional clothing, had his case thrown out by a judge at an employment tribunal in Leeds. Pictured: GV of Leeds Employment tribunal

At an employment tribunal in Leeds, West Yorkshire, Mr Ali tried to sue Leeds Taxi Owners Ltd for religion or belief discrimination.

However, his case was thrown out as a judge ruled he was technically self-employed despite being a driver for the member-owned company.

Mr Ali, an experienced taxi driver who is licenced by Leeds City Council, was able to pick up customers from the street but could also access Leeds Taxi Owners booking system to get customers.

The tribunal heard he was involved in the dress code dispute in 2019.

A tribunal report said: 'Leeds Taxi Owners had a dress code and it is that in part that gives rise to these proceedings, because Mr Ali wanted to wear his shalwar kameez so that he could conveniently go to the mosque and pray.

'There is no dispute that Leeds Taxi Ownert had a written policy that its drivers should wear smart western dress and not shalwar kameez.

'An issue arose in 2019 when it was obviously brought to somebody's attention that Mr Ali was wearing shalwar kameez and he was removed from the system for a period.

The experienced taxi driver who is licenced by Leeds City Council, was able to pick up customers from the street but could also access Leeds Taxi Owners booking system to get customers. (Stock image)

'He was reinstated after a couple of weeks. There were various discussions and he ended up having a meeting with the directors.'

What is a shalwar kameez? The shalwar kameez - which is the national dress of Pakistan - consists of loose-fitting trousers and a tunic A shalwar kameez is a traditional dress commonly worn by women and men in countries in South and Central Asia. It consists of a long shirt or tunic and loose-fitted trousers which are held up by a drawstring or elastic belt. The item of clothing is sometimes called a salwar kurta, salwar suit, or Punjabi suit and was introduced into South Asia in the 13th century. The shalwar-kameez is the national dress of Pakistan and is widely worn by men and women in all five provinces - Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Gilgit-Baltistan. It is also widely worn by men in Afghanistan. Advertisement

The report added 'some of Leeds Taxi Owners' clients object to drivers in shalwar kameez and want them to be in smart western dress'.

Arguing that he was an employee of the company, Mr Ali told the tribunal he worked up to 83 hours a week.

But, it was heard just a third of Mr Ali's fares came from Leeds Taxi Owners and 'fundamentally' he was a self-employed driver who signed up to Leeds Taxi Owners.

As a result, Judge Davies ruled Mr Ali cannot proceed with his claim as he was not an employee.

Judge Davies said: 'I find that Mr Ali falls on the side of the line of being in business on his own account.

'He is a hackney carriage driver plying his trade.

'He can choose at any time simply to pick up street fares. He can go down to the station and pick up passengers there, join a taxi rank or stop if somebody flags him down.

'He chose to sign up with Leeds Taxi Owners... Having regard to the context of the way he works, I find that was in the nature of a business decision taken by him.

'He thought it was in his benefit to pay £60 a month so as to have access to a whole different source of work, namely Leeds Taxi Owners' system work.

'He does not have any obligation to log on and do that work at any time... He is essentially choosing between different available sources of work throughout his working time.'

Judge Davies added: 'Mr Ali is also bound by the rule about dress code.

'That is one factor pointing towards a degree of subordination and integration into a business... but I find that it is outweighed by the other factors that point more towards true self-employment.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Travellers brawl at Appleby Horse Fair as police send armed officers to tackle 'serious violence' after receiving a tip that rival groups were planning to settle feuds.

Armed officers were sent to the festival in Cumbria after officers got information about groups intending to cause serious violence as part of on-going feuds.

Cumbria Police implemented 'immediate' Section 60 as tensions grow amid fear of serious violence.

Travellers brawl at Appleby Horse Fair as police send armed officers to tackle 'serious violence' after receiving a tip that rival groups were planning to settle feuds

The order will began at 9.30am on Saturday 14 August and will expire at 12.30am on 15 August.

The Section 60 will give officers enhanced stop and search powers, allowing officers to search people without needing to suspect that they may be carrying weapons.

Superintendent Matt Kennerley of Cumbria Police said: 'The police have information that there are a number of groups intending to travel to Appleby Horse Fair this weekend intent on causing serious violence as part of on-going feuds between different groups.

'This is unacceptable and will not be tolerated.

Armed officers were sent to the festival in Cumbria after officers got information about groups intending to cause serious violence as part of on-going feuds

'In response to this information and to help keep people safe, a number of measures are to be implemented immediately.

'Policing resources will be increased in key areas and at key times.

'In addition, people are likely to see armed police in the Appleby area to allow such officers to respond swiftly and effectively to any potential situation that arises.'

Supt Kennerley added: 'These powers will help our officers to keep people safe.

'However, I also urge anyone with information about potential disorder or any other type of criminality to contact the police.

'Anyone who is seeking to come to the Fair to act violently is no friend to those of us – including Appleby people and the Gypsy and Traveller people - who wish for the Horse Fair to be an enjoyable and safe environment for all.'

Cumbria Police implemented 'immediate' Section 60, which will give stop and search powers, as tensions grow amid fear of serious violence

The fair is an annual gathering for Gypsy, Romany and travelling communities and is billed as the biggest traditional Gypsy Fair in Europe.

Around 10,000 travellers are expected to attend the event who traditionally come to buy and sell horses.

It also offers an opportunity for the traveller community to come together to celebrate their heritage and culture.

The fair is usually held in early June outside the town of Appleby, in Cumbria, and attracts around 1,000 caravans, hundreds of horse-drawn vehicles, and around 30,000 visitors.

Around 10,000 travellers are expected to attend the event who traditionally come to buy and sell horses

Over the years, the mass gathering has generated allegations of violent crime, animal cruelty and mess left in the town.

However the RSPCA, which patrols the fair, has said just a small minority of visitors have ever shown scant regard for animal welfare.

Already travellers have clashed with locals in neighbouring market towns when they decided to set up an overnight camp at the Upper Eden Rugby Club when their camp was sprayed with cow manure and sectioned off with boulders.

But, despite the numbers being at what police said was a 'normal' level, incidents of crime and disorder were at an all time low as a new spirit of cooperation emerged between travellers and locals.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A damning investigation by Al Jazeera has accused football middleman Christopher Samuelson of offering to use offshore bank accounts to help an investor with criminal convictions buy second-division Derby County.

Samuelson, who is nicknamed 'The Magician', is a trust fund manager that has played key roles in takeover deals at Aston Villa and Reading previously.

Undercover reporters met with Samuelson on behalf of an investor they referred to as 'Mr X' and they were walked through how he could help their 'boss' in getting around the English Football League's Fit and Proper Persons' test for takeover deals.

Christopher Samuelson has been accused of offering to use offshore bank accounts to help an investor with criminal convictions buy Championship outfit Derby County

Samuelson is a trust fund manager that has played key roles in takeover deals at Aston Villa and Reading previously

The EFL's owners and directors' test dictates that anyone with an unspent criminal conviction which holds a custodial sentence of more than 12 months is banned from purchasing a club.

Samuelson, who was covertly filmed by the broadcaster's two reporters, is seen on camera saying that he can help move assets to 'secure locations' and his close relationships with banks in Liechtenstein can help conceal both identity and assets.

Mr X, the fictitious investor from China who, it was said to Samuelson, has been convicted for bribery and money laundering, was looking into a deal to buy Derby County.

Samuelson, who gained prominence in the 1990s as he built one of the biggest offshore trust companies in the world in Valmet, valued the total takeover deal at £99million.

Derby owner Mel Morris was introduced to the two reporters working on behalf of the fictitious Mr X but there is no footage to show Morris or Derby being made aware of any criminal convictions held by the fake Chinese investor.

A proposed takeover of Derby County has been at the centre of a new Al Jazeera investigation

Concerned that Mr X would fall foul of the Fit and Proper Persons' Test, the undercover reporters sought clarity on just how Samuelson would be able to ensure a smooth takeover process.

'We create the bio,' he told them. 'We'll say his business was real estate investment, and other sectors… We'll just manufacture it.

'I'm an expert. When I did the Aston Villa application, I wrote the whole thing myself and I took the information I needed and left the rest out.'

He added: 'I'll hold a gun to their head. I can pressure the Football League… it will be approved. And if we have to threaten them with legal action – watch them fall over.'

Samuelson was born to a well-off family in 1946, and attended Sherborne, the private boarding school situated in Dorset.

His rise in the 90s saw him gain some of the richest people in the world as clients. Russian oligarchs and Middle Eastern sheiks are both reported to have had business dealings with him.

As part of the discussions Al Jazeera learned that Samuelson's fee for the entire process was three per cent of the sale price, plus a club director role for himself.

Derby were left disappointed back in May when the proposed takeover of the club by Spanish boxing promoter Erik Alonso failed.

Alonso agreed a deal to buy the Rams' with owner Morris in April, with the club insisting it had seen proof of funds.

However, as revealed by Sportsmail, Morris was forced to finally accept defeat in this latest attempt to sell the club to Alonso's No Limits Sports and an EFL source confirmed it was 'dead in the water'.

Two undercover reporters working for the broadcaster were looking to buy the club on behalf of Mr X, a fictitious Chinese businessman, and middleman Christopher Samuelson helped them secure a meeting with Derby County owner Mel Morris about a potential takeover

One of his most prominent roles as a middleman saw him help broker the deal for Tony Xia to purchase Aston Villa in 2016.

Samuelson is said to have arranged for the Chinese businessman to buy Villa for a reported $105m (£75m). As part of that deal he was to take on the role as deputy chairman.

But financial issues plagued Xia and by 2018 the Midlands club was mired in financial crisis. Now owned by the NSWE group, an Egyptian company owned by billionaires Nassef Sawiris and Wes Edens, Villa is thriving.

Xia was sued for allegedly defaulting on loans back in China which are believed to be worth tens of millions of dollars. The businessman is currently in jail in China pending a police investigation. He denies all charges.

The covert investigation into talks over the sale of Derby County also saw the emergence of a secret Dutch police report from 2005 which included allegations levelled against Samuelson.

In the report, Samuelson is described as the 'de facto leader of an international money laundering operation'.

Samuelson previously helped Tony Xia buy Aston Villa in 2016 before financial concerns saw him sell in 2018. Xia is currently in jail in China pending a police investigation. He denies all charges against him

The undercover reporters allege that they stressed to Samuelson the need to conceal the identity of Mr X from everyone, including the EFL.

Samuelson is said to have claimed he had used offshore trusts to deceive the Football League previously, citing the time he helped arrange the sale of a majority stake in Reading FC back in 2012.

In response to the investigation, Samuelson's lawyers told Al Jazeera that he had never been told that Mr X had a criminal conviction for money laundering and bribery.

They added that had Samuelson known of any criminality on the part of Mr X, he would have ended discussions over the Derby sale immediately.

Derby, in their own statement to Al Jazeera, said the club would only be sold to 'appropriate custodians' and that they have not had any 'formal association' with Samuelson for some time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A rural town in England has become the centre of a wedding frenzy as it tops the table of areas that have seen a rise in the number of people getting married.

The market town of Clitheroe, in the Ribble Valley, Lancashire, was one of only six local authority areas that saw an increase in marriage over the past 50 years up to the census of 2011.

A report by the Office for National Statistics, published last week, identifies the town as having the sharpest increase across the country.

The rural town of Clitheroe, Lancashire, has become the centre of a wedding frenzy as couples flock there to tie the knot

According to data, the proportion of people married was lower in 2011 in almost every local area of England and Wales than 50 years previously.

In Clitheroe, the proportion of people married at each census had gone up 8 percentage points, and in Blackburn rural district, marriage was up 4 percentage points.

And now Clitheroe's marketing managers have called the area 'Ribble Valley wedding heaven', according to The Sunday Times.

In one bridal boutique, owner Liz Metcalfe has 162 wedding dresses stored as brides-to-be wait for their big day after months of delays.

In Clitheroe, the proportion of people married at each census had gone up 8 percentage points and was only one of six areas that saw an increase over the past 50 years

The town, which has 17,000 residents, has seen couples flock to the venues, with some saying their diaries are already filling up for 2022 and 2023

Covid-19 lockdowns and constantly shifting restrictions caused chaos for countless couples attempting their nuptials over the past 18 months.

But it is not just Clitheroe's scenic countryside that makes it a hit with couples, as Liz thinks it is the area's variety of venues crammed into the town.

While the area, which has 17,000 residents, boasts 20 venues for people to choose from, all offering something different to cater to all tastes.

Local florist Jim Hardman, who runs a shop with his wife Linda, have been swamped with orders since restrictions have eased, and provided flowers for three weddings on Thursday alone.

Clitheroe boasts 20 wedding venues for people to choose from, all offering something different to cater to all tastes

Simon Barnes, the owner of a weddings-only venue Bashall Barn, said they have been 'extraordinarily busy'.

He added their diary is already filling up for 2022 and 2023, and they even took their first booking for 2024.

A few weddings went ahead in lockdown with only six or 15 guests as rules changed during the country's lockdowns, with many people delaying their nuptials.

Laura Duggleby, a wedding photographer, said: 'A lot of my clients didn’t want a micro-wedding, and now they’re part of the backlog.'

This comes after the number of religious weddings hit a record low amid a general fall in the number of couples getting married, new figures reveal today.

Ceremonies taking place in churches and other faith sites now account for little over one one in five nuptials, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said.

But civil ceremonies also fell 1 per cent in 2018, according to new figures released today that do not cover the period when weddings were effectively banned over he past 18 months.

Overall there were 234,795 marriages in England and Wales in 2018; a decrease of 3.3 per cent compared with 2017 and the lowest since 2009, when the Financial Crisis was in full swing.

Around one fifth (21.1 per cent) of heterosexual marriages in 2018 were religious ceremonies. This compares to 84.7 per cent of all marriages in 1900 and 50.4 per cent as recently as 1980.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They tied the knot in 2015 and share children Theodore, four, and Amelia, seven.

And Peter and Emily Andre enjoyed a romantic evening out without the kids on Sunday at the Shangri-La hotel in London, to celebrate Emily's 32nd birthday.

The Mysterious Girl singer, 48, made sure to document their dinner date at restaurant Tíng at The Shard before he and his wife, 32, headed to their swanky hotel suite to unwind.

Sweet: Peter and Emily Andre enjoyed a romantic evening out without their kids on Sunday at the Shangri-La hotel in London, to celebrate Emily's 32nd birthday

The handsome couple posed together at the upmarket restaurant with a mojito on-hand.

Peter looked dapper in a black suit and unbuttoned white shirt while Emily opted for a black ensemble and she looked positively radiant for the outing.

The father-of-four wrote on Instagram: 'Someone’s birthday tomorrow … loads of pics coming in a few hours. Hope you don’t mind'.

He also captured the magnificent views across the capital as Emily delivered a subtle smile towards the camera from their dining table.

'Happy birthday': The Mysterious Girl singer, 48, made sure to document their dinner date at restaurant Tíng at The Shard before he and his wife, 32, headed to their swanky hotel suite

A light tipple: The handsome couple posed together at the upmarket restaurant with a mojito on-hand

Celebration: The father-of-four wrote on Instagram: 'Someone’s birthday tomorrow … loads of pics coming in a few hours. Hope you don’t mind'

Room with a view! He also captured the magnificent views across the capital as Emily delivered a subtle smile towards the camera from their dining table

The couple splashed the cash on multiple dishes including perfectly cooked scallops, Singapore curry laksa, lobster benedict and a sumptuous rice dish.

'This one was so yum omg,' Peter wrote alongside a snap of one of their meals.

Updating his followers once more on Monday, Peter shared a video from inside their stylish suite, complete with panoramic views across the London skyline.

Gold balloons which spelt 'happy birthday' were hung above one window and the dinner table featured two bottles of alcohol, chocolate dipped strawberries and other decadent sweet treats.

Scrumptious: The couple splashed the cash on multiple dishes including perfectly cooked scallops, Singapore curry laksa, lobster benedict and a sumptuous rice dish

Delicious: 'This was so yum omg,' Peter wrote alongside a snap of one of their meals

East meets West: One of their dishes comprised of a wholemeal crumpet, spiced butter, lobster and a poached egg

Tuck in! Peter captured the moment a waiter poured a light sauce over Emily's scallops

'This room though,' Peter penned. 'The Shard in London. Let’s have fun. [starry eyed face emoji] Happy birthday Emily.'

Peter and Emily share two children together while the singer is also the father to son Junior, 16, and daughter, Princess, 14, with his ex-wife Katie Price.

And his eldest son proved that the apple doesn't fall far from the tree when he joined his dad on stage at the Fantasia Festival in Maldon, Essex on Saturday.

Dressed head-to-toe in a grey camouflage tracksuit and a black checkered man bag, the son of glamour model Katie, 43, leaped at the opportunity to perform alongside Peter as an on-stage surprise.

Take it all in: Updating his followers once more on Monday, Peter shared a video from inside their stylish suite, complete with panoramic views across the London skyline

Tasty: The dinner table in the room featured two bottles of alcohol, chocolate dipped strawberries and other decadent sweet treats

Caption: 'This room though,' Peter penned. 'The Shard in London. Let’s have fun. [starry eyed face emoji] Happy birthday Emily'

Blended family: Peter and Emily share children Theodore, four, and Amelia, seven, while the singer is also the father to son Junior, 16, and daughter, Princess, 14, with his ex-wife Katie Price

Donning a pair of vertical razor slits on his left eyebrow and silver studs on both of his earlobes, the teen ensured that his hair had been freshly trimmed for the crowd of thousands to see.

After throwing his hands around for a few moments, the born-famous boy took his dad's microphone and spoke to the audience before sharing an embrace with the denim-clad Mysterious Girl singer.

He was in good company as Tony Hadley and Boyzlife also performed at the event.

Born famous: And his eldest son proved that the apple doesn't fall far from the tree when he joined his dad on stage at the Fantasia Festival in Maldon, Essex on Saturday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vanessa Hudgens and gal pal GG Magree have never been shy when it comes to showing off whatever fun-filled activity they're into at the moment on social media.

And on Sunday the two ladies shared some photos that appear to have been taken ahead of Magree's DJ gig in Scottsdale, Arizona.

Hudgens, 32, took to Instagram and shared a snap where she's laying on a hardwood floor with her hands seductively placed on each side of her head, and Magree looking on, that she captioned: 'Act natural.'

'Act Natural': Vanessa Hudgens, 32, dropped a seductive pose while laying on a floor with bestie GG Magree looking in a photo the actress shared on Instagram on Sunday

The Princess Switch star put her midriff on display dressed in skimpy brown top that was nothing more than a glorified bra with extra fabric.

She paired it with brown and white-patterned pants and matching platform boots.

The ensemble was rounded out with stylish sunglasses and her dark tresses styled long with a center part.

But it was her beaming grin that helped hone in the entire look.

Rave time: Magree, 32, shared a photo of herself and Hudgens dressed in the same outfits while sitting with Yaris Sanchez

Magree (born Georgia Magree), 32, rocked an animal print bodysuit, that hugged her womanly curves, with black extra-high platform boots and red-tinted glasses.

Her blonde locks were styled straight and long with a part in the middle.

Three hours earlier, Magree shared a photo of the two gal pals sitting on the top of a black couch dressed in the very same outfits alongside actress Yaris Sanchez.

'Sugar N Spice,' she wrote gushed in the caption.

Sanchez, 30, originally from the Dominican Republic, sat between Hudgens and Magree decked out in a black minidress and matching platform shoes.

Sanchez, 30, sat between Hudgens and Magree in a series of photos seemingly taken before Magree's DJ gig in Scottsdale, Arizona

Rockin' the house: Magree performed poolside at The Sunday Drip situated in the Maya Day & Nightclub in Scottsdale, Arizona on Sunday

Sanchez shared several photos that were similar to the one posted by Magree, which showed the three ladies getting rambunctious sitting on top of that long black booth chair

'The girls wanna rave,' she said of their attitudes for the day in the caption.

Out on the tour circuit lately, Magree performed poolside at The Sunday Drip situated in the Maya Day & Nightclub in Scottsdale, Arizona on Sunday.

The Australian native is popular DJ and electronic dance music producer whose been living in Los Angeles in recent years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophie Turner celebrated her husband Joe Jonas' 32nd birthday with a cute post on Instagram.

On Sunday, the 25-year-old Game of Thrones star shared two photos of the Cake By The Ocean singer as he posed in their living room, which decorated with streamers and a colorful 'Happy Birthday' banner.

'Birthday boy,' Sophie wrote in the caption, adding a partying smiley face emoji.

Happy Birthday! Sophie Turner celebrated her husband Joe Jonas' 32nd birthday with a cute post on Instagram of the singer posing amid party decorations

Joe donned a striped cream-colored polo shirt with navy blue trim and gold buttons as he stood with his arms behind his back.

In the next shot, Jonas rested his hand on a column and put his other hand in the pocket of his high-waisted grey pants as he glanced to the side with a slight smile.

A metallic tinsel foil fringe curtain was hung in the doorway behind the Camp Rock actor. Joe commented on Sophie's post with a red heart emoji.

Sweet: 'Birthday boy,' Sophie wrote in the caption, adding a partying smiley face emoji

New parent: The DNCE frontman became a father for the first time last year when Sophie gave birth to their daughter Willa at the end of July. Seen in 2019

The night before, Jonas was spotted in the same ensemble as he headed to dinner at Craig's with Sophie, who wore a slinky red slip dress.

The loved-up pair were joined by Joe's brothers Nick, 28, and Kevin, 33, as they dined at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's.

Joe's brothers and bandmates also posted birthday tributes on their Instagram pages. Nick added a black and white photo in which he and Joe were seen smoking cigars.

Brotherly love: Nick added a black and white photo in which he and Joe were seen smoking cigars with a touching caption

Kevin shared a boomerang of his brother, clad in a black puffer jacket and blue jeans, as he shook his hips on a sidewalk.

In the caption, he wrote: 'Happy birthday @joejonas love you dude!!! Dance your face off today!'

Nick's wife Priyanka Chopra celebrated her brother-in-law's birthday on her Instagram Story with a photo in which she was seen posing with her husband and Joe.

'Happy birthday @joejonas love you man. You deserve all the happiness in the world,' he wrote in the caption. Joe responded with a emojis of a red heart and smiley face with tears.

Funny: Kevin shared a boomerang of his brother, clad in a black puffer jacket and blue jeans, as he shook his hips on a sidewalk

Celebrating: Nick's wife Priyanka Chopra celebrated her brother-in-law's birthday on her Instagram Story with a photo in which she was seen posing with her husband and Joe

She superimposed a gold crown over Joe's head and wrote 'Happy Birthday Joe. Wish you all the love and good things in the world.'

Joe shared her post to his Instagram Story along with other birthday tributes from his friends.

The DNCE frontman became a father for the first time last year when Sophie gave birth to their daughter Willa at the end of July.

Turner and Jonas tied the knot in May 2019 with a surprise Las Vegas ceremony. They later married again in a lavish wedding that took place in France.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British sprinter CJ Ujah has been provisionally suspended for an alleged doping violation just one week after playing a role in Team GB’s 4x100m relay silver medal at the Tokyo Olympics.

In an astonishing development, the Athletics Integrity Unit revealed on Thursday evening that Ujah returned an adverse analytical finding from testing conducted during the Games.

The AIU said they were looking into the presence in the 27-year-old’s sample of the anabolic aid Ostarine and S-23, which aids muscle building.

If the findings lead to a conviction, the relay quartet and Team GB will be faced with the immensely embarrassing scenario of being stripped of the silver medal they won last Friday.

Ujah had led the quartet of himself, Zharnel Hughes, Richard Kilty and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake out of the blocks in one of the most exhilarating races of the Games.

The British team led until the final metres when Mitchell-Blake was passed by Italy’s the Filippo Tortu, costing them a gold medal by only 0.01sec. If they lose the medal, China would be upgraded to bronze.

Team GB 4x100m relay silver medallist CJ Ujah has been provisionally suspended for an alleged doping violation

Ujah, Zharnel Hughes, Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake and Richard Kilt won silver in Tokyo

Sportsmail understands that figures at UK Athletics were left stunned by the news, which they heard barely an hour prior to the official announcement.

They will not comment on an active investigation, while there has not yet been a response from Ujah’s representatives.

A British Olympic Association spokesperson said: ‘We are aware of the Athletics Integrity Unit statement, and the BOA will respect due process in this matter.’

The UK Anti-Doping Agency (Ukad) website describes Ostarine as having ‘a similar effect to testosterone’, adding: ‘Dietary supplements containing Ostarine typically claim to promote muscle building. Unscrupulous manufacturers may market such products as “legal steroids” or “steroid alternatives”.’

Ujah had been at risk of falling off the 100m map after some underwhelming seasons in the wake of a stunning 2017, in which he won both the Diamond League title and a 4x100m world championship gold medal.

Italy pipped Team GB to the men's 4x100m Olympic gold medal in a dramatic tight finish

Injuries cost him his place at the 2019 worlds, but ahead of the Olympics he had declared himself ‘the most confident I've ever felt in my track career’. Arriving in Japan on the back of a number of promising performances, he attributed his revival to adopting Zen Buddhism and morning meditation sessions.

However, after making it through his 100m heat in 10.08sec, he flopped in his semi-final, crashing out in fifth place in 10.11sec.

Speaking after the relay silver medal, Ujah said: ‘Every major championships since the last Olympic Games we have won a medal and we’re probably the most decorated team when it comes to 4x100m over the last cycle. Just watch out for us. It’s a growing team and a young squad and I am proud of these guys.’

Born in Enfield, north London, Ujah has been one of Team GB's top track athletes in recent years, with the 27-year-old winning the 4x100m world title in 2017 and then the European title in 2016 and 2018.

Ujah is one of Great Britain's best 100m runners and is a two-time European champion

He became the fifth and youngest Brit to break the 10-second barrier in the 100m race, with the best time of 9.96 (with a +1.4 tailwind) set in Hengelo, Netherlands in June 2014.

Having grown up in north London, Ujah went on to study mathematics and science at Walthamstow’s Sir George Monoux College before graduating to Middlesex University in the capital, where he is currently studying sports science.

In 2016, Olympic legend Usain Bolt appeared to give the Brit the cold shoulder before they competed in the the World Championships, which Ujah brushed off in an exclusive interview with Sportsmail.

'We didn't chat,' Ujah told Sportsmail in 2017. 'I don't know if it was because of headlines that he maybe saw before. Possibly. Some said something like, "CJ Ujah is going to overthrow Bolt", but I didn't say that.

The 27-year-old athlete currently has approximately 27,000 followers on Instagram

'I said he was not the same Bolt that he was years ago, and that the 100 metres was more open.

'But it got misconstrued and I don't know if he saw it and thought, "This little kid is arrogant". In previous years we were talking so I actually think he did see it.

'When I next see him I will talk to him about that, put it right.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The first signs of a crackdown on 'rip-off' travel test companies emerged last night as the competition watchdog vowed to help swiftly tackle rogue firms.

The Competition and Markets Authority said it was working on imminent 'interim' measures to ensure families can get a well-earned foreign break or reunite with loved ones abroad.

And it warned it would 'not hesitate to take enforcement action' against providers flouting the law and not giving customers what they paid for.

More than 400 private firms are listed on the Government's website for holidaymakers. Double-jabbed travellers from countries on the green and amber lists must book one PCR test to be taken within two days of arrival in Britain. Non-fully vaccinated passengers must book another test to take on day eight when returning from amber nations.

The Competition and Markets Authority said it was working on imminent 'interim' measures to ensure families can get a well-earned foreign break or reunite with loved ones abroad [Stock image]

On Tuesday, the Mail revealed how some firms are charging more than five times the price of a return flight to Europe for each swab.

Yesterday, among the 426 private firms on the Government-approved list, the average price for a single post-arrival PCR swab was £91. Advertised prices range from £20 to as much as £400 each.

Scrapping VAT on PCR's 'would give economy a £5bn boost' Axing VAT on Covid travel tests could boost the UK economy to the tune of £5billion, new modelling shows. The figures were based on the estimated 6.7million Britons who would be encouraged to go on holiday if PCR tests were cheaper. The study from the University of Hull Business School challenges the Treasury's reported argument that VAT from tests, pictured, is an important source of income amid soaring pandemic debts. The research projects that cheaper tests could boost spending generated by outbound international travel from £9.4billion to £14.7billion for this quarter, or July to September. In turn, the overall tax take in relation to holiday spending could rise from £1.92billion to £2.06billion. Avi Lasarow, boss of testing firm Project Screen by Prenetics, said VAT on tests was a 'stealth tax' and that companies could drive down prices if it was removed. A spokesman for the Government said it was working with private providers to try to reduce costs. Advertisement

The Daily Mail has campaigned for weeks for a fairer deal for would-be travellers by calling for test prices to be driven down and unscrupulous practices stamped out.

It comes after Health Secretary Sajid Javid referred the travel test market to the CMA amid growing reports of 'rip-off' prices and travellers receiving tests and results several days late.

Some have not received them at all, while others have wrongly been sent another person's results.

It has led to some having to extend their quarantine period or even miss flights. Dozens of complaints have been made to Action Fraud.

Mr Javid has asked the CMA to conduct a 'rapid' review of 'exploitative practices' among private providers of PCR tests.

Yesterday, the watchdog released a statement following suggestions it may not complete its work until the summer break is over, which sparked an angry backlash from MPs and travel industry chiefs as many hope to travel before schools reopen in September.

George Lusty of the CMA has acknowledged that it's a 'pressing issue' and added: 'That is why we are providing ongoing support to [the health department], including on steps that could be considered in the interim before the rest of our work on the PCR testing market is concluded.'

The watchdog will investigate whether private firms are breaching consumer law, what wider structural problems exist in the market and the action ministers should take.

The move was welcomed last night. Rory Boland, of Which? Travel, said 'it's encouraging to see the CMA recognise the urgency of this issue'.

The CMA has powers to fine companies, take them to court or it can order them to change their procedures.

But a source said the watchdog believes that the most effective and swift action is likely to be through providing advice to Mr Javid about the actions he should take.

This is because more formal CMA investigations usually take place over long periods.

The Department of Health said: 'While we await the CMA's advice, the Government will continue to ensure testing providers are held to account by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service. Companies that fail to meet the high standards required will be removed from our list of approved suppliers without hesitation.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Did you know Davison? Did you witness the incident in Plymouth? Email: james.gant@mailonline.co.uk

Advertisement

Furious locals have joined campaigners and MPs in asking why Jake Davison was granted a shotgun licence and had his weapon returned to him last month after an alleged assault last year.

Friends of the killer's victims as well as the Gun Control Network, Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer and Plymouth MP Luke Pollard called for urgent answers into why the 22-year-old was allowed to be armed.

The incel fanatic was stripped of his gun in December - following an alleged assault in September - but it was returned to him last month after he attended an anger management course.

It comes as disturbing new footage shows the gunman crouching over one of his victim's bodies during the horror attack.

A car's dashcam picked up the grisly scenes as Davison looms over the woman while shocked residents appear to be calling the police.

Meanwhile a former top prosecutor said the shooter should have been on a police watchlist before he killed five people and himself on Thursday.

Nazir Afzal, who was previously chief crown prosecutor for the North West, said Davison was 'exactly the type of person the authorities should be keeping an eye on'.

The police chief investigating the mass shooting was confronted by an angry local on why his force had given back Davison's pump-action shotgun after taking it away.

Chief Constable Shaun Sawyer was challenged by 78-year-old former MoD armed security guard Stewart Parfitt who asked why the firearm was returned last month.

Davison's shooting spree left five people dead - as well as himself - and was Britain's first 'incel' mass shooting, named after a violent online subculture of 'involuntary celibates', who have an inability to find a sexual partner.

Today, his sister spoke of how she had been unable to comprehend the fact that her brother had murdered their mother Maxine, before taking four more lives, including that of a three-year-old girl.

She told a friend: 'I'm devastated, I haven't been able to take it all in, it's just too much.'

The friend told MailOnline: 'She is heartbroken, her brother has not only shot and killed their mother but then taken his own life and if that isn't bad enough is responsible for killing four innocent people, including a little three-year-old girl.

'She's lost two members of her family and needs time to grieve, which is difficult because she's had so many people knocking at her house. She's had to move away temporarily.

'When I saw her, she looked so shocked still and really tired and withdrawn. You can see the effect this horrific incident has had on her.

'The one positive thing is that she isn't alone, she has her boyfriend Shane who has been looking after her and providing a shoulder to cry on. He's been a tower of strength.'

The sister's other brother himself left a heartfelt tribute to his mother this afternoon, by updating his Facebook profile picture to one of the two of them together.

In other developments:

Friends said Davison's mother had begged the NHS and police to give him urgent mental health treatment;

Neighbours said his father Mark had previously told the police his son's gun should be taken away from him;

The police watchdog is also probing what information Devon and Cornwall Police had about Davison's health;

Boris Johnson said that the issue of how the killer came to legally own a gun should be 'properly investigated';

The Prime Minister branded the mass shooting in Plymouth on Thursday as an 'absolutely appalling' incident;

Plymouth residents last night held candlelit vigils for the five victims killed in the shooting spree on Thursday;

Jake Davison who shot multiple people and then himself last night was a YouTuber who ranted about being a 'fat ugly virgin'

Adopted Sophie Martyn, 3, and her father Lee, 43, (pictured) were shot by Jake Davison at random. Lee's wife Becky is pictured right. Witnesses have told how Lee died while trying to shield his daughter from the gunman

Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife Becky works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts. Sophie was pushing a toy pram when the gunman struck

Jake Davison's mother Maxine was the first to be killed. She and other relatives are claimed to have begged the police and NHS to help him with mental health problems

66-year-old Kate Shepherd was Davison's final victim, and was gunned down by Blush hair salon in Plymouth

Jake Davison then moved on towards a nearby wooded area where he shot and murdered dog walker Stephen Washington, 59, (above)

Home Secretary Priti Patel and Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall Police, Shaun Sawyer, visiting the tributes in Plymouth today

Plymouth residents last night came together for a candlelight vigil at North Down Crescent Park after the local community was rocked by the shooting spree

'Police gave shotgun back to gunman after 'anger management class' one month before rampage' Police are facing mounting questions about why the killer behind Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade was free to own a weapon - as it was revealed his licence was returned just a month ago. Gunman Jake Davison, 22, murdered his mother Maxine, 51, in her Plymouth home with a pump-action shotgun before going out into the street and killer a further four innocent people. The bodybuilder, who had posted rambling videos about being 'beaten down' on social media, said nothing during the 12-minute rampage through a quiet residential street before turning the gun on himself. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) said they would investigate Devon and Cornwall Police over Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate. The legally held weapon had been taken from him in December 2020 following an allegation of assault last September. It was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot shotgun. Confirming a mandatory referral from Devon and Cornwall Police yesterday morning, IOPC regional director David Ford said announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'. This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing, he said. Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12. 'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun. 'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered. 'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings. 'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.' Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.' According to The Telegraph, Davison had claimed that he had the shotgun for sports use and had the licence reinstated after he attended an anger management course. Advertisement

Today it emerged that the gunman worked out at a special gym which helped people with their mental as well as physical health.

He used to regularly attend the Ford Community gym near his home, where trainers also give advice on self-esteem so people can 'improve how they see themselves'.

Davison used to spend 'hours' working out and would only lift weights, according to a fellow gym user, who said: 'He was quiet, didn't say much at all.

'He'd go and find the heaviest weights and lift them, he was a big strong lad.

'But if I went down for a big session at the gym, he'd always still be there when I left.

'This was about two years ago, I don't know if he still went but it's the kind of place he would go to, it's not a big commercial place.'

The gym was set up by couple Peter and Brydie Bruce.

In a 2019 interview with the Plymouth Herald, the couple said they were driven by a 'passion to help others improve their mental health, as well as their physical health.'

Brydie, who is a Mental Wellbeing Coach and MHFA Youth Mental Health First Aider, said that the gym 'isn't just about getting fit, it's also how about people see themselves.'

When approached by MailOnline today at their home, Peter said: 'I'm not going to talk about anything whatsoever. The gym is closed today and will be for a few days.'

It comes as friends of victim Lee Martyn, who died alongside his daughter Sophie, said: 'If he had issues why the hell was he allowed to have a shotgun?'

The Gun Control Network, which helped ban handguns, said: 'The important question is how did he get the gun and why was he given a licence. It is not about his motivation but what was wrong with the system that we can put right.'

Sir Keir Starmer told Sky News: 'Well it's a very good thing there's already an investigation into how the perpetrator got a gun licence given back to him very recently.

'I think the wider question is how on earth did he get a gun licence in the first place, what background checks were done. I'm glad there's the investigation already into why the licence was returned.

'I do think there are wider questions here and that could involve a review of the gun licencing laws because there are other questions here that need to be addressed.'

Today, Home Secretary Priti Patel told the community of Keyham, Plymouth: 'You're not on your own.'

The Conservative MP visited North Down Crescent park on Saturday afternoon to add a bouquet of flowers to a growing floral tribute in the peaceful park – which overlooks Biddick Drive, where the shooting happened.

Ms Patel spoke with community leaders, including chairman of the Keyham Neighbourhood Watch Kevin Sproston, to assure them that they had a 'great deal of support'.

She said: 'I can imagine how shattering this was for everybody, seeing the scale of what was going on, and the volume and response of the emergency services.

'But it is important to recognise that these things, thankfully, very, very rarely happen. This will not define Keyham.

'Seeing the way the support has helped bring people together and look after each other has been, and will continue to be, so important.'

Addressing the Home Secretary, Mr Sproston likened the incident to 'Keyham's September 11', and said: 'Every single person in Keyham knows exactly where they were when this happened.

'The hurt is deep, and we need some help in order to look after the people in our community.'

Ms Patel responded: 'That's absolutely understandable. The implications, the impact of this will be long-standing.

'It's a very sad time, very tragic. I think in the aftermath, so many people will be affected.

'People will have seen things that, quite frankly, in all our lifetime we would never, ever want anybody to witness or experience. It's very hard.

'But you are not on your own, there is a great deal of support.'

The Home Secretary declined to answer any questions put to her around gun control.

Davison first murdered his own mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing schoolgirl Sophie Martyn, her father Lee, 43, and dog walker Stephen Washington. He then crossed a road to a hair salon where he shot and fatally injured Kate Shepherd, 66

A woman lays flowers with tributes in Plymouth, Devon, where five people were killed by gunman Jake Davison in a shooting on Thursday

Members of the public place flowers at Royal Navy Avenue on Saturday afternoon in Plymouth two days after the horror shooting spree

Kev Sproston, a member of the local neighbourhood watch team, told her the mass shooting was 'our September 11'. Pictured: The public laying flowers today

During Ms Patel's visit, Chief Constable Sawyer was challenged by 78-year-old former MoD armed security guard Stewart Parfitt who asked why the firearm was returned to Davison last month. Pictured: The public laying flowers today

But Luke Pollard, Labour MP for Plymouth Sutton, and Shadow Secretary of State for DEFRA, said that the people of Plymouth deserve 'clear answers' as to how the gunman got a firearms licence.

Mr Pollard said: 'I want to see answers to two very simple questions – why did this happen, and how did this happen?

'I want to see a proper, thorough investigation as to how the shooter got a firearms licence, and why he was given back that gun. That's the question that the people in this community have.

'When I heard what had happened, I was a bit broken anyway – but when I saw the news that the gun had been returned to him, I was even more so.

'We have been through an enormously difficult few days, and those difficult days are going to continue well into the future.

'That's why we need to make sure we're getting clear answers to those questions. This community deserves the truth.

'If there are problems with the system, I want to see those problems being improved and repaired.

'But more than that, I don't want to see any other community, anywhere in Britain, going through what we have over the last couple of days.

'We've got an entire community grieving here, we've got families grieving. We've got a three-year-old killed. We need to have proper answers here.'

Meanwhile, the people of Keyham have been left reeling in the aftermath of the shooting – with even those who didn't know the victims turning out to lay flowers and candles in North Down Crescent park.

Debbie Ackland, 55, a mental health support worker for the NHS, said she has had a 'constant headache' since the shooting happened.

She said: 'I just haven't been able to get rid of my headache since it happened.

'I work for NHS social services, and as soon as I heard the names of the little girl and her dad, I knew who the mum was and that she worked for the NHS.

'I haven't had any dealings with the family personally, but it's just terrible. It's devastating.'

Debbie, who grew up in Keyham, added: 'I was in the park here when the emergency services arrived.

'I was just about to put my three grandchildren in the playground when all the helicopters came in.

'There were police walking around with dogs, it was so surreal. I've never seen anything like it in my life.'

When asked what she thought of Mr Davison having a firearms licence, Debbie said: 'I deal with people with mental health problems every day, it's one of the things we deal with in adult social care.

'It's very sad, they need help. We do what we can, we refer them to the immediate crisis team – it's pretty much all we can do.

'I do know that if people have got a mental health background, they wouldn't be issued that firearms licence anyway. So I don't know whether that's something they're looking into.

'You just don't know who you're living next to, what people are thinking, what they're doing.'

But Debbie said: 'The support has just been brilliant. I went into work on Friday and they had counselling set up for all the staff that had been involved. Everyone has really come together.'

And Hayley Locke, 37, who also works for the NHS in an admin role, was another woman who came down to the park to pay her respects.

She said: 'I don't know any of the victims, but when I heard that the little girl's mum also worked for the NHS, it really hit me hard.

'We're obviously a massive staff, but we all care for each other, we look after each other in the NHS, and somebody in our Trust is going through hell now.

'I just think it's a really tragic thing that's happened, and I wanted to pay my respects.'

Speaking about Mr Davison's firearms licence, Hayley added: 'You don't know the circumstances around it, but they must have thought it was okay to give him his licence back – although whether he convinced them of that, I don't know.

'But it sounds to me like he shouldn't have had one. Having read about some of his social media posts, it sounds like he had a few problems.

'I don't really want to talk too much about him, to be honest. It's the people who have lost their lives, and their families, that I feel most for.'

Meanwhile, a mother who visited the park with her eight-year-old son, who did not wish to be named, said: 'It's just horrifying. I just don't understand it.

'There's not enough mental health support out there anyway, but I think that somehow some boxes have been missed here.

'I think if he had had the gun taken off him in the first place, I don't understand how he's been given it back.

'He must have had some sort of mental health issue, because you don't just do that for no reason. But if he did, then why has he got a gun licence?'

And another woman, who also did not wish to be named, agreed that Mr Davison should not have had the gun.

She said: 'He shouldn't have had it in the first place. This is Britain we're talking about, not America.

'I'm not for guns at all. Why did he need to have it?

'I think we're all in shock. It's just one of those ones where I can't find the right words to say – I think I just need to be here to pay my respects.'

Davison was stripped of his gun in December following an alleged assault in September but it was returned to him last month after he attended an anger management course.

This is despite his toxic social media posts and videos and please from his mother to keep it away from him.

An investigation was yesterday launched by the Independent Office for Police Conduct into his possession of a shotgun and a firearms licence.

Mr Afzal, who was chief crown prosecutor for the North West said Davison was 'exactly the type of person the authorities should be keeping an eye on'.

When asked on BBC Breakfast on Saturday if Davison should have been on a watchlist, he said: 'Yes, absolutely, particularly given that he had a firearms licence and given that we now learn in December it was taken off him temporarily because of allegations he was facing and returned to him.

'He was exactly the kind of person that you would be keeping an eye on or the authorities should be keeping an eye on.'

Mr Afzal said none of Davison's social media posts seemed to have been taken into account when restoring his gun licence.

When asked on BBC Breakfast if a year seemed like a short period of time for the licence to be revoked, he said: '100 per cent I agree with you.

'It's not just about the fact that the gun was returned to him, his licence was restored.

'In the interim there were all these social media posts talking about the violence he believed in or felt was necessary, how he felt about women. None of that seems to have been taken into account.'

He added: 'If they (the police) were aware (of his social media posts) then they have got even more questions to be asked.'

Davison's social media use suggested he was involved in the 'incel' culture, a following in which people describe themselves as 'involuntary celibates' and feel they are being oppressed by women due to a perceived lack of sexual interest.

Mr Afzal said Davison's social media posts painted a picture of a man who thought women were 'lesser beings'.

He added: 'We have now seen posts on various social media sites which paint a picture of somebody that has a very low opinion or had a very low opinion of women, who seemed to have a belief he was entitled to do whatever he wanted to, a real expectation that women were some kind of lesser being.

'That kind of extreme misogyny of the type we have seen here and in terms of the incel community is a threat to all women and, ultimately, to all our communities.'

Priti Patel paid her respects to the victims of the mass shooting in Keyham by placing a floral tribute near to the scene this afternoon.

She laid a large bouquet of cream flowers among other tributes at North Down Crescent Park, where a vigil was held on Friday evening.

Ms Patel was joined by the chief constable of Devon and Cornwall Police Shaun Sawyer, who also laid a large bouquet of white flowers.

The Home Secretary, joined by local Labour MP Mr Pollard, then spoke with members of the local neighbourhood watch team at the park.

Ms Patel told members of the local neighbourhood watch team that Thursday's mass shooting was 'tragic beyond words'.

A message on one of the flowers is pictured to three-year-old Sophie, who was killed despite her hero father's best efforts to save her

Flowers are placed at Biddick Drive in Plymouth as police officers talk to locals paying their respects on Saturday afternoon

Speaking at a park near to the scene, she said: 'It's tragic beyond words, really, really tragic, for a range of reasons, and obviously for those involved.

'I'm sure everyone will have known each other and this really will have touched so many people's lives. But quite an important moment as well where people are coming together from across the community to support one another.'

Kev Sproston, a member of the local neighbourhood watch team, told her the mass shooting was 'our September 11'.

Mr Sproston told reporters: 'How I define that is the fact that every single kid, every single adult, knows exactly where they were, similar to 9/11.

'To the point that I speak to people, and they will tell me exactly where their brother was, where their sister was, where their mother was.

'That's the impact that it's had on people, it's going to be something that is in their own minds and thoughts for a long period of time.'

The chilling parallels between the shooting in Plymouth and the Sandy Hook and Hungerford massacres In December 2012, 20-year-old Adam Lanza gunned down 27 people, including his mother, before turning his weapon himself at Sandy Hook Elementary School, Connecticut. Lanza murdered 20 elementary school children, six adults and shot his own mother, Nancy, 52, four times in the head with a rifle while she slept in bed. A 2014 report found Lanza was a deeply troubled young man who obsessed over mass killings as he fell deeper into a pit of mental illness while his mother ignored his struggles. FBI files revealed he had an 'obsession' with historic mass shootings and a 'paedophilia-like' interest in children before he committed the fourth deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States. Documents also showed Lanza had meticulously created a spreadsheet documenting previous mass shootings, including the 1999 Columbine High School shooting. He had acquired National Rifle Association safety permits after attending shooting ranges with his mother, Nancy Lanza. Details on the pair's relationship remain unclear, but one a medical professional said Nancy was never allowed into Adam's room. It was on August 19, 1987 that loner and gun fanatic Michael Ryan went on a shooting rampage in Hungerford, a market town in Berkshire. Armed with an automatic rifle, a pistol and at least one hand grenade he shot 16 people dead, including his mother, before killing himself. His victims included a police officer who tried to tackle him. At least another 15 people were also injured. His first victim was a woman who was picnicking with her two children in Savernake Forest, 10 miles from the Berkshire town. Less than 10 minutes later, firefighters were called to a house in Hungerford where they found the body of Ryan's mother. Ryan, dressed in combat gear, then made his way, shooting at people as he went on foot, to the town's main shopping area where he indiscriminately shot and killed 12 people. He then managed to evade a massive manhunt by armed police and helicopters until he was tracked down to the empty John O'Gaunt Community Technology College where he barricaded himself in. Negotiators made contact with Ryan after he had fired at circling helicopters. At one point Ryan waved an unpinned grenade at police through a window. He is reported to have told negotiators: 'Hungerford must be a bit of a mess. I wish I had stayed in bed.' The body of the 27-year-old, who had shot himself, was later found inside. Ryan was described by the press as a gun fanatic who had an 'unhealthy' relationship with his mother. The incident led to tighter restrictions on gun ownership with the introduction of the Firearms (Amendment) Act of 1988 but critics said the legislation did not go far enough. On March 13 1996, former Scout leader Thomas Hamilton entered the gymnasium at Dunblane Primary School and opened fire on a class of five and six-year-olds, killing 16 children and their teacher. In a shooting spree which lasted less than three minutes, Hamilton, who was armed with two pistols and two revolvers, fired a total of 109 rounds. A public inquiry into the Dunblane massacre found that Hamilton, a former shopkeeper, had been investigated by police following complaints about his behaviour towards young boys. The incident led to further tightening of gun controls with a ban on owning handguns. Advertisement

During Ms Patel's visit, Chief Constable Sawyer was challenged by 78-year-old former MoD armed security guard Stewart Parfitt who asked why the firearm was returned to Davison last month.

Mr Sawyer had laid flowers in a park close to the killings in tribute to those that died in Thursday afternoon's horror.

But he was approached by Mr Parfitt, who got his attention by raising his walking stick in the air before asking: 'Why did you give that bloke his gun back when he's been a bloody lunatic for years?'

Mr Sawyer told him that the matter was being looked into but he was unable to comment as it was now part of an investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct.

Speaking to MailOnline, Mr Parfitt said: 'People around here are angry that the gun that man used to kill five people before himself was given back to him just weeks ago by the police.

'He's always been odd, I'd see him walking about and when you'd pass him he'd grunt like a gorilla. My grandsons said he used to wear odd shoes and hardly talked to anyone face to face, preferring to unleash all his feelings to a camera by himself.

'He'd had the gun and his licence taken off him at the end of 2020 when he was accused of assault but I wanted to know who decided to give it back to him and so when I saw the chief constable I tried to get some answers.

'But he just gave me a reply that it was all being looked into but there wasn't an awful lot he could tell me now because it was being investigated by the IOPC.

'He said he'd get more answers for me and the community soon - but I'll probably be dead by the time they get round to it. He then said he had to go and walked off to meet the Home Secretary.

'I'm a former member of armed security who worked for the MoD guarding the docks and the only people who should be allowed to keep guns are police and the army - certainly not 23-year-olds who live in the middle of a city.'

Ms Patel responded: 'That's absolutely understandable. The implications, the impact of this will be long-standing. It's a very sad time, very tragic. I think in the aftermath, so many people will be affected.

'People will have seen things that, quite frankly, in all our lifetime we would never, ever want anybody to witness or experience. It's very hard.

'But you are not on your own, there is a great deal of support.' The Home Secretary declined to answer any questions put to her around gun control.

But Luke Pollard, Labour MP for Plymouth Sutton, and Shadow Secretary of State for DEFRA, said the people of Plymouth deserve 'clear answers' as to how the gunman got a firearms licence.

Mr Pollard said: 'I want to see answers to two very simple questions – why did this happen, and how did this happen?

'I want to see a proper, thorough investigation as to how the shooter got a firearms licence, and why he was given back that gun. That's the question that the people in this community have.

'When I heard what had happened, I was a bit broken anyway – but when I saw the news that the gun had been returned to him, I was even more so.

'We have been through an enormously difficult few days, and those difficult days are going to continue well into the future.

'That's why we need to make sure we're getting clear answers to those questions. This community deserves the truth.

'If there are problems with the system, I want to see those problems being improved and repaired.

'But more than that, I don't want to see any other community, anywhere in Britain, going through what we have over the last couple of days.

'We've got an entire community grieving here, we've got families grieving. We've got a three-year-old killed. We need to have proper answers here.'

The people of Keyham were today grieving in the aftermath of the shooting – with even those who did not know the victims turning out to lay flowers and candles in North Down Crescent park.

Debbie Ackland, 55, a mental health support worker for the NHS, said she has had a 'constant headache' since the shooting happened.

She said: 'I just haven't been able to get rid of my headache since it happened. I work for NHS social services, and as soon as I heard the names of the little girl and her dad, I knew who the mum was and that she worked for the NHS.

'I haven't had any dealings with the family personally, but it's just terrible. It's devastating.' Debbie, who grew up in Keyham, added: 'I was in the park here when the emergency services arrived.

'I was just about to put my three grandchildren in the playground when all the helicopters came in. There were police walking around with dogs, it was so surreal. I've never seen anything like it in my life.'

When asked what she thought of Mr Davison having a firearms licence, Debbie said: 'I deal with people with mental health problems every day, it's one of the things we deal with in adult social care.

'It's very sad, they need help. We do what we can, we refer them to the immediate crisis team – it's pretty much all we can do.

'I do know that if people have got a mental health background, they wouldn't be issued that firearms licence anyway.

'So I don't know whether that's something they're looking into. You just don't know who you're living next to, what people are thinking, what they're doing.'

Mr Sawyer had laid flowers in a park close to the killings in tribute to those that died in Thursday afternoon's horror. Pictured: A child paying tribute

The people of Keyham were today grieving in the aftermath of the shooting – with even those who did not know the victims turning out to lay flowers and candles in North Down Crescent park

Debbie Ackland, 55, a mental health support worker for the NHS, said she has had a 'constant headache' since the shooting happened. Pictured: The scene today

She said: 'I just haven't been able to get rid of my headache since it happened. I work for NHS social services, and as soon as I heard the names of the little girl and her dad, I knew who the mum was and that she worked for the NHS'

Police at the scene on Biddick Drive on saturday afternoon as a tent remains erected over one of the five victims

Hayley Locke, 37, who also works for the NHS in an admin role, was another woman who came down to the park to pay her respects. Pictured: Members of the public today

But Debbie said: 'The support has just been brilliant. I went into work on Friday and they had counselling set up for all the staff that had been involved. Everyone has really come together.'

And Hayley Locke, 37, who also works for the NHS in an admin role, was another woman who came down to the park to pay her respects.

She said: 'I don't know any of the victims, but when I heard that the little girl's mum also worked for the NHS, it really hit me hard.

'We're obviously a massive staff, but we all care for each other, we look after each other in the NHS, and somebody in our Trust is going through hell now. I just think it's a really tragic thing that's happened, and I wanted to pay my respects.'

Speaking about Mr Davison's firearms licence, Hayley added: 'You don't know the circumstances around it, but they must have thought it was okay to give him his licence back – although whether he convinced them of that, I don't know.

'But it sounds to me like he shouldn't have had one. Having read about some of his social media posts, it sounds like he had a few problems.

'I don't really want to talk too much about him, to be honest. It's the people who have lost their lives, and their families, that I feel most for.'

A mother who visited the park with her eight-year-old son, who did not wish to be named, said: 'It's just horrifying. I just don't understand it.

'There's not enough mental health support out there anyway, but I think that somehow some boxes have been missed here.

'I think if he had had the gun taken off him in the first place, I don't understand how he's been given it back.

'He must have had some sort of mental health issue, because you don't just do that for no reason. But if he did, then why has he got a gun licence?'

And another woman, who also did not wish to be named, agreed that Mr Davison should not have had the gun. She said: 'He shouldn't have had it in the first place. This is Britain we're talking about, not America.

'I'm not for guns at all. Why did he need to have it? I think we're all in shock. It's just one of those ones where I can't find the right words to say – I think I just need to be here to pay my respects.'

Davison shot multiple people and then himself last night in the worst shooting atrocity in Britain for 11 years

In rambling and unsettling films made in the weeks before his rampage, he described an obsession with The Terminator and repeatedly mentions to 'incel' movement linked to mass shootings in the US

Elsewhere CCTV footage released last night captured the shooter casually walk across a Plymouth street towards his final victim - moments after shooting dead a three-year-old girl and the three others.

The video, obtained by ITV News, was on a quiet street showing the incel gunman during his killing spree, his pump action shotgun hanging by his side.

Minutes earlier he had murdered his own cancer survivor mother, Maxine, at her home nearby, before going outside and randomly killing three-year-old Sophie Martyn and her father Lee, 43.

Sophie was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee who was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly. Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One witness said: 'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back. He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

Davison then aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Davison then walked out of the cul-de-sac down a path, telling a stunned resident: 'Nothing to worry about mate,' before shooting dog walker Stephen Washington, 59.

One witness said: 'I went up there to see if I could help and there was a bloke lying on the grass face down. He was obviously dead, and his two dogs were running free.'

The video shows Davison at this point. He is then seen walking past a house and crosses the road in the direction of Blush hair salon, where he will fatally shoot Kate Shepherd, 66, his fifth victim. This is where the footage ends.

A witness to Ms Shepherd's murder said she was shot 'without a word' from Davison as she was smoking a cigarette outside the salon.

A 16-year-old boy, who was walking to a supermarket when he saw the murder, said: 'She fell to the floor and he just carried on walking. He didn't say anything to her. I don't know if she worked at the salon or not. A man in a hoodie arrived and held his hands over her stomach wounds. I couldn't believe what I saw.'

Seconds later, Davison turned the gun on himself before armed police can reach him. Sophie and Lee were rushed to nearby Derriford hospital, where Lee's wife works, but both passed away despite the medics' best efforts.

Tributes have flooded in for the Martins who lost their lives during a six-minute scene of carnage, as it was revealed Sophie was adopted by Lee and his partner two years earlier.

One friend said in tribute: 'You were such a kind selfless gentleman who put everyone else before yourself we have shared many memories together, I will never forget the things in life you have done for me.'

Another wrote: 'I am totally distraught that a good friend's brother and niece have been taken in such an horrific way, my heart is breaking for my friend & his family at this very very sad news.

'Deepest and sincerest condolences to all the deceased & hope those injured make a speedy recovery.'

Neighbours said penultimate victim Mr Washington was out walking his two pet Huskies along a tree lined path close to the Davison family home when he was shot by the killer.

Mike Moore, who lives near by said: 'Both the dogs ran back to Stephen's home and that's when the family became concerned.

'Stephen was well known around here because he was always out with his beautiful dogs. He wasn't friends with Jake and there's nothing connecting them so we think it was completely random.'

Within six minutes, officers, some armed only with Tasers, had raced to the scene of the carnage. But they were too late to save the victims, whose bloodied bodies lay in the street.

Davison's body was found 12 minutes after the shooting began.

Yesterday police and social services were facing questions about whether Britain's worst mass shooting for more than a decade could have been prevented.

Last night the Independent Office for Police Conduct launched an investigation into 'Devon and Cornwall Police's decision-making in relation to Davison's possession of a shotgun and shotgun certificate'.

IOPC regional director David Ford said the probe will look at 'what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed'. The killer's shotgun and certificate were removed by police in December some three months after an allegation of assault in September 2020.

He is said to have had a row with two youths which was reported to police, to whom he was already known. A family friend also claimed yesterday that Davison had assaulted his own father.

A source close to the family said: 'Apparently, he hasn't been well for quite a bit, mentally, and also beat up his father a couple of months ago. The police took his gun licence from him, but then gave it back to him.'

His weapon, which is legal in the UK for sports such as clay pigeon shooting if a licence is obtained, was then returned in early July.

Nazir Afzal, who was previously chief crown prosecutor for the North West said Davison, 22, was 'exactly the type of person the authorities should be keeping an eye on'.

When asked on BBC Breakfast on Saturday if Davison should have been on a watchlist, Mr Afzal said: 'Yes, absolutely, particularly given that he had a firearms licence and given that we now learn in December it was taken off him temporarily because of allegations he was facing and returned to him.

'He was exactly the kind of person that you would be keeping an eye on or the authorities should be keeping an eye on.'

Mr Afzal said none of Davison's social media posts seemed to have been taken into account when restoring his gun licence.

When asked on BBC Breakfast if a year seemed like a short period of time for the licence to be revoked, he said: '100% I agree with you. It's not just about the fact that the gun was returned to him, his licence was restored.

'In the interim there were all these social media posts talking about the violence he believed in or felt was necessary, how he felt about women. None of that seems to have been taken into account.'

He added: 'If they (the police) were aware (of his social media posts) then they have got even more questions to be asked.'

Mr Afzal said that Davison's social media posts painted a picture of a man who thought women were 'lesser beings'.

He added: 'We have now seen posts on various social media sites which paint a picture of somebody that has a very low opinion or had a very low opinion of women, who seemed to have a belief he was entitled to do whatever he wanted to, a real expectation that women were some kind of lesser being.

'That kind of extreme misogyny of the type we have seen here and in terms of the incel community is a threat to all women and, ultimately, to all our communities.'

Within hours of the carnage, a disturbing series of YouTube videos emerged in which Davison, under the user name Professor Waffle, fantasised about being the 'Terminator' from the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.

He also spoke of his belief in the 'blackpill' philosophy of the 'incel' community, a fatalistic and misogynistic world view that your position in life cannot change.

His family had desperately applied for professional help with Davison's ADHD according to a close family friend, with the gunman being described as 'introverted' and a 'troubled soul'.

The friend told the Telegraph: 'Jake was always very quiet growing up, almost introverted. He was a troubled soul. He got into guns and he knew everything there was to know about them.

'Maxine and Jake used to be close. You'd always see him helping her with the shopping at Lidl up the road, but then his views changed and he went against women and he became misogynist. They clashed a lot about that.'

Victoria Cleave, 29, whose husband worked with Davison at Babcock, said: 'Absolutely vile man. So sickening what he did and to think Danny was sat in the same room as him yesterday and worked with him.'

The vigil was organised by the local neighbourhood watch and chairman Kevin Sproston who led attendees in a minute's silence

Mr Washington (pictured above) had been out walking with his 'beautiful' huskies, who rushed back home to raise the alarm with concerned family members

Local Kristina Viladzidzi called him as a sociopath. She wrote: 'He was absolutely terrified of dogs. I remember him being super anxious when we met him in the park, I was always automatically taking dogs on a lead.

'We were about to go to exact same place but my boyfriend wanted to finish [a computer] game so we went ten minutes later. If we went a bit earlier he would definitely target us as he hated our dogs.

'He was a great example of a sociopath. Even eye contact with him was awkward. Before I knew details, he was the person [who] came to my mind and not surprisingly for me it was him.'

Self-described 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and bodybuilder Davison was described as having a 'pump action shotgun'. The weapons are legal in the UK - but only as long as they have a fixed magazine capacity of no more than three cartridges and a valid Shotgun certificate.

The murders came 22 days after he was bragging online about the UK 'having more guns you think' in a post about US-style mass shootings.

He 'liked' about 800 clips about gun culture, the US second amendment and violent games online.

Davison also described his fascination with previous atrocities including the Hungerford massacre in 1987 - one of the worst UK gun attacks in history - where an unemployed former labourer shot dead 16 people with semi-automatic rifles and a handgun.

In a chilling Reddit post written just over three weeks ago about the evolution of gun attacks over the past 80 years, Davison wrote: 'There are lot more guns in Europe and the UK then people think'.

MailOnline yesterday revealed the killer was a nihilistic YouTuber who fantasised about being The Terminator, ranted about being a 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and described his affinity with the 'incel' movement linked to mass murder by misogynists in the US and Canada.

Only yesterday did YouTube and Facebook delete his hate-filled accounts.

And one friend of the family wrote on Facebook last night that his relatives, including his mother Maxine, had begged for mental health support for Davison, adding: 'The NHS basically said they are short staffed and that was it.

'The family even asked the police to come out to see him as he was talking acting and acting strange - they didn't do a welfare check. And now six people are dead'.

On a Reddit thread, under the question 'What do incels think of their mother', Davison replied: 'Can't stand her'

Davison wrote this post about mass shootings and more guns being in the UK 'than people think' just 22 days before the Plymouth massacre

Devon and Cornwall police chief constable Shawn Sawyer said his social media and claims his family went to the police and the NHS about his mental health would form part of their investigation.

Speaking at a press conference outside Crownhill police station in Plymouth, the senior police officer said the weapon used in the Plymouth shooting was described as a 'pump action shotgun' and confirmed a firearm had been recovered from the scene.

Mr Sawyer said police would look at Davison's social media output as part of the investigation.

He said: 'This is an extraordinarily unusual response by a fellow human being.

'Whether there were mental health issues I cannot say at this time.' He said most witnesses were 'shocked at what was unfolding before them,' but said there was no evidence to suggest Davison was saying anything as he carried out his atrocity.

Police investigating the Plymouth shootings raided the gunmen's father's flat on Thursday.

Armed officers forced their way into the home of Mark Davison, about a mile from where his son Jake killed five people before turning the gun on himself.

Mr Davison was not in at the time - according to a neighbour - but returned later in the evening and spoke to detectives.

He was being comforted by one of his other sons yesterday afternoon and declined to comment about the tragedy.

Plymouth has two gun shops in the centre of the city, Pull The Trigger and Peter's Fishing and Sports, which are both near the city's market.

A member of staff at Peter's Fishing and Sports recalled how Davison had been in last year. He said: 'I remember the gunman came in just before the first lockdown and was interested in an air rifle we had up on the wall.

'He didn't buy it in the end but spent a few minutes examining it. He didn't have the bushy beard back then and seemed fairly normal, nothing that would trigger any kind of alarm.

'Apparently he was seen walking through the market on Monday. I've seen him around a few times.

'But how he managed to get a license to own a shotgun is a mystery because in order to have a license you have every part of your background scrutinised down to the most minute details. Or at least you're supposed to.'

Was his GP contacted over shotgun licence? A gun licence will only be granted if police decide the applicant poses no threat to public safety and has a 'good reason' for owning a firearm. To decide if they are fit, officers will carry out a series of checks. These include interviews, visiting the person's home, obtaining character references, carrying out a criminal record check and contacting the family GP. Home visits are not always necessary to renew a licence, but police must be satisfied there is no 'danger to public safety or the peace'. As part of the application process consent must be given for the person's GP to share medical information with officers. If a licence is granted a note is placed on the owner's GP record and the doctor should contact police if concerns arise about their suitability. In most cases GPs are only contacted during the vetting procedure if the applicant has declared a medical condition. Relevant conditions requiring a GP report include depression and personality disorders. Mental health problems can also be relevant. Applicants must have a legitimate reason to own a shotgun, such as for hunting and gun club target shooting. Pump-action shotguns by law cannot hold more than three shells. There is no minimum age to get a shotgun certificate, but you are not allowed to use it without adult supervision until you are 15. You have to be 14 before you can get a separate firearms certificate, which allows you to own a rifle. Advertisement

A senior police source said firearms licence departments were struggling in forces in areas such as Devon and Cornwall.

He said: 'The resources are not there to regularly and proactively visit every single firearms licence holder. There are simply not enough staff to do that because of the sheer number of licences.

'The gun lobby is also relatively powerful. Suspension or revocation of a licence is seen as an extremely big step. That needs a certain amount of justification. You cannot do it on a whim.'

Activists want police to brand the killings terrorism. The Everyday Sexism project's Laura Bates said we 'are talking about an individual radicalised online into an extremist belief system who then acted on those beliefs to massacre people. This is terrorism. It is extremism. It is radicalisation.

'Repeated news reports, police and politicians all saying this is not terror related. This is shocking and shameful. Extremist misogyny, male supremacy, sees women die all over the world, including repeatedly in incel massacres. We cannot tackle it if we do not name it.'

One policing source said: 'This may need to be something that the policing world needs to review, to keep pace with this threat.'

MailOnline has revealed Davison was an active YouTuber calling himself 'Professor Waffle', who posted videos of himself working out and most recently ten-minute rants about life being 'rigged against you', humanity being on the 'brink of extinction' and being repulsive to the opposite sex.

He also shared clips from ultra-violent video games and just two days ago 'liked' videos of a M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle being shot.

In his most recent online rant from his bedroom he said: 'You wake up and you stare at the wall and you're thinking um nothing's changed but I'm still in the same position, same period in life, still a f***ing this, that virgin f***ing fat ugly, what'. He added: 'I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something. And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission'.

A fortnight ago, the 23-year-old also spoke of his affinity with the 'incel' movement, which has been linked to a number of mass shootings in the US. The most notorious was by misogynist killer Elliot Rodger, who killed six people in California in May 2014 before he turned the gun on himself. In Canada in 2018 Alek Minassian posted a Facebook message showing his support for Incels before ploughing a van into crowds, killing ten.

'Incel' stands for 'involuntary celibate' and those referring to themselves as such believe their unattractiveness to women is predetermined by his genetics. Some extremist followers believe they are owed sex by women. Davison says repeatedly in his videos that he is repulsive to women, overweight and so is all his family.

He also talks about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Davison also 'liked' a series of videos about guns, and shared posts on Facebook quoting former American president Donald Trump as well pictures of a statue holding a rifle with the US flag in the background.

His Facebook profile suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

He said on July 28: 'People like similar to me, they've had nothing but themselves. And then they've socially had it tough, probably grew up in a s*** background, like, like… How can you have drive and willpower, you know, when you've been defeated a million times? It's you wake up and you're like 'what the f***?', you know, when you've when you've worked so f***ing hard – so f***ing hard – and you see mother***ers who work nowhere near as hard as you.

'For the most part it's just been me against the world. It's just been me fighting an uphill battle with a big f***ing rock on my back, you know, while I'm seeing mother***ers that don't deserve half of anything, now they're getting a free road to the top'.

He added: 'I think any as long as you're breathing air… It's like in the Terminator, right, you know, fate is nothing, you know, the whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything's rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction, you know, these machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted.

'But yet humanity still tries to fight to the end! And I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something.

'And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission, you know'.

Why was Incel killer Jake Davison given his gun back? Were his mother's fears about his mental health ignored? Why were his social media posts not acted on? The questions police HAVE to answer over Plymouth massacre

The devastating rampage Jake Davison undertook in Plymouth on Thursday evening sent shockwaves across Britain.

But it also raised urgent questions about how the 22-year-old killer was able to have access to such a deadly weapon.

Disturbing social media posts and videos he published on open accounts appear to have been missed or ignored when granting him a gun licence.

The sick killer also had a firearm snatched off him by Devon and Cornwall Police last year because he allegedly assaulted someone.

Yet officers, for reasons that are not yet fully known, felt an anger management course would suffice - and gave it back to him last month.

The authorities have burning questions to answer over how they handled the troubled young man, with some of the pressing issues outlined here.

Were his mother's fears about his mental health ignored?

The biggest question Devon and Cornwall police must urgently answer is whether Davison was fit to be allowed to store a lethal weapon.

The 22-year-old blasted his mother to death before killing four others including a three-year-old girl during his rampage in Plymouth.

The random nature of the other four killings further begs questions about his mental state, with him appearing to take a pop at whoever was in front of him.

Davison then doubled back on the route of his shooting spree to some garages behind the local hairdressers and shot himself in the head.

This is on top of the disturbing videos he posted on YouTube and other platforms about being a 'f***ing fat ugly virgin' and pulling deranged faces to viewers.

Jake Davison who shot multiple people and then himself last night was a YouTuber who ranted about being a 'fat ugly virgin'

He said: 'I used to be OK with being a virgin too, but when you get older and the inferiority complex kicks in and the feeling of despair and missing out occurs.

'Try being an unemployed, autistic, poor, sexually frustrated male with tons of health issues, no social circle and being stuck in government housing with my mother for years on end, having missed out on so much in life.'

Meanwhile his own mother, Maxine, 51, is believed to have begged police and health services to check her son's welfare.

A friend of the family wrote on Thursday night that other relatives had made similar pleas for help. They said in a Facebook post: 'The NHS basically said they are short staffed and that was it.

'The family even asked the police to come out to see him as he was talking acting and acting strange - they didn't do a welfare check. And now six people are dead.'

Davison was diagnosed with autism as a child and was sent to Mount Tamar special school in Plymouth, where he was said to have been 'disruptive' for his peers.

Jess Wallace recalled: 'My boyfriend went to school with him and said he was pretty shy and quiet and would talk about how cool Americans are, and the idea of having a gun collection.'

Another woman related to a former classmate added: 'He was well-known for his anger issues.'

Did he have a licence for the pump action shotgun he used?

Police have already said the killer had a gun licence, but at a press conference yesterday they could not say whether it was for the firearm he used to murder.

He was seen holding a pump action shotgun but it is not yet clear how he would have acquired the weapon.

Professor of Criminology at Brighton University Peter Squires, who is also a member of the Gun Control Network, explained ammunition for these are restricted in the UK.

The guns are fed from a fixed tubular magazine with cartridges loaded in manually in a similar way to a regular shotgun.

But they can hold more at once than a standard shotgun, meaning the user can fire more bursts in quick succession like a semi-automatic weapon.

In Britain, where gun laws are reasonably strict, Prof Squires said there are restrictions to having just two cartridges in the magazine at one time.

He told MailOnline: 'Pump action shotguns are not as long as regular ones. There has been an issue surrounding those.

'They were prohibited to some extent after the Hungerford shootings and restricted to two rounds in the pump action magazine.

But he said there are loopholes for sport and pest control which means people can justify needing a gun.

He said: 'This is gun licencing in the UK in a nutshell. We have very tough gun laws but when it comes to licence applications and renewals it's the classic case of 43 police forces do it with 43 different shades of due diligence.

'I think there's a real issue about the time and resources that police put into firearms licencing because it costs them money to do it, which is the absurd thing.

'The fact he may well have been showing signs of lunacy may not have come through. It opens up that whole question about whether GPs should certify if someone is sane at point of licence application or renewal.'

It begs the questions whether Davison had a right to use the gun, whether he was a member of a shooting club and if he modified the gun to suit his twisted needs.

Why was the gun returned to him after being confiscated in December?

In a move that could have prevented the tragedy of Thursday night, Devon and Cornwall Police snatched Davison's shotgun from him in December.

The legally held weapon had been taken from him following an allegation of assault in September.

But it was returned to him in July after he attended an anger management course after which police classed him as being fit again to possess the three-shot gun.

IOPC regional director David Ford yesterday announced an investigation into the shooting and 'police contact with Jake Davison prior to the incident'. This includes the force's role and actions regarding firearms licensing.

Chief Constable Shaun Sawyer yesterday during a press conference outside a police station in Plymouth, following the shooting on Thursday

Mr Ford said: 'After assessment of the referral we have determined we will carry out an independent investigation focusing on Jake Davison's firearms licensing history and its impact on the tragic events of Thursday August 12.

'We will examine what police actions were taken and when, the rationale behind police decision-making, and whether relevant law, policy and procedures were followed concerning Mr Davison's possession of a shotgun.

'The investigation will also consider whether the force had any information concerning Mr Davison's mental health and if so, if this information was appropriately considered.

'It appears the force's response to reports of the shootings was very prompt and having reviewed information currently available, we are not intending to investigate the Devon and Cornwall Police response to the shootings.

'This will be kept under review as more information emerges. However, the investigation will explore whether there was any causal link between the arrival of police and Mr Davison apparently shooting himself.'

Mr Ford added: 'It has not yet been established whether the shotgun returned to Mr Davison was used in yesterday's shootings.'

In its investigation the IOPC will seek to get to the bottom of why officers returned the deadly weapon to Davison and what checks they did.



Was he a member of a shooting club which gave him the right to have one?

There are few reasons to justify having lethal weapons in the United Kingdom, with gun licencing laws being tough.

One of them a person can fairly apply using is if they are a sports shooter who goes to shooting ranges or hunts game or other animals.

The Telegraph reported this morning that this was Davison's justification for needing a shotgun. Prof Squires said the type of pump action shotgun the killer had on him is often used for sport shooting.

He said: 'There has been a sort of rock and roll shooting sport created which involved them. It's been a bit controversial.

'The law was always a bit of a loophole that a conventional pump action shotgun, which is basically a semi-automatic shotgun was restricted to two rounds.

Davison shot multiple people and then himself last night in the worst shooting atrocity in Britain for 11 years

'But these new practical shooting shotguns seem to be permissible to have fairly large magazines because they use them in combat simulation sports.

'It's a bit like an assault course shooting. They dive behind vehicles, shoot through windows, and jump over walls to hit small targets on a timed basis.

'It's a rifle licence, so not just a shotgun licence, but the upgraded rifle licence. To have one you're supposed to evidence it by being a member of a club and actually taking part in real competitions.

'That's your good reason and someone else has to say you're a genuine sport shooter.

'So someone has vetted him and said he's okay and there will be a question about whether he did any competition because that's really the only reason you're allowed one.'

If this is the reason Devon and Cornwall Police allowed Davison to keep a gun, more information is urgently needed on whether he used it for this purpose.

Were police aware of his social media rants before the killing spree?

Hours after the shooting, MailOnline uncovered a range of disturbing videos Davison had posted online.

They could be found on mainstream platforms such as YouTube and were not hidden from the public or taken down until after the tragedy on Thursday.

The footage shows a deeply troubled young man who appears ready to blow at any moment.

Calling himself 'Professor Waffle', he posted videos of himself working out and most recently ten-minute rants about life being 'rigged against you'.

He said humanity was on the 'brink of extinction' and that he was repulsive to the opposite sex.

He also shared clips from ultra-violent video games and just two days ago 'liked' videos of a M1 Garand semi-automatic rifle being shot.

In rambling and unsettling films made in the weeks before his rampage, he described an obsession with The Terminator and repeatedly mentions to 'incel' movement linked to mass shootings in the US

In his most recent online rant from his bedroom he said: 'You wake up and you stare at the wall and you're thinking um nothing's changed but I'm still in the same position, same period in life, still a f***ing this, that virgin f***ing fat ugly, what.'

He added: 'I like to think sometimes, you know, I'm a Terminator or something. And despite, despite, um, you know reaching almost total system failure he keeps trying to accomplish his mission.'

A fortnight ago, the 22-year-old also spoke of his affinity with the 'incel' movement, which has been linked to a number of mass shootings in the US.

Some followers believe they are owed sex by women. Davison says repeatedly in his videos he is repulsive to women, overweight and so is all his family.

He also talks about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'.

Davison also 'liked' a series of videos about guns, shared posts on Facebook quoting former Donald Trump and pictures of a statue holding a rifle with the US flag.

Devon and Cornwall Police have not said whether they were aware of the videos or not, but will face pressure to clarify.

How did the conversations between Davison and police go on previous occasions?

Thursday's shooting was not the first time Devon and Cornwall Police had been in contact with Davison. It emerged yesterday officers had taken his firearm off him in December following an alleged assault.

It is therefore likely they had seen first-hand what the twisted man was like as a person.

The IOPC during its probe will need to uncover the conversations police had with him and whether there was a missed opportunity to help him or grounds to lock him up.

Was he being monitored by police or spooks?

With the deranged killer's YouTube page being accessible, it would seem confusing if he was not being watched by police or the security services.

A former top prosecutor said today the gunman should have been on a watchlist before the shooting spree.

Nazir Afzal, who was previously chief crown prosecutor for the North West said Davison was 'exactly the type of person the authorities should be keeping an eye on'.

When asked on BBC Breakfast on Saturday if Davison should have been on a watchlist, Mr Afzal said: 'Yes, absolutely, particularly given that he had a firearms licence and given that we now learn in December it was taken off him temporarily because of allegations he was facing and returned to him.

'He was exactly the kind of person that you would be keeping an eye on or the authorities should be keeping an eye on.'

Mr Afzal said none of Davison's social media posts seemed to have been taken into account when restoring his gun licence.

When asked on BBC Breakfast if a year seemed like a short period of time for the licence to be revoked, he said: '100 per cent I agree with you.

'It's not just about the fact that the gun was returned to him, his licence was restored.

Mr Afzal said none of Davison's social media posts seemed to have been taken into account when restoring his gun licence

'In the interim there were all these social media posts talking about the violence he believed in or felt was necessary, how he felt about women.

'None of that seems to have been taken into account.' He added: 'If they [the police] were aware (of his social media posts) then they have got even more questions to be asked.'

Mr Afzal said that Davison's social media posts painted a picture of a man who thought women were 'lesser beings'.

He added: 'We have now seen posts on various social media sites which paint a picture of somebody that has a very low opinion or had a very low opinion of women, who seemed to have a belief he was entitled to do whatever he wanted to, a real expectation that women were some kind of lesser being.

'That kind of extreme misogyny of the type we have seen here and in terms of the incel community is a threat to all women and, ultimately, to all our communities.'

Police and the security services need to reveal whether they were monitoring him and messed up, or if he completely avoided their gaze.

Will police look to clamp down on gun licences in the county?

The Tragedy of Britain's first mass shooting in 11 years has inevitably reignited questions over whether gun laws are tough enough.

Rolled out to the press to answer questions on the matter, Nick Kelly, leader of Plymouth City Council, said the investigation could show there are wider issues about scrutinising people who are given firearms.

Councillor Kelly told BBC Breakfast on Saturday: 'My personal view is let's see what the investigation unearths, let's try to piece together exactly why the licence was suspended, taken away in the first place, and why it was deemed appropriate to give back.

'It could be a wider issue nationally with regards to greater scrutiny of people who are given firearms because the last thing we want as a nation, or indeed as a city, is for anybody else to endure and go through the horrific actions and the loss of five innocent lives and two people who have got serious injuries in hospital.

'My own view with regards to guns is I think why do you need a gun in the first place?

'If there's a very legitimate reason, well I would not want to take guns away from everybody, but I think gun crime in Plymouth is unheard of - perhaps nationally there's more of an issue.

'We just need to review it, look at the facts in this specific case and hopefully if tighter legislation is required that will be forthcoming.'

Yet many use guns for completely legitimate reasons, such as farmers for pest control - with rural Devon full of landowners unlikely to want to give up theirs.

Devon and Cornwall Police will surely look closer at their gun licencing practice after this, but it is not yet clear what action it will take.

Obsessions of a maniac who called himself the Terminator: Plymouth gunman posted videos on YouTube of himself pumping iron and ranting about his life before going on murder spree

Staring intensely into the camera, Jake Davison signed off his final video on YouTube with the chilling words: 'I am a Terminator.'

Within weeks, the 22-year-old virgin would enact his bloody fantasies with appalling consequences.

In a 12-minute rampage, the gunman murdered his own mother and four strangers, including a three-year-old girl.

The gun massacre – the worst in a decade in the UK – left Plymouth residents questioning how a loner with seemingly serious mental health problems was allowed to have a firearms licence.

Shockingly, it emerged yesterday that the behaviour of the apprentice crane operator had been of concern for some time to those close to him, including his mother Maxine and father Mark – who had reportedly begged the NHS for help and even allegedly contacted the police saying he should not be allowed to keep a gun.

Within hours of the shootings, disturbing videos emerged online in which the 17-stone weightlifter moaned about being 'defeated in life' and talked about the violent sci-fi films starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.

He said: 'The whole premise of the Terminator movies is that you know everything is rigged against you, there's no hope for humanity, you know, we're on the brink of extinction.

'These machines are unstoppable killing machines that can't be beaten, can't be outsmarted, but yet humanity still tries to fight to the end.

'I know it's a movie but, you know, I like to think sometimes I'm a Terminator or something and despite reaching almost total system failure, he keeps trying to accomplish his mission.'

Recording his final video on July 28, Davison said: 'I'm beaten down and defeated by f****** life. That drive I once had, that's gone.'

The loner had described himself as an 'incel' – a reference to the 'involuntary celibate' movement, a radical group of misogynistic young males who spend their lives ranting online about women and are of growing concern to police.

Recording videos in a small bedroom he likened to a 'prison cell', Davison spent his days agonising over why he had never had a girlfriend or even been kissed.

Obsessed with sex, he fired off scores of messages to incel groups asking why he was constantly rejected on dating sites and bemoaning his lack of experience of love as a teenager.

Incels and 'black pill' links to Plymouth gunman: Misogynist movement who believe they are 'owed sex' and have been behind several mass shootings in the US including 2020 machete attack classed as terrorism An incel, which is an abbreviation of an involuntary celibate, refers to a group of men who advocated for violence against women because they believe they are unjustly denied sexual or romantic attention. Essentially, they blame women for refusing to have sex with them and believe in responding with rape and violence. Those who identify as an incel interact with each other on online forums where they discuss their hatred of women, hatred of feminism, how to get away with rape, and specific women to target. In 2014, self-proclaimed Incel Elliot Rodger (pictured) declared a 'War on Women' and went on a killing spree near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Since then, Incels have been linked to a number of violent attacks, and are increasingly described as a terrorism threat. In February 2020, a machete attack in a Toronto massage parlor became the first incident of alleged Incel violence to be prosecuted as an act of terrorism. Jake Davison talked about being a 'black pill-er' - a group who believe they are unworthy of love and attempts to form lasting relationships with women are 'destined to end in failure'. Dr Joseph Downing, a fellow in nationalism at LSE who studies security and terrorism, told MailOnline: 'The incel attacks and jihadi attacks share many commonality. In all cases it's the chicken and egg problem. 'Is it somebody who acts like this because of their predisposition to violence who found the incel movement, or is it the incel movement that gave that individual the idea to go and commit violence? 'Many think it's about extremist propaganda and the ability to access it and be radicalised, but I'm on the side of that it doesn't really matter. 'These people go and seek extremist ideologies because they're predisposed to do that kind of thing. So whether it's Andre Breivik or jihadis or the incel movement it doesn't matter. 'The incel movement is pretty nuts. When you go down the rabbit hole they say stuff like women are forcing me to be celibate and should cater it upon themselves as their feminine duties to give sexual favours to men. 'But it doesn't really say much about acts of violence. It's not really an ideology that goes as far as say radical Islam. 'They're more of an abstract nihilistic, misogynistic kind of group. So there is a commonality with other forms of extremist violence. 'It's more the person is predisposed to to that kind of behaviour and they go and seek out some kind of extremist ideology. 'The individual is just not interested in the other information out there, they want to find the radical ideology.' He added: 'I don't think people like him will encourage similar acts of violence - in this case we lose the fact that what he's done is really mysterious. 'The majority of people you could just never sway to do that kind of thing. But there may well be other individuals who will go out and commit acts of violence and say it's inspired by him, for example. 'Some may say yes I was inspired by him and incel and stuff like that, but I don't think people are swayed, some just have that psychopathic tendency to extreme violence or they don't.' Advertisement

Revealing he had not spoken to a girl since he was 17, Davison considered himself a virgin loser with nothing to live for.

He wrote of his loneliness and despair, saying he had been 'forgotten about'.

'I used to be OK with being a virgin too, but when you get older and the inferiority complex kicks in and the feeling of despair and missing out occurs,' he said.

'Try being an unemployed, autistic, poor, sexually frustrated male with tons of health issues, no social circle and being stuck in government housing with my mother for years on end, having missed out on so much in life.

'Not being able to do the hobbies and things I enjoy as I don't have a car, I am socially isolated and a black sheep who barely interacts with anyone other than a few people at work.

'It's not just sex and teen romance I feel I missed out on, I feel I missed out on the entire teenage experience. Since leaving school I don't have any friends.'

Born in Plymouth, he was raised with his older brother and sister by their single mother Maxine, with whom he had a difficult relationship, writing online: 'Feel my mother has played a role in [me] being a male virgin.'

Diagnosed with autism as a child, Davison was sent to Mount Tamar special school in Plymouth, where he was said to have been a 'disruptive' influence on his peers.

Jess Wallace recalled: 'My boyfriend went to school with him and said he was pretty shy and quiet and would talk about how cool Americans are, and the idea of having a gun collection.'

Another woman related to a former classmate said: 'He was well-known for his anger issues.'

After leaving school, Davison described feeling positive as he embarked on a career working in construction scaffolding before an ankle injury sent him spiralling into depression. He admitted online that his 'mental, physical and emotional health' had been deteriorating for two years.

He wrote of his frustration at being unable to get a doctor's appointment and revealed he tried a cocktail of supplements and steroids and even considered drugs like cocaine.

Consumed by self-loathing, the recluse posted regular questions such as 'Should being ugly be considered a disability?' and recorded scores of videos and selfies discussing his weight issues and fear of being too fat to get a girlfriend.

Lonely and bored, he described himself as a 'computer addict with nothing else to do for many years'.

He wrote: 'When you have been a recluse for as long as I have, you search up and go on pretty much every subject on the internet. I can't think of a subject I haven't dabbled in on the internet – technology, politics, space, exploration, astronomy, LGBT transgender movies, comics, video games, military, special forces guns, weapons, tanks, jets, nuclear power, futurism, transhumanism, drugs, biology, history.'

In a desperate search for like-minded individuals, he signed up for IncelTV on YouTube.

Spurred on by others in the community, Davison said he had 'overdosed' on 'black pill' – an incel philosophy centred on the belief that success with the opposite sex is determined by genetics.

He wrote: 'Inferiority complex of being a virgin for almost 23 years and the panic of getting older is crippling.' Incel culture has been associated with killings and acts of violence, particularly in the US, where Davison had fantasised about living.

Elliot Rodger became a spiritual figurehead of the incel movement when he murdered six people in Isla Vista, California, in 2014 aged 22 – the same age as Davison.

Before his rampage, Rodger had posted a video on YouTube saying he wanted to take revenge on women for rejecting him.

Within hours of Davison's killings, other incel internet users had built what was described as an online 'shrine' to him yesterday.

Shortly before the attacks, Davison called for a 'Government-funded incel social programme or rehab centre' to get them to do group activities 'to build confidence and self-esteem and getting them out of their depressed mindset'.

Among his ideas were group therapy, activities such as rock climbing and 'taking away computers, phones, internet to detox from social media and the internet'.

But trapped in his bedroom during lockdown, Davison's despair only grew.

Yesterday it emerged that he had liked nearly 800 videos on YouTube pointing to an obsession with US gun culture, violent video games and weightlifting.

He boasted to followers that he held a shotgun licence, writing: 'It would be good if there were more [shooting] ranges and clubs too.

'I have a section SGC (shotgun certificate) but would properly have a FAC (firearms certificate) as well if there were more ranges... as soon as I get a car, which should not take too long, I will apply for my FAC.'

Within recent weeks, Davison's thoughts had turned to death and knives. He wrote online: 'Machetes are awful weapons... most are cheaply made and lack the cutting power to do any real damage like actual swords do.

'If you actually look at machete attacks, videos and news reports, more often than not they only manage to cut and lacerate skin.

'They rarely have the weight and sharpness to cut through bone and skull. They are good for cutting through bush, not cutting limbs and heads... best sword for zombie would be a two-handed great sword which would cut limbs clean off and penetrate skull easily.'

In another post on 'mass shootings' he referred to the Texas clock tower shooting in America in 1966 and the Hungerford massacre in Berkshire in 1987.

Davison wrote: 'There are a lot more guns in Europe and the UK than people think.'

Yesterday, neighbours revealed the Davison family's desperate pleas for help.

Donna Croft said: 'His poor mum has only just got cleared of cancer. His sister was a harmless soul, she was in the same class as my son.

'The dad even begged the mental health team to assess him but they basically said they couldn't be bothered and said they were too short of staff to come out.

'So not have only the mental services on this country let these poor families down, they could [have] prevented this to happen.

'People like that need 24/7 help. How he got a gun to kill these people is crazy.'

His Facebook profile and logo'd T-shirts suggests he started working at defence and engineering company Babcock International earlier this year. The company declined to comment.

Six minutes of utter carnage: How the Plymouth gunman's sickening rampage unfolded and left five innocent people dead

The rampage lasted for just six minutes – 12 until the gunman's body was found - but it left five innocent people and their killer dead and the whole nation in shock.

Jake Davison's shooting spree in a quiet suburb of Plymouth on a summer's evening is Britain's worst for more than a decade.

The first warning residents had in the cul-de-sac of Biddick Drive was when Davison, 22, burst into the house he shared with his mother and began shouting on Thursday evening.

However, the heated argument quickly became murderous.

His killing spree began shortly before 6.11pm, when terrified neighbours made a flurry of 999 calls to Devon and Cornwall Police's control room.

They told operators they could hear gunfire and there was a man with a pump-action shotgun killing people at random.

One witness, Sharron Turner, 57, who lives nearby, said Davison kicked in the door of a property – now known to be his own home – where he turned the gun on his 51-year-old mother, Maxine, who had cancer.

'Firstly, there was shouting, followed by gunshots – three, possibly four to begin with,' she said. 'This was when the shooter kicked in the door of a house and randomly started shooting. He ran from the house shooting as he ran.'

Some in his line of fire had lucky escapes.

On his way out, still clutching the weapon, Davison, who was dressed in black and grey, told a stunned passer-by: 'Nothing to worry about, mate.'

But an instant later he gunned down a girl of three, Sophie Martyn, who was pushing a toy pram up the street accompanied by her adoptive father Lee, 43.

Mr Martyn was shot in the back when he tried to protect his daughter.

The pair – who had tried to run away – were then shot at least twice more at close range, killing them instantly.

Davison is said to have 'hovered' over their bodies for a moment after slaughtering them before carrying on down the road.

One retired resident who lives opposite and watched the murders from his kitchen window, said he 'couldn't believe what I was seeing'.

The shocked local added: 'We were sat in our kitchen when we heard shots in the street, so we looked outside.

'A man was running with his little girl who was pushing a toy pram as she ran. There was no noise or screaming, they were just running.

'This bloke with the gun stopped about 15ft from them, raised his gun to his shoulder, and shot the man in the back.

'He fell on to his daughter, protecting her even though he may have been dying.'

Speaking of Davison, the witness added: 'He walked up and stood over them and fired from inches away to finish them off.

'It looked like first he shot the man in the head, then through the body, and I think that shot went through and killed the child.

'This is on the pavement across the road from my house. You don't witness a murder, two people killed right in front of you, every day. He was just shooting indiscriminately.'

By now armed police were on their way. But Davison, a crane driver whom relatives claimed had mental health problems but was unable to get help in lockdown, had not finished.

Still on Biddick Drive, he aimed and shot at two locals, named by family members as Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother, Michelle, 53, who had gone out to help the earlier victims. Both received 'significant' injuries but survived.

Ben's brother, Jordan, confirmed his brother and mother had been caught up in the carnage.

In a message posted on social media later, he said: 'Just a little update... Ben is now home and going to make a full recovery.

'My mum has to have an operation on her arm and is expected to make a full recovery.'

Peggy Holliday, an intern at the National Marine Aquarium in Plymouth, was walking to a shop when she heard screaming. There were also gunshots, which she thought initially were fireworks.

She said: 'A couple of the gunshots went off and I ran opposite a pub and the owner came out and he shouted at me, 'Get in here, get in here now!'

'I forward-rolled into the pub and I literally clung underneath one of the pool tables for dear life and I froze.

'I said, 'There's shooting, it's violent, it's terrifying'. It literally felt like a living nightmare. It felt like I was being hunted.'

Davison, who held a licence for the shotgun, entered a nearby strip of open land known to locals in the Keyham area of Plymouth as the 'dog park', where he shot Stephen Washington, 59, who was walking his two husky dogs. He died at the scene.

His friend Caitlin Greyling, 19, added: 'Paramedics were working on the woman. I could see them moving up and down as they did compressions on her chest.

'After a while they stopped and I thought maybe she has been saved, but she hadn't.' Police later confirmed Mrs Shepherd had died at Plymouth's Derriford Hospital.

Davison then doubled back to garages at the back of the hairdressers, where he put the gun to his own head and killed himself.

Another witness said: 'He just looked around, turned the gun on himself and fired it. I couldn't believe what I was seeing. It was like a horror movie.'

By then, police including armed officers from the nearby naval base had arrived in Biddick Drive, where they discovered a scene of carnage.

They quickly traced Davison's steps and found his body. He was pronounced dead at 6.23pm.

Survivor Bert Pinkerton told the BBC he had walked past the gunman, who had a 'vacant stare', adding: 'The bloke was walking towards me. I could smell the gunfire. It could have been me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rumer Willis celebrated her 33rd birthday on Monday by sharing a treasure trove of throwback snaps, including some capturing her parents Demi Moore and Bruce Willis as young parents.

In a slideshow posted to her Instagram account, a mustachioed Bruce tenderly cradled his newborn daughter in his arms.

'How it started….8.16.88,' Rumer captioned the slideshow, indicating the date she was born.

Happy birthday! Rumer Willis celebrated her 33rd birthday on Monday by sharing a treasure trove of throwback snaps, including some capturing her parents Demi Moore and Bruce Willis

The slideshow started off with a snap of Demi as a young mother, holding her newborn daughter while flashing a silly expression towards the camera.

A slew of other childhood photos followed, including one of baby Rumer sitting next to her father on the couch as he folded his arms across his chest.

There is also a sweet shot of Rumer as a young girl pampering herself with a facial and hair curlers.

In one snap, a young Rumer snuggled up to a baby conehead.

Mommy and me! The images included a sweet shot of Demi Moore holding her infant daughter

Daddy's little girl: The Die Hard actor sat beside his daughter on the couch with his arms folded across his chest

Just the girls! The actress and her daughter beamed with joy

On Sunday, she gave fans a look at her 'last day of 32' with a drop of new photos.

Rumer appears to be celebrating her birthday in Idaho with her family, and enjoyed a night singing karaoke with her sisters and mother Demi in their forested backyard the day before turning 33.

Demi married Bruce in 1987 after they meet at the premiere for the film Stakeout, which starred Demi's then-fiancé Emilio Estevezand.

Aww! Willis snuggled up to a baby conehead

Treating herself! There is also a shot of Rumer as a young girl pampering herself with a facial and hair curlers

Birthday fun: 'How it started….8.16.88,' Rumer captioned the slideshow, indicating the date she was born

The Die Hard star and Moore welcomed three daughters: Rumer in 1988, Scout in 1991, and Tallulah in 1994.

The pair have managed to stay close after ending their marriage in 2000.

The Ghost star was previously married to singer Freddy Moore from 1981 to 1985.

She also married actor Ashton Kutcher in 2005 before splitting in 2011. Their divorce was finalised in 2013.

The Two And A Half Men star filed for divorce in December 2012, a year after the couple first parted ways.

Fun in the sun! Willis appears to be celebrating her 33rd birthday in Idaho

Celebrate! On Sunday, she gave fans a look at her 'last day of 32' with a drop of new photos

Simply stunning: She shared this breathtaking selfie as she marked her last day at 32
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for showing off her well-put-together clothing ensembles on her social media outlets.

And on Sunday, Nicole Scherzinger put on an eye-catching display in a flowing paisley-printed dress while arriving at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood.

The Pussycat Dolls member, 43, was seen flashing a wide smile as exited a private vehicle and made her way towards the star-studded function.

Dressed to impress: Nicole Scherzinger put on an eye-catching display while wearing a vibrantly colored outlet while arriving at the Jennifer Klein Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood on Sunday

Scherzinger sported a vibrantly colored and sleeved dress that featured lovely paisley and floral patterns to the event.

Her beautiful dark brunette locks added an element of darkness to her otherwise vibrant ensemble.

The entertainer also sported a light pair of platform shoes and a near-matching wide-brimmed hat to the function.

She accessorized with numerous articles of jewelry, including a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses.

Accessorizing well: The Pussycat Dolls member sported numerous articles of jewelry that added a bit of shine to her clothing ensemble

Dressed for the weather: The performer also wore a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses and a wide-brimmed hat

Scherzinger kept a small crossbody leather purse slung over her left shoulder for the duration of her time in public.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back

Striking: Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

The performer is currently awaiting the start of production on the upcoming television special, Annie Live!

Development on the project was initially announced this past May when it was made known that Alex Rudzinski and Lear deBessonet would be co-directing the musical.

The production is based on the Broadway show of the same name, which in turn is based on Harold Gray's comic strip, Little Orphan Annie.

Future project: Scherzinger is currently set to appear in the forthcoming musical special, Annie Live!; she is seen in February

Tony Award-winning choreographer Sergio Trujillo will plan out the event's dance scenes.

Taraji P. Henson is currently set to play the villainous Miss Hannigan, and her casting was announced in June.

That same month, Harry Connick, Jr. signed on to portray Daddy Warbucks in the forthcoming special.

Scherzinger's casting was announced earlier this month, and she gave a statement to Deadline to express her excitement for being involved with the project.

Impressive cast: Taraji P. Henson and Harry Connick Jr were also added to the forthcoming feature's list of performers; the former is seen in 2020

'Musical theater has always made my heart soar, so I'm over the moon to join this amazing cast for such a great classic,' she said.

Titus Burgess was recently added to the cast, and he will play Rooster Hannigan.

The actress who will fill the role of the show's titular character has not been announced as of yet.

Annie Live! is currently set to have its official premiere on NBC on December 2nd.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was dumped from Love Island after 19 days in the villa.

And Abigail Rawlings looked sizzling in her first public appearance since being voted off of the dating show last week.

The tattoo artist, 27, put on a busty display in a navy blue bandage dress as she featured on Aftersun on Sunday.

First outing: Abigail Rawlings, 27, looked sizzling in her first public appearance since being voted off of the dating show last week

The brunette beauty modelled the mini dress, which featured a cross-over top and a cheeky peep-front neckline which showed off her ample assets.

Abigail styled her luscious locks in her signature beachy waves and looked glamorous as she opted for a full-face of makeup.

The former Islander strutted her stuff as she stepped onto the stage in black patent peep-toe heels as she prepared to speak to the show's host, Laura Whitmore.

Busty display: The brunette beauty modelled the mini dress, which featured a cross-over top and a cheeky peep-front neckline which showed off her ample assets

Abigail was booted off Love Island alongside Dale Mehmet last Monday night after their fellow contestants voted for them to leave out of a group of three boys and three girls.

The reality star admitted she felt it was her 'time to go', after beginning to feel like a spare part in the villa after failing to find love on the popular show.

The tense episode saw host Laura interrupting the Island Vibes Club party to reveal that following a public vote, Tyler, Dale, Jake, Abigail, Mary and Kaz received the fewest votes and were therefore at risk of being dumped.

Stunning: Abigail styled her luscious locks in her signature beachy waves and looked glamorous as she opted for a full-face of makeup

Booted off: Abigail was booted off Love Island alongside Dale Mehmet (pictured right) last Monday

'Time to go': The reality star admitted she felt it was her 'time to go' when she was dumped from the villa

One girl and one boy were set to go, and who left was decided by their fellow islanders, who chose to save Tyler, Jake, Mary and Kaz.

After the news, Abi said: 'I feel like it was my time to go, I got to the point where I felt like a loose part', following a failed romance with Toby.

Meanwhile, Dale added: 'I've had one of the best summers of my life. I came in here done what I said I was gonna do and enjoyed myself.'

Dumped: After the dumping, Abi said, 'I feel like it was my time to go, I got to the point where I felt like a loose part', following a failed romance with Toby (pictured on Aftersun on Sunday)

Heading off? Host Laura Whitmore showcased her toned legs in a mini dress and heels as she rolled her suitcase across the Aftersun set

Exciting! The star shared a sneak peak at Monday's episode after revealing the clip using towels - just like how Tyler asked Kaz to go exclusive with him last week

'We've been through thick and then and I don't think I'd want to be leaving with anyone else.'

Dale's last romantic connection was with Mary Bedford, however following his exit she admitted to newcomer Aaron Simpson that 'something was missing'.

Abi was coupled up with Toby, who left her for Mary at Casa Amor, before deciding his heart actually belonged to Chloe Burrows - who he dumped weeks prior.

After being ditched by Toby, Abi made her attraction to Dale known, however he decided he wanted to put all of his energy into Mary.

Couple goals: Former Islanders Siannise Fudge and Luke Trotman also appeared on the show

Work it: Siannise looked sensational in a cut-out cream dress and clear heels

Fashion: Arielle Free rocked a multi-coloured mini skirt and crop top (left) while Will Njobvu (right) sported an animal-print shirt and denim jacket
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Reynolds' thrice-delayed comedy Free Guy topped the box office this weekend with an impressive $28.4M opening domestically and $22.5M overseas.

On Saturday, the 44-year-old action star celebrated Disney officially confirming it wants a sequel.

'And after three years of messaging #FreeGuy as an original IP movie, Disney confirmed [Saturday] it officially wants the sequel,' Ryan - who boasts 79.2M social media followers - Instastoried.

$50.9M total! Ryan Reynolds' thrice-delayed comedy Free Guy topped the box office this weekend with an impressive $28.4M opening domestically and $22.5M overseas

'If it isn't called Albuquerque Boiled Turkey" we've failed.'

In Shawn Levy's PG-13 video game-set flick, Reynolds plays a bank teller/NPC Guy opposite Jodie Comer's Millie Rusk/Molotov Girl.

Free Guy received a 'certified fresh' 82% critic approval rating (out of 198 reviews) and 95% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes.

'It's been a labour of love for *checks notes* a very strange three years,' the Grammy nominee gushed last Tuesday.

Blockbuster: On Saturday, the 44-year-old action star celebrated Disney officially confirming it wants a sequel

Ryan Instastoried: 'And after three years of messaging #FreeGuy as an original IP movie, Disney confirmed [Saturday] it officially wants the sequel. If it isn't called Albuquerque Boiled Turkey" we've failed'

Buddy movie: In Shawn Levy's PG-13 video game-set flick, Reynolds plays a bank teller/NPC Guy opposite Jodie Comer's Millie Rusk/Molotov Girl

'I had so much fun making this film!' Free Guy received a 'certified fresh' 82% critic approval rating (out of 198 reviews) and 95% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes

'I'm so glad #FreeGuy will finally bring its unique brand of feel-good mayhem to the big screen. I had so much fun making this film and I hope you feel the same watching it.'

Free Guy also features Lil Rel Howery, Joe Keery, Taika Waititi, Hugh Jackman, Dwayne Johnson, Tina Fey, John Krasinski, and the late Alex Trebek.

In second place was producer Rodo Sayagues' directorial debut Don't Breathe 2 with $10.6M despite dismal reviews - according to THR.

The home-invasion horror sequel stars Stephen Lang, Brendan Sexton III, and Madelyn Grace.

Home-invasion horror sequel: In second place was producer Rodo Sayagues' directorial debut Don't Breathe 2 with $10.6M despite dismal reviews

Queen of Soul biopic: Liesl Tommy's feature directorial debut Respect, starring Oscar winner Jennifer Hudson as Aretha Franklin, landed in third place for its opening weekend with $8.8M

Liesl Tommy's feature directorial debut Respect, starring Oscar winner Jennifer Hudson as Aretha Franklin, landed in third place for its opening weekend with $8.8M.

The musical biopic on the Queen of Soul received mixed reviews and THR reported that 45% of the audience was African-American with the majority being older females.

Jaume Collet-Serra's Jungle Cruise, starring Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson and Emily Blunt, came in fourth despite mixed reviews.

Only earned $138.6M of its $200M budget back: Jaume Collet-Serra's Jungle Cruise, starring Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson and Emily Blunt, came in fourth despite mixed reviews

Earned $7.8M: James Gunn's The Suicide Squad dropped to fifth place despite being the best reviewed of the films with a 91% critic approval rating (out of 305 reviews) on Rotten Tomatoes

However, the Disney theme park-inspired movie has only earned $138.6M of its $200M budget back in its third week in theaters and Disney+.

James Gunn's The Suicide Squad dropped to fifth place despite being the best reviewed of the films with a 91% critic approval rating (out of 305 reviews) on Rotten Tomatoes.

The star-studded $185M-budget antihero flick, featuring Margot Robbie and Idris Elba, only earned $7.8M bringing the total box office to $87.6M.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Heavy rain has given way to a mini heatwave starting today as temperatures reach 78F (26C) after parts of the UK were battered by more than a month of showers in the first ten days of the month.

The Met Office said 46mm of rain has so far fallen in Greater London, which usually sees 53mm in the whole of August, while West Sussex has seen 98 per cent of its average rainfall for the month.

Meanwhile, Britons took to the beach today as the mercury soared to make the most of the first glimpse of summer in two weeks.

Sunseekers could be seen frolicking in the sea along Britain's coastline today - with the southeast enjoying the warmest temperatures in the country.

Simon Partridge, a Met Office forecaster, told MailOnline temperatures reached 77F (25C) today but rain is set to continue later in the week - especially in the northwest.

It comes after parts of Surrey and areas in the south east dealt with up to 85 per cent of their total rainfall for August in just over a week.

The average rainfall for the country in August is 89mm, but so far almost 40 per cent of that total has fallen. It is 10 per cent more than expected, the Met Office said.

This man was relaxing on the grass in Battersea Park in London during a break in the bad weather which has hit the capital

Some parts of the South East of England have seen more than 85 per cent of their expected rainfall for August over the past week

Simon Partridge, a Met Office forecaster, told MailOnline temperatures reached 77F (25C) today but rain is set to continue later in the week - especially in the northwest

The Met Office said 46mm of rain has so far fallen in Greater London, which usually sees 53mm in the whole of August, while West Sussex has seen 98 per cent of its average rainfall for the month. Pictured, sunseekers in Bournemouth, Dorset

Meanwhile, Britons took to the beach today as the mercury soared to make the most of the first glimpse of summer in two weeks. Pictured, a runner in Hyde Park, London, today

Other areas - including parts of west Scotland and eastern areas in England - have been drier than usual.

Grahame Madge, a Met Office spokesman, said: 'August has essentially been a case of mixed fortune with some areas seeing drier weather than usual, while others have virtually had a whole month of rainfall in just 10 days.

'We're not expecting to see record-breaking weather, as there have certainly been wetter Augusts in the past but many areas have faced a very wet and intense period of rain.

'We are putting this down to an area of low pressure which is moving slowly across the country bringing the damp conditions many have seen.'

Other areas - including parts of west Scotland and eastern areas in England - have been drier than usual

Mr Madge said that over the next few days the weather is expected to be 'more settled' compared to last week.

Many areas in England and Wales will see clearer and sunnier spells with the temperature likely to hit the low-20s.

Mr Madge added: 'Do not expect to see heatwave conditions, but dry, sunny spells for many. However, there may be a few outbreaks of rain in Northern Ireland and Scotland as the week progresses.'

A Met Office forecast for today cited 'sunny spells for most areas', while showers fell 'mainly in the east' and eastern Scotland battled 'heavy, thundery downpours'. It added that today saw 'light winds' but was 'feeling warmer'.

It comes as Ladbrokes slashed odds from 5/4 to just 4/6 on the season entering the record books as wettest ever.

Alex Apati of the bookmakers said: 'It's looking increasingly likely this summer will enter the record books for all the wrong reasons with even more rain ready to batter Britain.'

Mr Partridge said the next week would be 'a bit drier and sunnier' but uncertainty would continue.

He added: 'Next week does look a bit drier for the whole of the UK. We've had an awful lot of rain and thunder storms and there is more rain to come through the weekend. It's changeable with further spells of rain and showers at times. It's as warm now as we're likely to see.'

People expecting a heatwave may be disappointed as the unsettled weather is expected to continue to the weekend

The Forth Bridge is reflected in North Queensferry Harbour, Fife, on Tuesday as the weather took a turn for the better

Beachgoers are pictured sunning themselves on a patch of sand in Newquay, Cornwall, today

A middle-aged man donned a straw hat to protect his sun from the harsh UV rays on a beach in Weymouth, Dorset

Sunbathers topping up their tans on the busy beach at the seaside resort of Weymouth in Dorset on a day of sunshine

He said the mercury was set to drop again this weekend while signs pointed to a 'drier and brighter' week in seven days' time.

He added: 'At the moment I can't say there'll be a heatwave but on the balance things are drier and brighter and a little bit warmer.

'Down in east and southeast we're likely to see 23C and 24C. That's today and tomorrow. Into the end of the week it's low 20s but not quite as warm. It could get to 23C. It won't be massively different but it won't be quite as warm as now.

'The northwest will face rain. Northern Ireland and northwest England will feel it particularly tomorrow and again on Thursday. It could still see as much as 20 mm of rain over a few hours, but that's usual for the area.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Alfred Molina has tied the knot with Oscar-winning Frozen director Jennifer Lee.

The stunning bride, 49, posted a gallery of photos from the sunlit garden ceremony to Instagram on Monday with the sweet caption: 'We did. We do.'

In one snap, The Spider-Man actor, 68, was seen overcome with emotion and holding his hands to his face as he watched his bride walk down the aisle.

The nuptials come a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020.

Alfred and Jill wed in 1986 and remained legally married until her death last year, however he confirmed that he was in a relationship with Jennifer in November 2018. It is not known exactly when Alfred and Jill separated.

Special moment: Alfred Molina, 68, shed tears of joy as he married Frozen director Jennifer Lee, 49, at a ceremony officiated by Jonathan Groff (all pictured)... 16 months after his wife Jill Gascoine died of Alzheimer's aged 83

Overcome with emotion: Alfred was seen weeping as he tied the knot with Jennifer, with the bride sharing several snaps from their nuptials to Instagram on Monday

Pictures from Alfred and Jennifer's wedding showed the couple embracing while backed by greenery and beautiful rose bushes.

Jennifer, who is the Chief Creative Officer at Walt Disney Animation Studios, looked sensational in a tulle dress with an A-line skirt and sequins dotted throughout.

Her groom donned a grey suit, light pink shirt and sunglasses with a white rose placed in the lapel of his smart ensemble.

Also present at the ceremony as officiator was actor Jonathan Groff, 36, who famously voiced Kristoff in the Frozen films.

First marriage: The nuptials come a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020 (pictured together in 1994)

In a subsequent post from Jennifer, she shared further details of how Jonathan was involved in her nuptials to Alfred.

Captioning a photo of herself and Jonathan talking at the reception, she wrote: 'This beautiful, generous soul is the reason Fred and I met. We owe him the world.'

Jennifer and Jonathan worked on Frozen together and he also worked with Alfred on a 2012 production of John Logan's play Red.

Both Alfred and Jonathan starred in 2019's animated Frozen II — with Alfred as the voice of Agnarr, Elsa and Anna's father, and Jonathan reprising his role of Kristoff.

The newlyweds have been dating for more than two years, with Jennifer sharing several snaps of them together to Instagram over the years.

In 2019 Jennifer spoke about their private romance, telling the New York Times: 'I just feel very lucky because I'm, you know, 48 years old and I'm very happy in my family life and he's very caring and very good to my daughter. And so I feel lucky.'

'This beautiful, generous soul is the reason Fred and I met': In another post, Jennifer shared further details of how Jonathan, 36, was involved in her nuptials to Alfred

Romantic: Alfred, 68, and Jennifer, 49, were seen embracing in two snaps, backed by greenery and beautiful rose bushes

Jill was first married to Dundee hotelier Bill Keith - tying the knot in 1965 and divorcing in 1972 - during which time they had two sons Adam and Sean, but they did not stay in contact with Bill after the divorce and Jill raised them as a single mother.

A decade later Jill met Alfred when they were both working in the same theatre production. They then married in Tower Hamlets, London, in 1986 when she was 49 and he was 33. He had a daughter, Rachel, now 41, from a previous relationship.

The actress rose to fame as Detective Inspector Maggie Forbes in The Gentle Touch and appeared in the spin-off series, C.A.T.S Eyes, before building a career in America.

Gushing: In 2019 Jennifer spoke about their private romance, saying she 'feels very lucky' in her family life (pictured together in December 2018)

One to watch: Jennifer and Jonathan worked on the animated film Frozen together (pictured: an image from the film)

In 2010, Jill was forced to drop out of what was considered a major comeback role in EastEnders playing role the of Glenda Mitchell. At the time, Jill said she felt she 'lacked the right experience to film such a big continuing drama'.

While Jill lived until 2020, four years prior in 2016, Alfred shared that Jill was already in the 'final stages' of the debilitating disease.

He told The Radio Times: 'Alzheimer's is a cowardly disease. It creeps up on you from behind and by the time you realise you've got it you're probably not realising much else. It's a stinker'.

Friends had previously revealed how Jill started noticing problems with her memory in 2010. She was diagnosed in 2012 after her memory loss became more significant.

In August that year she appeared as a dying mother on stage in LA in a two-week run of the drama Anxiety, with proceeds going to the Alzheimer's Association.

It was a play written for her without any lines to remember.

Jennifer, meanwhile, was previously married to Robert Joseph Monn, with whom she shares daughter Agatha. Agatha, 18, was the voice of nine-year-old Anna in the first Frozen film, from 2013.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She gave birth to her first child, Brody, back in May.

And Georgia Kousoulou admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her post baby body, and that her first thought when jetting off on holiday was that her 'body isn't the same.'

The TOWIE star, 29, hoped to inspire her 1.4 million followers by normalising 'stretch marks and belly rolls' as she donned a yellow swimsuit and took the selfie in the mirror.

Postpartum: Georgia Kousoulou, 29, admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her body after giving birth

Self conscious: The TOWIE star penned a heartfelt message in an attempt to inspire her followers to 'normalise stretch marks and belly rolls'

She was glowing in the snap, as she posed with her leg extended and her hand on her hip.

Her blonde locks were swept back into a bun on top of her head, revealing her radiant visage.

Penning the heartfelt message, she said: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same, I can’t wear my usual high leg swimsuits because I can see my stretch marks on both sides' [sic]

Normal: In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, as she penned: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same'

She caught herself thinking these things and decided to don the costume anyway, writing: 'than I re looked at myself & looked down at my happy baby boy & thought WHY not? There just an extra accessory I have to bling up my swimsuits …' [sic]

Continuing on: 'Sometimes we just need to remind ourselves we are superwomen, we grew a HUMAN, we can do what the hell we like! Let’s normalise stretch marks & belly rolls [three sun emojis]'

Noting on the end of the message: 'p.s this swimsuit is very flattering from Zara ! I think it holds my belly in [crying laughing face] or it’s the pose' adding a red love heart on the end.

In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, which sat just below the one-piece.

The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June.

She shared candid photos of herself in a white crop top and grey sweatpants, referencing her stretch marks and c-section scar in the post's caption.

Candid post: The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June

Georgia admitted that while she 'cried' upon seeing her stretch marks after the birth, she now feels 'proud' at having grown a beauty healthy baby', and encouraged other mothers to not feel pressure in 'bouncing back' quickly.

'THE REALITY.. all I heard when I was pregnant was 'you'll bounce back, you're young" etc. It got in my head and I probably did think I would to an extent,' Georgia began.

'So you can imagine the first time I looked in the mirror eight weeks ago, I'm not going to lie.. I freaked out, my body wasn't my body I was used to no more. I had big stretch marks, I am wider and obviously a c-section scar, I remember just crying.'

Georgia went on to reveal how she's now feeling 'proud' at what her body has achieved, nearly two months after giving birth.

'NOW eight weeks on this is me, I've done no exercise and ate what I want, when I can. I now look at my body and I'm proud. I'm proud I have grown a beautiful healthy baby, I'm proud I have got through the first eight weeks,' she said.

She went on to say that while she would love to fit into her size 10 Zara clothing, she's giving herself 'minimum a year' to drop the pounds as she's focusing on herself and her baby.

From baby bump to baby Brody! The post comes after Georgia and her millionaire beau Tommy Mallet the first trailer for their new spin-off show showing new family life

Honest: Tommy is heard admitting 'this is pretty daunting' and that this 'it's an emotional rollercoaster' in the trailer

The reality star urged society to 'stop using these phrases' of bounce back for women, and encouraged other mothers to not feel any additional pressure.

'It's taken us nine months to grow a baby, why are we expecting our bumps to go straight away? Let's just encourage mum to look after themselves, their mental health and their babies.

'Let's stop adding more pressure on women, it's hard enough!' she continued.

Georgia and Tommy are now set to share their pregnancy and first weeks as parents with fans in a spin-off show.

In a first look trailer for the upcoming two-part special, called Georgia & Tommy Baby Steps, the couple are seen preparing to welcome their son in hospital and sweetly joking that the little one takes after his dad.

In the teaser, the couple are seen sitting on their sofa while Georgia is still pregnant with the clip then showing them with beloved dog Monkey and their baby son.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patrick Mahomes and Brittany Matthews' baby daughter Sterling is already a music connoisseur.

Brittany, 25, posted an adorable video of her five-month-old daughter strapped into her baby carrier on Saturday as she showed off her sense of rhythm.

The tot managed to bounce along perfectly in time to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty.

Letting loose: Patrick Mahomes' fiancée Brittany Matthews, 25, shared an adorable video on Saturday of her five-month-old daughter sterling bouncing along to a rap song.

Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design.

She also wore a large floppy bowed handbag while nestled in her Jolly Jumper. T

Sterling jumped up and down on a pink mat with her name printed on it while doing an admirable job of staying on the beat.

'@patrickmahomes made me do it,' Brittany joked in her caption while adding a tears of laughter emoji.

She's got the beat: Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design as she bobbed on tempo to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty in her Jolly Jumper

Visiting: On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm. They were visiting him at his training camp

She also posted a copy of the video to her Instagram Stories and captioned it: 'She. Is. The. Cutest.'

Brittany and Patrick announced that she was pregnant with their first child, a girl, back in September of last year, and baby Sterling was born on February 20 of this year.

On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm.

Brittany wore a black-and-white T-shirt with red short and white trainers, while Sterling had on a black-and-white dress with red Converse sneakers and a matching bow and Patrick was suited up in his Chiefs uniform.

His fiancée and daughter were making a visit to his training camp with the Chiefs.

'Sterling's First Camp!' he wrote, while Brittany captioned a similar post with, 'It's Game Day, and we could not be more excited for Season Starting!! Sterling is ready.'

The latest: The NFL star, 25, and Brittany are set to get married in 2022. They've dated since high school and got engaged on September 1, 2020, the day he received his first Super Bowl championship ring; seen in 2019 in Atlanta

Patrick and Brittany got engaged on September 1, 2020, the same day that he received his Super Bowl championship ring.

The sweethearts, who have been together since they were in high school, have already picked out a venue and a date for the upcoming nuptials.

Although they're keeping those details secret for now, Brittany shared in March on Instagram that they're planning on tying the knot in 2022.

Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony.

Among the gifts was a silk robe embroidered with her name and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900.

Jackson Mahomes, Patrick's younger brother, revealed that he had been sent flask and a bottle of Fireball whisky, as well as an expensive silver Rolex Submariner wristwatch.

Pricy: Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony

Luxurious: Among Sydni's gifts were a silky robe with her name embroidered on it and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They first met on the winter series of Love Island in 2019.

And Lucie Donlan, 23, and Luke Mabbott, 25, looked more loved-up than ever at Boardmasters Festival in Newquay on Sunday.

The pair put on a cosy display at the annual surf competition on the Cornish coast, with Lucie flashing her abs in a striped crop-top and low-waisted white jeans combo.

Amorous display: Lucie Donlan, 23, and Luke Mabbott, 25, looked more loved-up than ever at Boardmasters Festival in Newquay on Sunday

The petite blonde showed off her own toned surf physique in the cheeky top, which featured pastel stripes and a side-tie bow.

The former Love Islander stepped out in a pair of flattering mom jeans and matching white high-top trainers.

Lucie showcased her natural beauty by sporting a pared-down makeup look and accessorised with a delicate seashell necklace.

Affectionate: Her beau, 25, looked very affectionate as he wrapped his arm around his former co-star as he donned a charcoal grey hoodie and black shorts

Her beau looked very affectionate as he wrapped his arm around his former co-star as he donned a charcoal grey hoodie and black shorts.

Luke cut a cool figure as he sported a backwards light brown suede baseball cap and white Boohoo Man sports socks.

The 'Justin Bieber lookalike' headed to the festival in a pair of cream and beige Nike trainers, and accessorised with a thin silver chain.

The couple have enjoyed a fun-filled couple of days at Boardmasters Festival, which combines live music and surfing and skateboarding competitions in and around Newquay.

The former Islanders were pictured in the crowd alongside the likes of UK fashion model Emily Airton and professional boxer Brad Pauls.

Fun-filled: The former Islanders were pictured in the crowd alongside the likes of UK fashion model Emily Airton and professional boxer Brad Pauls

Their festival-visit comes as Lucie was recently forced to contact the police after receiving daily death threats from trolls online she revealed last month.

It's been two years since Lucie appeared on the ITV2 dating show, but the star admitted online abuse is worse now than it was in 2019.

Speaking to The Sun, she said: ' It’s made me really anxious. When I came off the show, I was so busy that I never really had time to look at my phone. But this year it felt much harder to escape the comments.'

Lucie revealed the daily death threats were from the same accounts each day and the comments made her feel nervous enough to contact the police.

Of the ordeal she said: 'I’m lucky, I’ve got great people around me. As well as my family and boyfriend, Maura [Higgins] is great to talk to because she’s so strong.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012.

But these days, it seems Evangelista, 54, only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear.

On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section.

Burying the hatchet: Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012. But these days, it seems Evangelista only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear

Sweet: On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista, 54 reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section

In the cute snap, Augustin, who is clad in a grey t-shirt and a black Anaheim Angels baseball cap, is grinning broadly as Salma peeks out behind him with a wide smile.

'Here comes the weekend!! Viva el fin de semana!!! #tgif #weekendvibes,' she wrote in the caption of the photo, which was taken on a boat.

The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Hayek gave birth to their daughter, Valentina Paloma in September 2007.

Exes: Linda and Pinault dated briefly in 2005 and 2006. Pictured in 2005

Falling in love: The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Seen in 2020

Friendly: The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde

The Mexican actress and the Kering CEO tied the knot in a lavish ceremony on Valentine's Day in 2008. The pair, who reportedly met at a party in Venice later renewed their vows in the romantic Italian city.

Francois-Henri shares a son, Francois, 23, and a daughter Matilde, 20, with his ex-wife Dorothée Lepère. The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde.

In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father.

Lovechild: In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father. Seen in 2005

Evangelista and Henri-Francois had dated for four months in 2005 and early 2006, a few months before he met Salma. In August 2011, Linda officially filed for child support, initially asking for $46,000 a month.

The staggering sum even shocked the judge, who said it would be 'the largest support order in the history of the Family Court.' In May 2012, a heavily publicized court battle ensued in which both parties revealed sordid details about their relationship.

Pinault said that he broke up with Evangelista upon learning she was pregnant and asserted that they had only spent seven days together during their short-lived romance. Linda's lawyer claimed that the billionaire asked her to terminate the pregnancy.

A few days into the trial, the two reached an out-of-court settlement for an undisclosed amount. At the time, they said in a statement, 'We are happy that we were able to reach an agreement for the benefit and well-being of our son, Augie.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling has died in her Clapham home at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness.

Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street in 1966. She passed away on August 10.

Dilys has four half-siblings, including the late Dr Who actress Deborah Watling - who passed away in 2017 aged 69 - and Clacton MP Giles Watling, who confirmed her death in a statement on Friday.

Sad news: Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling died on August 10 at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness (pictured in 1977)

Giles told the Wandsworth Times: 'Dilys was a much-loved sister and was the eldest of the five of us.

'She led the way and was a real trailblazer for the rest of us.

'She took Broadway by storm in the late 1960s, playing the eponymous role of Georgy – and we were proud when she was nominated for a Tony Award.

'She also released a couple of singles, including Don't Say You Love Me, which made it into the charts in 1964.

Coronation Street: Dilys famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street (pictured on the soap in 1996)

Nominated: Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and passed away on August 10 (pictured on The Benny Hill show in 1975)

'She was eccentric in many ways, but was always incredibly generous, warm and loving.

'In her last few days, she recounted stories of her life that we thought she had long-since forgotten.

'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully.'

Half brother: Dilys' half-brother, Clacton MP Giles Watling, confirmed in a statement: 'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully' (pictured in 1992)

Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale.

She received a Tony Award nomination for her performance in Georgy on Broadway in 1970 and went on to appear in Sweeney Todd and musical Time in 1986.

Dilys also starred in The Morecambe & Wise Show, as Flossie, and appeared in Minder in 1994 (marking her last TV appearance) as well as an episode of The Bill in 1991.

Dilys was born in 1943 in Fulmer Chase, Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks.

Place of birth: Dilys was born in 1943 in Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks (Dilys pictured with her sister - the late actress Deborah Watling - in 1995)

Family: Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale (pictured in 2019)

Her father Ion was a Lancaster Bomber pilot and was killed in action during WW1 with her mother going on to marry actor Jack Watling.

Dilys attended St Mary's Convent School in Essex and later performed at the Bristol Old Vic.

The late star's film credits include the 1963 crime film Calculated Risk and 1967's horror Theatre of Death, which also starred Christopher Lee and Julian Glover.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivia Rodrigo added a splash of color when she arrived at the annual Day of Indulgence party on Sunday in Los Angeles' Brentwood neighborhood.

The 18-year-old actress and singer rocked a vibrant patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at the self-care celebration with a friend.

Olivia's sheer long-sleeve shirt featured shifting green and pink circles, and she contrasted it with a black mini skirt.

Self-care Sunday: Olivia Rodrigo, 18, rocked a colorful patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles on Sunday

The 5ft5in hitmaker matched her skirt with a cool pair of tall black platform boots.

She wore her brunette tresses parted down the middle and tied back in a low-slung bun.

She kept red-tinted slim sunglasses on hand to block out the sun, and she wore a surgical-style mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Olivia also accessorized with a fuzzy leopard-print handbag, and she was seen leaving the party with several bags of swag.

Her friend walked arm-in-arm with her as they arrived and then again as they departed the party.

She wore a pink blouse with black trim, plus a tan mini skirt, golden boots and a fuzzy bucket hat.

The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, a film and television producer, is a regular retreat for A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

In addition to the suitcases, the guests received a LeSportSac weekenders bag with items specially tailored for each individual guest.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Among the high-profile crowd were Jennifer Lopez and her daughter Emme, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks, Tessa Thompson, Leslie Mann and many others.

Free stuff for the wealthy: Olivia joined A-listers like Jennifer Lopez, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks and Tessa Thompson to get an incredible amount of free swag; seen in May in London

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Stepping on toes: Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole

Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole.

The Bizaardvark star released a cover image for her virtual concert Sour Prom which featured her dressed in a prom dress with a tiara on her head, a bouquet of flowers in her arms and mascara running down her face from crying.

Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different.

Similar: Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different

After the publicity image was released, Courtney posted Olivia's photo to her own Instagram, captioning it: 'spot the difference! #twinning!'

Olivia took the post as a compliment and replied: 'love u and live through this sooooo much.'

Courtney replied: 'Olivia — you're welcome. My favorite florist is in Notting Hill, London! Dm me for deets! I look forward to reading your note!'

Though seemingly polite, she seemed to imply that Olivia owed her some flowers for the photo.

She made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.'

'So bit of both. I dig manners.'

Not happy: Courtney made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.' 'So bit of both. I dig manners'; seen in 2020 in London

But in her cover interview for Variety, released last week, Olivia said she was honored just to be on Courtney's radar.

''I mean, to be honest I’m flattered that Courtney Love knows who I am,' she said.

She continued: 'She’s from a totally different generation, so I thought that was cool, but I think we’re both obviously really inspired by the film Carrie. I don’t know — I didn’t really give it too much thought.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is arguably one of the most famous dancing pros to ever come out of Dancing With The Stars.

And Julianne Hough proved just why as she put on a pin parade on her latest outing.

The 33-year-old television personality showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

Gorgeous: Julianne Hough showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage.

She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels.

Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap.

Out and about: The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage

In the details: She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels

Her blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as she wore a white protective face mask.

The women's-only party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

Rocking it: Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was star-studded event filled with A-listers.

And Laverne Cox certainly found a way to stand out.

The 49-year-old actress channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

On the prowl: Laverne Cox channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Orange Is The New Black star made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield.

She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage.

The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers.

Interesting: The 49-year-old actress made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield

Flaunting it: She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage

She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag.

Laverne's highlighted blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as they flowed over her shoulder.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

Fashion forward: She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag

In the details: The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An author who wrote an award-winning memoir on her life as a state school teacher is rewriting the book amid claims it was racist.

Criticism has been levelled against Kate Clanchy, 55, from Scotland, for her 2019 memoir Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me for portraying some pupils in a racist manner.

The critically-acclaimed book, which won the Orwell award, features passages with racial tropes such as 'chocolate-coloured skin' and 'African Jonathon' to describe a black child, the Times reported. The text also describes two autistic children as 'jarring company'.

Twitter users slammed Clanchy over the writing online, with one commenting: 'This has horrified and triggered me. This book is full of racism and ableism. Privileged people always hail teachers like this, while disabled people & people of colour have their lives seriously damaged by them.

Kate Clanchy, 55, from Scotland, is rewriting her 2019 memoir Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me after some accused her of portraying some pupils in a racist manner

'Look at all the privileged jumping to her defence too!'

The racial tropes were shared on Twitter and faced scrutiny from fellow authors, leading to Philip Pullman leaping to the book's defence and describing it as 'humane, warm, decent, generous and welcoming'.

Kate claimed some of the offending references were taken out of context but later apologised and said she would rewrite the book.

Her publisher, Picador, was accused of not going far enough in its initial statement on the row.

The critically-acclaimed book, which won the Orwell award, features passages with racial tropes such as 'chocolate-coloured skin' and 'African Jonathon' to describe a black child, the Times reported. The text also describes two autistic children as 'jarring company'

It later issued two apologies and said it was discussing the best way to update future editions of the book.

The author has been a teacher in state schools for more than 30 years.

A poet herself, she published an anthology of pupil's poetry in 2018 which resulted in her appointment of an MBE for services to literature. Many of the young poets were from refugee backgrounds.

Judges for the Orwell Prize, which was awarded to her memoir, said it was 'moving, funny and full of life' and included 'sparkling insights into modern British society'.

Twitter users slammed Clanchy over the writing online, with some saying the book had 'triggered' them

Clanchy posted on Twitter last week and said she had been wrongfully accused of racism by users of book review website, Goodreads.

Chimene Suleyman, co-author of The Good Immigrant USA anthology, tweeted she was concerned by 'the publishing team that didn't spot it, the awards that celebrated it, and the white authors defending it and invalidating people of colour who are upset by it.'

Other Twitter users were quick to criticise the author, with one posting: 'Just caught up on the racist tropes in Kate Clanchy’s writing. Read extracts, the kind of crude, blunt historical racism that lives on in white discourse.'

A poet herself, she published an anthology of pupil's poetry in 2018 which resulted in her appointment of an MBE for services to literature. Many of the young poets were from refugee backgrounds

Another commented: 'My partner and I read the book. The grotesque and dehumanising way she described one of her students nearly triggered an anorexia relapse. It is full of ingrained racism, ableism, fatphobia and misogyny, and utter middle-class snobbery.'

Clanchy said: 'I've been given the chance to do some re-writing on Some Kids.

'I'm grateful: I know I got many things wrong, and welcome the chance to write better, more lovingly.'

Picador said: 'We realised our response was too slow. We vigorously condemn the despicable online bullying of many of those who have spoken out.

'This has no place in our community.'

It said it apologised 'profoundly for the hurt we have caused, the emotional anguish experienced by many of you who took the time to engage with the text, and to hold us to account.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Parcel and package delivery scams are the most common type of 'smishing' text messages, new data has revealed.

Smishing is a technique that criminals use to target consumers with texts impersonating trusted organisations.

These text messages often contain a link to a fraudulent website that replicates a legitimate site, asking the victim to enter personal and financial information.

Now research has found that, over a 90-day period, the number of scam texts pretending to be from a delivery firm represented more than half of all smishing attempts, according to new data provided to UK Finance by cybersecurity company Proofpoint.

Example of a scam text message where fraudsters try to get customers to click on link

Each year within the UK, millions of people report text messages as spam with Proofpoint operating the 7726 text message system on behalf of mobile phone operators, which allows customers to report suspicious texts.

The numbers 7726 on a keypad spell out the word 'SPAM'.

UK Finance revealed that, aside from parcel delivery smishing scams, those pretending to be from a bank or other financial institution represent around a third of texts.

During the recent 30-day period however, the proportion of delivery scam texts has increased significantly and represents three times the number of those pretending to be from a bank.

Some 67.4 per cent of smishing campaigns were parcel and package delivery texts in the past 30 days whilst just 22.6 per cent were purporting to be from other financial institutions and banks.

Other smishing attacks made up 9.6 per cent whilst Government Entity scams made up just 0.4 per cent.

This includes criminals posing as organisations such as HMRC and DWP.

Malicious texts are often part of a wider scam. If someone clicks on a link and provides information, they may then get a phone call from someone claiming to be from their bank.

Exploiting the personal and financial information provided in the text message, the person offers to help safeguard funds by trying to convince someone to transfer money into a 'safe account', which is in fact an account run by the same criminal that sent the original text message.

Reports to the 7726 system are being used by the National Cyber Security Centre to take down fraudulent website URLs and prevent further fraud losses.

The data shown in the table below covers those categorised as smishing for the 30 and 90-day periods to mid-July.

TOP SMISHING CAMPAIGNS AS OF 14 JULY 2021 30 days 90 days Parcel and Package Delivery 67.4% 53.2% Financial Institutions and Banks 22.6% 36.8% Other smishing attacks 9.6% 8.9% Government Entities 0.4% 1.1% Source: UK Finance by cybersecurity company Proofpoint

Katy Worobec, Managing Director of Economic Crime at UK Finance, said: 'Criminals are experts at impersonating a range of organisations and have capitalised on the pandemic, knowing that many of us will be ordering goods online and awaiting parcel deliveries at home.

'We are urging people to follow the advice of the Take Five to Stop Fraud campaign and to always stop and think whenever you get a text message out of the blue before parting with your information or money.

'Always avoid clicking on links in a text message in case it's a scam and forward any suspected scam text messages to 7726 so that the criminals responsible can be brought to justice.'

Take Five to Stop Fraud urges people to remember the Stop, Challenge, Protect behaviours and to recognise that criminals are experts at impersonating people, organisations and the police.

Laura Suter, head of personal finance at AJ Bell, added: 'Scammers have homed in on the massive surge in everyone shopping online while they were stuck at home in lockdown and are using it for their gain.

'But even now lockdown has eased, the scammers are showing no signs of easing up. Once the scammer has got your initial details they'll usually contact you for more information, involving transferring cash from your bank account – with many people losing their life savings this way.

'Last year scammers stole £479million from unsuspecting people through these scams, with the actual figure likely to be a lot higher as much of it goes unreported.

'Everyone thinks they are smart enough to spot a scam text, but the messages have become so sophisticated that it's easy to be caught out.

'Lots of people will also see the text when they are in a hurry to receive their package or are rushing, so won't stop to think about whether it's legitimate or not.

Those who receive such texts are advised to take a moment & check if it is real before replying

'The best thing you can do is stop to consider the message or show it to a friend or family member – better to get a package late if the message is genuine than get caught up in a scam.'

Text and email scams have been rife in recent times with many fraudsters taking advantage of the pandemic.

This is Money has previously reported that consumers were falling victim to a Post Office scam when people were sent emails asking them to send a payment to release packages.

Screenshots of the email show the fraudsters telling the recipient there is a parcel waiting for them but they must pay a shipping cost before it can be delivered.

A link is then attached which, if clicked on/and or completed, could put consumers at risk of fraud.

Those who are expecting packages are most likely to be tricked while it appears scammers have wised up to the fact some delivery firms do ask for extra fees to be paid in order to release items.

Parcel delivery payments have also become a recent issue with consumers finding themselves falling foul of delivery companies for other reasons.

This is Money has reported that many UPS consumers are being told they must pay high delivery fees to receive items from overseas.

Our investigation revealed that many of these fees were not correct with some customers overcharged by hundreds of pounds.

Meanwhile, courier behaviour has been criticised by Citizens Advice which recently called for fines for delivery companies after saying the way parcels are delivered is not fit for purpose.

It said, despite a large number of people not receiving their deliveries, the majority of couriers receive no penalty for lost or stolen deliveries.

How to protect yourself from smishing scams

• Remember that criminals will send out smishing text messages with links leading to fake websites used to steal personal and financial information.

These text messages may appear to be from trusted organisations and may use official branding to convince you they're genuine. Always access websites by typing them into the web browser and avoid clicking on links in texts.

• Remain vigilant and check delivery notifications very carefully to ensure they are genuine. Text messages may look very similar to those that are genuine but may use generic greetings, such as Dear Sir/Madam, or include spelling errors.

• Always question claims that you are due goods or services that you haven't ordered or are unaware of, especially if you have to pay any fees upfront.

• Customers can report suspected scam texts to their mobile network provider by forwarding them to 7726 which spells 'SPAM' on your telephone keypad.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Griff proudly wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event on Sunday.

Olympic champion diver Tom, 27, gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final.

And the singer, 20, was sure to show her support as she donned his handmade garment over a yellow dress and posed up a storm at The SSE Wembley Arena.

Amazing! Griff wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event at Wembley on Sunday

Nice touch: The singer, 20, proudly flaunted the impressive garment on the red carpet (left) which was carefully created by the diver, 27, during his time in Tokyo (right)

Griff looked sensational for the celebratory evening, ensuring to work all her angles and show off the cardigan as she posed for the cameras.

The beauty beamed a smile as she looked over her shoulders, displaying the perfectly knitted Team GB on the back.

Continuing with the Tokyo theme, the star's bright yellow dress featured further references to the sporting event.

She completed her look with a selection of jewellery including several necklaces and a touch of sparkling eyeshadow.

Showing it off! Griff pointed to the impressive jumper and put on an animated display as she posed on the red carpet

Proud: The singer styled the handmade garment with a yellow Tokyo dress and fluffy shoes styled with white socks

Speaking about why he knitted the impressive garment, gold medallist Tom posted on his Made With Love knitting page, wrote: 'When I got to Tokyo, I wanted to make something that would remind me of the Olympics to look back on in the future.

'I designed a pattern for the colour work that would signify everything about these games!

'On the back I went for a classic @teamgb logo, the shoulders have a flag and GBR on them. For the front I wanted to keep it simple and I tried my best to embroider TOKYO in Japanese! What do you think?!' he wrote.

The diver, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40.

He said: 'Since my knitting page is gaining momentum, I wanted to take the opportunity to try and raise some money for the @thebraintumourcharity in memory of my Dad! Any donations would be greatly appreciated.'

Multitalented: Keen knitter Tom showed off his finished Team GB cardigan at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics last week

He'd be so proud: The star, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40 (pictured 2010)

Putting his skills to full use, Tom has also knitted an emotional keepsake to forever remind him of his first gold medal at Tokyo 2020 - a customised gold medal pouch.

The British sportsman broke down in tears as he and diving partner Matty Lee triumphed in the 10m synchronized platform event - his first gold medal in four Olympic games.

Tom has previously spoken about the cathartic effect knitting has on his mindset during competitions.

He said: 'When we went to Japan for the test event I actually took my knitting with me and was doing it during my competition because sometimes there's 45 minutes in between each dive so I'd sit there and knit and just take my mind off the competition completely. I'm obsessed!'

Daley activity: Tom has gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final on Tuesday

And smile! Boris Johnson was also seen at the event on Sunday, posing for some selfies with the Olympians

Chic: Singer Anne-Marie posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal

Performance: Nile Rodgers and Laura Mvula rocked the stage as they provided entertainment during the fun-fulled evening

The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the Team GB homecoming event.

Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round.

'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley.

Congratulations: Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round

Winners: The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the TEAM GB homecoming event

Gold medallists: 'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley

Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony and delivered a speech.

Getting in amongst the Team GB spirit, the Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians.

Boris also posed for some selfies, in one snap holding an Olympic medal.

Big appearance: Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony

PM duties: Boris delivered a speech at the homecoming event as well as snapping selfies with the athletes

Team GB spirit: The Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians

Showing support: Chevon Clarke was among the Olympians who snatched up a chance to be photographed with the PM

Photos galore: The 57-year-old held an Olympic medal in one of the snaps taken by an Olympian on their phone

Political figure: Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer also arrived to show his support for the UK's athletes on Sunday

Anne Marie wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair, hosted by the National Lottery, where is set to perform later in the evening.

The chic star paired her dress with Prads shoes as she posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal.

Stylish: Anne-Marie, 30, looked glamorous as she arrived at the homecoming event in London in a white dress with puff sleeves

Looking good: The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she the statement look with a sweep of nude lipstick

Gorgeous: The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do as she posed with weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell, 27

The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do, as she posed with 27-year-old weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell.

The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she complemented the statement look with a slick of nude lipstick.

By way of accessories, she kept it simple by wearing multiple hoops in her ears, and a gold chain with a coin pendant hanging on it.

The minidress showed off her toned pins, and revealed a tattoo the singer has on her left knee which reads: 'Confidence,' in cursive lettering.

Gracing the stage: The Alarm hitmaker looked proud to be on the stage and beamed a smile as she stood infront of the flag

Cute: She wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair where is set to perform at the star-studded event later in the evening

Showstopper: Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet

Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet.

She is amongst many artists to perform at the event, including Rag'n'bone Man, Nile Rodgers, Laura Mvula, and Yungblud who will perform alongside the best of Britain's dance and theatre artists.

Yungblud will sing David Bowie's iconic hit anthem Heroes alongside a dance circus performance from Motionhouse.

Ivor Novello winner Laura Mvula will pair up with the esteemed contemporary dance company Rambert to perform a solo set.

Songstress: The star looked glowing for her performance, sporting a slick of pink blusher and matching glossy lipstick

Popstar: Anne Marie's hit singles include 2002, Ciao Adios and Our Song, which she undoubtedly treated the audience to a rendition of

Set: The stage design was stunning, with beautiful flowers all around Anne-Marie as she performed her hit tunes

The moving 90 minute concert to welcome home Team GB athletes will be hosted by Radio One presenters Greg James and Clara Amfo and also feature music from Bastille and Nile Rodgers with his band Chic.

KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style on the red carpet wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Singer Griff was also in attendance wearing the cardigan Tom Daley knitted poolside, paired with a yellow slip dress with her hair slicked back into a bubble pony tail.

Smart: Nile Rogers cut a dapper figure for the event in a white suit and black tie as well as a matching hat

Bright: The recording artist teamed her eye-catching ensemble with semi-sheer neon yellow shoes

Backing dancers: Laura was joined by the Rambert School of Ballet and Contemporary Dance for her impressive set

Dazzling: Mica Paris performed with Chickenshed, with the singer belting out some tunes for the star-studded audience

Showstopping: Nile and Mica, who sizzled in a black dress, looked sensational on the red carpet before they took to the stage

Speaking ahead of the event, Greg James said: 'As always with the Olympics, I've become an expert in events I only think about every four years.

'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again.

'It's been a long time coming – it's going to be a brilliant night. Anyway, must go, I'm off to practice shot put,' he joked.

Excited: Presenter Greg James (left) said 'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again' before singer KSI (right) took to the stage

Proud: Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!'

Achievements: Clara also added: 'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

Success story: Married couple Jason and Laura Kenny are Britain's most successful male and female Olympians

Job well done: Alice Kinsella and Amelie Morgan were in high spirits as everyone celebrated Team GB

Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!

'I am so honoured to be hosting Team GB Homecoming Concert with Greg, on what promises to be a brilliant show full of celebration and love!

'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

The celebration will re-unite Team GB with their friends, family and fans for the first time since Tokyo 2020, which closed with an emotional ceremony on Sunday.

Team GB finished the Games with the same number of medals as at London 2012 but were beaten by the USA, China and Japan for the top spots.

Fashion forward: KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Switching it up: The singer changed his look when he graced the stage, donning a fashionable cream suit

Superstar: Rag 'n' Bone Man was also amongst the stars who took to the stage at the ceremony and performed some hits

Incredible voice: The successful star's latest album, Life By Misadventure, was released in May

Jason Kenny's record breaking gold medal moved GB up to 64 medals on Sunday, while Lauren Price victory in the middleweight final allowed them to replicate history.

As a result, Team GB finished fourth in the Tokyo medals table with 22 gold, 21 silver and 22 bronze medals for a total of 65.

It made Tokyo their second-most successful Olympics overseas after the contingent won 67 medals in the Rio de Janeiro Games five years ago.

Talent: Gold medal winning diver Tom Daley, 27, was all smiles as he posed at the homecoming event. Tom's knitting went viral on Tik Tok, Twitter and Instagram throughout the games

Pride: Athletes arrived at the event wearing their Team GB kit including gymnast Joe Fraser, 22

Britain's chef de mission Mark England hailed the team's achievement as the greatest in their Olympic history, saying: 'Following Beijing we had no idea that British athletes would deliver 65 medals in London.

'We knew we were in great shape for Rio but it had never been done before, matching and then surpassing London's number of medals.

'I just think that finishing this Games with two gold medals, and for this team to deliver 65 medals, is absolutely extraordinary.

Team: Cyclist Matt Walls, 33, was in attendance for the big night of celebrations and musical performances

Medal winner: Gymnast Bryony Page, 30, wore her bronze and silver medals with pride while Bradly Sinden donned his silver

Prize winner: The cyclist Ryan Owens, 25, wore his silver medal for the star studded event

'Not only has the team made history but it has probably made history on the back of the most complex and most challenging and difficult environment that we will face certainly in my lifetime.

'It has been against all the odds and I think it is the greatest achievement in British Olympic history. It has been the miracle of Tokyo and it has been wonderful to be here.'

Team GB looked in high spirits as they arrived for the event wearing their kit, and some wore their medals.

Good times: Swimmer Tom Dean, 21, looked proud as he posed for the camera with his arms behind his back

Proud: 26-year-old Jack Laugher wore his bronze medal round his neck and beamed a smile for some pics

Medallist: Cyclist Josie Knight, 24, arrived at the event and proudly showed off her medal for the cameras

Team: Gymnasts, Jessica Gadirova, 16, Alice Kinsella, 20, Amelie Morgan, 18 and Jennifer Gadirova, also 16, posed for a group shot at the affair

Power couple: Cyclists, Laura Kenny, 29, and Jason Kenny, 33, were in attendance and also donning their Olympics kit

Happy: Gold medal winning gymnast Max Whitlock, 28, wore red white and blue with pride at the event

Amazing: Rower Helen Glover, 35, arrived at the event in her GB kit and posed up a storm on the red carpet
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said.

Jean Todt, who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery.

Schumacher, 52, has not been seen in public since suffering severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 with his then 14-year-old son Mick, who is now an F1 driver himself.

Todt, 75, said Schumacher, who won 91 Grand Prix races before retiring from Formula One in 2012, only survived thanks to the work of the doctors and Corinna, 52, who 'wanted him to survive'.

Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said. Pictured: Schumacher and Corinna in 2006

Jean Todt (right with Schumacher in 2002), who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret.

Todt told Sport Bild: 'I've spent a lot of time with Corinna since Michael had his serious skiing accident on December 29, 2013. She is a great woman and runs the family.

'She hadn't expected that. It happened suddenly and she had no choice. But she does it very well. I trust her, she trusts me.'

He added: 'Thanks to the work of his doctors and the cooperation of Corinna, who wanted him to survive, he survived - but with consequences.

'And right now you are fighting the consequences. We hope that things will slowly but surely improve.'

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret. Pictured: Schumacher skis in Northern Italy in 2005

Todt also said that Schumacher's son Mick, 22, who is now competing for F1 team Haas, has a 'special place in his heart'.

He said: 'Mick is one of those people who [will] always have a special place in my heart and that of my wife Michelle Yeoh.

'The Schumacher family is very special to us. I wrote a great story with Michael and built a wonderful relationship. And then the children were there.'

Todt revealed that he only partially recognises Mick in his father. He claims Michael had to build his own life whereas Mick was able to receive 'a very good education in a more comfortable environment'.

'[But] of course, Michael and Mick are of the same blood and have the same goals, but the conditions [they faced] were completely different.'

Updates on Michael Schumacher, who won five world titles for Ferrari and his first two with Benetton, have been scarce since the accident in 2013.

In 2019 the family released an update on his 50th birthday assuring his millions of fans they are doing 'everything humanly possible' to help him recover.

Last year it was suggested he was set to undergo stem cell surgery which was cancelled because of the Covid 19 pandemic.

Michael Schumacher suffered devastating brain injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 and his condition has been a closely guarded secret ever since

In September Zurich-based neurology specialist Professor Erich Riederer told a documentary for French TV channel TMC he doubted the racing legend would ever fully recover.

He said: 'I think he's in a vegetative state, which means he's awake but not responding.

'He is breathing, his heart is beating, he can probably sit up and take baby steps with help, but no more.

'I think that's the maximum for him. Is there any chance of seeing him like he was before his accident? I really don't think so.'

Former Ferrari teammate Felipe Massa admitted Schumacher was in a 'difficult place' adding: 'I know how he is, I have information.

'The main thing about all this is that we know his situation is not easy. He is in a difficult phase but we need to respect him and the family.'

A documentary about Schumacher featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix on 15 September.

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features exclusive interviews with Corinna, his two children Gina and Mick and brother Ralf.

It also features interviews with who worked with or raced against Schumacher, including Jean Todt, Bernie Ecclestone, Sebastian Vettel, Mika Hakkinen, Damon Hill and David Coulthard.

A documentary about Formula One legend Michael Schumacher (pictured celebrating winning the Grand Prix at Silverstone in July 1998) featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix

The documentary does not focus on Schumacher's health after he suffered severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 (pictured L-R brother Ralf, mother Elisabeth, Schumacher, and father Rolf)

The documentary retraces the life and career of the German driver and promises unseen archive material that shows the 'many facets of his multi-layered personality'.

The portrait of the racing legend is 'the only film supported by his family', the platform said in a press release.

Schumacher's manager Sabine Kehm describes the film as the 'family's gift to their beloved husband and father'.

'The greatest challenge for the directors was certainly to find the balance between independent reporting and consideration for the family,' said Vanessa Nocker who directed the film along with Hanns-Bruno Kammertons and Michael Wech.

'Corinna Schumacher herself was our greatest support in this.

'She herself wanted to make an authentic film, to show Michael as he is, with all his ups and downs, without any sugar-coating.

'She was great and brave enough to let us do what we wanted, and so we respected and kept her boundaries. A very inspiring, warm woman who made a lasting impression on all of us.'

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features interviews with his wife Corinna, (pictured together) children, and past and present F1 drivers

Schumacher was most famous for his career at Ferrari between 1996 and 2006, where he won five consecutive championships.

He retired in 2006, but returned to racing four years later with Mercedes. He retired for a second time in 2012 after two unsuccessful seasons with the team.

Following an unsuccessful two year stint, Schumacher once again retired.

The documentary was set to be released in 2020 following filming in 2019, but was delayed several times by producers because of the volume of material they had to edit.

It is set to air on Netflix in Europe on September 15 - weeks after the anniversary of Schumacher's F1 debut in Belgium 30 years ago.

It is not yet known if the documentary will be added to Netflix in the UK on the same date.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A survivor of Jake Davison’s murderous rampage narrowly escaped a mass terrorist shooting in Tunisia six years ago, it can be revealed.

Ben Parsonage, 33, and his mother Michelle, 53, were gunned down by Davison during his 12-minute killing spree in Plymouth – but survived.

The former junior boxer was wounded by a blast to his stomach but was later discharged from hospital.

Ben Parsonage, survivor of Jake Davison's attack in Plymouth last week. He's with Gemma Pook, his partner and their two sons Oliver and Lucas

Michelle, 53, (pictured) was gunned down by Davison during his 12-minute killing spree in Plymouth – but survived

He and his mother, who had two operations in hospital, are now expected to make a full recovery.

Incredibly, it emerged last night that Mr Parsonage came close to death in June 2015, when an Islamist gunman opened fire on a beach in Sousse, Tunisia.

Mr Parsonage was on the beach with sons Oliver and Lucas when Seifeddine Rezgui pulled a Kalashnikov assault rifle out of a parasol and shot 38 holidaymakers.

The Briton ran to his hotel where partner Gemma Pook, 30, the mother of his two children, was relaxing by a pool. Miss Pook said her partner was in a state of ‘panic’ after he and the children were evacuated from the terror-stricken beach.

Undated screengrab of Jake Davison, taken from a video posted on Youtube, who went on a murderous rampage in Plymouth

She said at the time of the Tunisia attack: ‘My reaction was quite calm at first, but I did feel rather frightened and shaking as the event started to unfold.

‘We were so shocked, we couldn’t believe what we had heard and seen. I was very scared, everyone at the hotel was scared.

‘Nobody has been able to get on a flight home straight away, it’s all very slow progress.’

A total of 30 Britons were killed in the attack. The family spent days locked in the hotel complex before they were allowed to return to the UK.

Mr Parsonage was visiting his mother at the time of the shooting in Plymouth on Thursday.

Incredibly, it emerged last night that Mr Parsonage came close to death in June 2015, when an Islamist gunman opened fire on a beach in Sousse, Tunisia. Pictured, gunman Seifeddine Rezgui seen calmly walking on Sousse beach carrying his weapon

There have been conflicting reports surrounding how the mother and son were shot and it remains unclear.

The Daily Mirror reported that the gunman fired at the family’s front door then shot the pair when they opened it.

While a family friend said they had been shot after they ran out to help the other victims.

The friend added: ‘[Mr Parsonage] has been through a lot of stuff. He was on the beach getting chased by the gunman in Sousse. They were all lucky to escape. Ben was out there with his partner and sons. He has been through it twice.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to make a stylish display.

And Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening.

The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with a pearl detailing.

Stunning: Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening

The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings.

The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up.

Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event and were spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis.

The pair looked dapper in three-piece black suits with silk bow ties and white shirts.

Wow! The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with pearl detailing

Gorgeous: The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings

Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures.

Also joining the stylish stars was pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit.

The presenter looked sensational in the striking ensemble and posed up a storm as she joined Iris for a snap at the glitzy gala.

Earlier in the day Iris also attended the Formula E 2021 BMW i E-Prix, displaying her midriff in a quirky blue plaid print dress.

Pose: The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up

Beautiful: Iris Law posed for a snap with French racing driverJean-Eric Vergne

While last month, Iris looked sensational as she displayed her long slender legs in a slinky red and white summer dress on Instagram.

The model who debuted a blue buzzcut, looked the picture of confidence as she sat on the step of a rustic building to pose for the camera.

The midi dress perfectly highlighted Iris' tan and rode up a little in the warm breeze.

She wore a blue bra beneath her dress, almost matching the shade of her newly dyed hair.

Double trouble: Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event are where spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis (Centre)

Smile: Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures

Smile! Iris was joined by pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit, for a stunning snap at the event

Glam: Nicki looked sensational in her jumpsuit and wore her blonde locks down

Iris gazed off into the distance from behind her shades as she munched on an apple.

She accessorised with a simple gold chain necklace and matching bracelets on each wrist.

The London native debuted her buzz cut in British Vogue at the beginning of July and explained it was for her role in upcoming series Pistol where she plays Soo Catwoman.

All in the details: She accessorised with a selection of necklaces and bracelets
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@