The remains of an ancient fast food joint — or 'thermopolium' — that was buried in volcanic ash in the Roman city of Pompeii back in 79 AD has opened to tourists.

Decorated with colourful frescos, the snack bar was unearthed back in 2020 in Regio V, the north-eastern sector of Pompeii which spans some 54 hectares.

Archaeologists believed that, in its heyday, the thermopolium would have served the ancient city's poorer residents, offering such foods as duck, paella and snails.

The diners would rarely have had a kitchen in their own residences, forcing them to visit such eateries instead.

Pompeii and many of its residents were famously submerged beneath pyroclastic flows of searing gas and volcanic matter following the eruption of Mount Vesuvius.

The remains of an ancient fast food joint — or 'thermopolium' (pictured) — that was buried in volcanic ash in the Roman city of Pompeii back in 79 AD has opened to tourists

Decorated with colourful frescos (as pictured), the snack bar was unearthed back in 2020 in Regio V, the north-eastern sector of Pompeii which spans some 54 hectares

ROMAN REPASTS Based on bones and residue found in the containers in the serving counter, archaeologists have been able to determine some of the meats that were likely on sale at the thermopolium. These included: Duck

Fish

Goats

Pigs

Snails Based on this, experts think one menu option was likely a form of paella. Other offers may have included coarse breads, lentils and baked cheese. Excavations have also revealed wine jugs, at the bottom of which were found residues from fava beans. These were added to wine in Roman times in order to enhance its taste and lighten its colour. Advertisement

'We know what they were eating that day,' said the former Pompeii Archaeological Park chief, Massimo Osanna, back in 2020, when the thermopolium was first exposed during work to preserve the fragile ruins of the buried city.

Painstaking excavations revealed a multi-sided serving counter with wide holes in its top surface that held deep vessels for hot foods, much like might be seen in present day buffet and salad bars.

In one container, archaeologists found a fragment from a duck's bone, while other contained the remains of various animals the Romans would have eaten, including fish, goats, pigs and snails.

The researchers have also found nine amphorae — tall ceramic jars used in ancient times to store food and drink — along with a couple of flasks, a bronze ladle and a ceramic-based oil container.

One jug was found to contain traces of ground fava beans, which Romans would add to wine in order to improve its flavour and lighten its colour.

Patrons of the thermopolium would have been greeted with vibrant decorations, with ornate mosaic floors and interior walls that were painted in yellow and orange with various frescos, which also adorned the zig-zag shaped serving counter.

One of these featured a sea nymph — or 'nereid' — riding a horse through the waves, while another, perhaps hinting at the food on the menu, depicted two upside-down mallards and a rooster with a plumage vividly painted in so-called 'Pompeiian red'.

According to Professor Osanna, the thermopolium had a good location in the city, standing as it did on the edge of a square with a fountain. Another snack bar has also been found in the same area. Pictured: archaeologists work to conserve the outer walls of the thermopolium

Archaeologists believed that, in its heyday, the thermopolium would have served the ancient city's poorer residents, offering such foods as duck, paella and snails. Pictured: a fresco on the snack bar's serving counter depicts two upside-down ducks and rooster

'The painted images represent, at least in part, the foods and beverages effectively sold inside,' explained Pompeii staff anthropologist Valeria Amoretti.

Another fresco, meanwhile, featured a dog on a leash. This wasn't the only pooch-themed discovery in the remains of the thermopolium, however, with archaeologists also unearthing the complete skeleton of an adult canine.

Unlike the big, muscular dog depicted on the counter, however, this one was a small dog. It would have only stood at around 8–10 inches (20–25 cm) at the shoulder and represents something of a rare find from a Roman site.

The discovery of such a small pet, Dr Amoretti explained, attests to the practice of 'selective breeding in the Roman epoch to obtain this result.'

Human remains were also found in the thermopolium — one of a man who, based on the nails and pieces of wood found under his body, was likely lying on some kind of bed at the time when the aftermath of Vesuvius' eruption killed him.

Other bones were also found within one of the vessels of the serving counter, and researchers think they may have been placed there when the site was disturbed in the 17th century by diggers looking for valuables.

Painstaking excavations in the ancient snack bar revealed a multi-sided serving counter (pictured) with wide holes in its top surface that held deep vessels for hot foods, much like might be seen in present day buffet and salad bars

One fresco on the thermopolium counter featured a sea nymph — or 'nereid' — riding a horse through the waves (pictured), while another depicted two upside-down mallards and a rooster with a plumage vividly painted in 'Pompeiian red'

'We know what they were eating that day,' said the former Pompeii Archaeological Park chief, Massimo Osanna, back in 2019, when the thermopolium was first exposed during work to preserve the fragile ruins of the buried city. Pictured: a worker cleans a mosaic on the floor of the thermopolium, which has recently opened to the public

In the thermopolium, archaeologist found nine amphorae — tall ceramic jars used in ancient times to store food and drink — along with a couple of flasks, a bronze ladle and a ceramic-based oil container. Pictured: worker cleans a detailed mosaic on the floor of the snack bar

According to Professor Osanna, the thermopolium had a good location in the city, standing as it did on the edge of a square with a fountain.

Another snack bar has also been found in the same area. (In total, 12 thermophobia have been found in the city.)

Regio V, the sector of the city in which the recently opened thermopolium is located, has been the focus of the most intensive excavation and restoration efforts in Pompeii ever since the 1960s.

Visitors to the thermopolium will also be able to see two large villas in the area — the 'Casa di Orione' and 'Casa del Giardino' — which are in the process of being restored.

Decorated with colourful frescos, the thermopolium was unearthed back in 2020 in Regio V, the north-eastern sector of Pompeii which spans some 54 hectares

Pictured: a fresco of a large dog on a leash, seen inside the Pompeiian thermopolium
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The reviews for one of 2018’s most anticipated games are in.

Critics are hailing Red Dead Redemption II as one of the best games of the year for a variety of reasons, as the video game currently holds ‘universal acclaim’ according to review aggregator Metacritic.

But just what exactly are the reviews for Red Dead Redemption II? Here’s a look at what the critics are saying about the highly-anticipated video game ahead of its release as well as information about the game itself, including its upcoming companion mobile app.

Red Dead Redemption II has been praised for its engrossing game world and fun gameplay

Red Dead Redemption 2 reviews

Critics from around the world have praised the game for its engrossing storyline, rich open world environment and stunning graphics, with many calling it among the best video games of all time.

IGN has hailed the game for its ‘gorgeous depiction’ of the Old West with ‘one of this generation’s best single-player experiences’ that’s ‘a meticulously polished open world ode to the outlaw era.’

Game Informer gave Red Dead Redemption II a perfect score of ten out of ten, saying: ‘Rockstar Games has outdone itself again with Red Dead Redemption II.

'The up-close portrayal of the outlaw Van der Linde gang’s unraveling is a compelling companion story that blends seamlessly with the original game, and depth and breadth of the open world is a technical triumph that every gamer should experience.’

Electronic Gaming Monthly also praised the game for its visuals, storyline and attention to detail, saying: ‘This is one of the most gorgeous, seamless, rootinest, tootinest games ever made, and if you voluntarily miss out on it, you’re either not a gamer or in a coma.’

Another very positive review came from US Gamer, which lauded its ‘absolutely beautiful open world’ with the few drawbacks in the game being the occasional bugs and the somewhat tedious travel across the game world at times.

Yet another glowing review came from GameSpot, who praised its ‘emotional, thought-provoking story’ as well as its richly-detailed game world, strong writing and engrossing gameplay.

In addition, Forbes also offered up another very positive review for Red Dead Redemption II, lauding, like many other reviewers, its engrossing open world and memorable gameplay.

One of the few more lukewarm reviews of the video game came from Slant Magazine, who hailed the game for its ambition and scope but found relatively little depth to it.

Red Dead Redemption 2 mobile app

Red Dead Redemption II fans who also don’t want to spend a second away from all the action in the upcoming video game will soon have an app for that.

Rockstar Games will reportedly launch a companion app that can be used alongside the highly-anticipated video game.

The app, set to be available upon the release of the video game, will essentially give players a second-screen feature as they play the game.

Specifically, it will allow them to view the game map and make note of areas of interest and waypoints as they explore it. It will also offer real-time information about the game’s main character Arthur Morgan, including his stamina, health and other critical statistics.

Since the information will be displayed on a different screen, gamers can play the video game without a heads-up display for a more immersive gameplay experience overall.

In addition, it will offer players the chance to browse their character’s in-game journal, which will be updated automatically with additional entries and illustrations as they explore the map, undertake missions and interact with non-player characters.

The app will also let players track their stats through the Social Club function, browse the game manual and purchase the digital version game’s official guide.

The game’s app will be available for both iOS and Android starting on Friday, October 26.

In addition to the upcoming Red Dead Redemption II app, Rockstar Games has also released mobile versions of many of its Grand Theft Auto titles, Max Payne and Bully: Anniversary Edition.

Many critics have offered particular praise for the game's striking visuals and rich open world

Red Dead Redemption 2 trailer

The launch trailer for Red Dead Redemption II was uploaded to YouTube back on October 18, 2018 and has already accrued more than 2.9 million views so far.

Red Dead Redemption 2 release date

The upcoming video game will be released on Friday, October 26, 2018.

How to play Red Dead Redemption 2

Red Dead Redemption II can be played on Xbox One and PlayStation 4 upon its release.

Critics also lauded the game's engrossing storyline and attention to details in the game world

What is Red Dead Redemption 2?

Red Dead Redemption II is an upcoming action-adventure video game with an Old West theme that’s among the most anticipated games of 2018.

Both published and developed by Rockstar Games, Red Dead Redemption II is set in 1899 and follows the adventures of Arthur Morgan, a fictional Old West outlaw. In terms of storyline, the game is intended to act as a prequel to 2010’s Red Dead Redemption.

Red Dead Redemption II is the third entry into the popular Red Dead video game series, following Red Dead Revolver in 2004 and Red Dead Redemption along with its expansion pack, Undead Nightmare, in 2010.

The video game will continue to use the Honor system implemented in Red Dead Redemption, which impacts the game world based on how players interact with the various non-player characters in it. Overall, it main story mode is expected to take about 60 hours to fully complete.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CONTRIBUTORS STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

1.1 The definitions and rules of interpretation in this Clause apply in these Terms and Conditions.

“ANL” means Associated Newspapers Limited, registered address, Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London W8 5TT and registered company number 84121;

“Affiliates” means in relation to a person, any direct or indirect parent undertaking or subsidiary undertaking from time to time of such person, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings from time to time of any parent undertaking of such person. An undertaking is a “subsidiary undertaking” of another undertaking (its “parent undertaking”) if that other undertaking, directly or indirectly, through one or more subsidiary undertakings:

(a) holds 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(b) it is a member of the undertaking and has the right to appoint or remove 50% or more of its board of directors or equivalent managing body; or

(c) it is a member of the undertaking and controls alone, or pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders or members, 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(d) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over it, for example by having the right to give directions with respect to its operating and financial policies, with which directions its directors are obliged to comply.

“Content” means any and all text, Images, Videos, Lineage, audio or video material, recordings of moving images with or without sound, all stills, images, content, materials, information, data, software and executable code, in whatever medium or form supplied or made available by or on behalf of the Supplier in connection with these Terms and Conditions;

“Fees” means the fees that we have agreed to pay the Supplier respect of the licence of the Content as set out in the self-generated Invoice;

“Images” means any photos, print graphics, interactive or digital graphics or other still images;

“Intellectual Property Rights” means all intellectual property rights wherever in the world arising, whether registered or unregistered (and including any application), including copyright, know-how, confidential information, trade secrets, business names and domain names, Marks, patents, petty patents, utility models, design rights, semi-conductor topography rights, database rights and all rights in the nature of unfair competition rights or rights to sue for passing off;

“Lineage” means written content or text material accompanying the content supplied by Supplier;

“Licensed Media” means:

(a) any and all digital or electronic publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website, and which in each case is owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time including those which operates under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, ‘Metro’ or ‘This is Money’ brands, or any derivative of such brands, including, but not limited to the publications owned or operated by ANL and which are located at www.metro.co.uk, www.mailonline.co.uk, Mailonline.co.uk/au, www.dailymail.co.uk, www.dailymail.com and www.thisismoney.co.uk and any subsequent or additional URLs which may replace them from time to time;

(b) any and all print publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed which ANL operates including those under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, or ‘Metro’ brands, or any derivative of such brands;

(c) any of the above publications’ pages or articles (including its mobile versions) on any social media accounts or news aggregator websites from time to time (including, but not limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, MSN, Apple i news and Yahoo; and

(d) any media player owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time (with or without embedding functionality and whether incorporated in the publications set out above or in any third party sites, services, apps or publications).

“Marks” means any and all trade marks, trade names, service marks, trade dress, logos, URLs, identifying slogans or other distinctive brand features of a party to these Terms and Conditions, whether or not registered;

“Supplier” means the entity set out in the self-generated Invoice; and

“Video” means a recording of moving images with or without sound supplied by Supplier.

2. GRANT OF LICENCE

2.1 Subject to these Terms and Conditions, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL and each of its Affiliates a non-exclusive (unless otherwise agreed), royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence to use, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform, display, edit and transmit the Content in connection with and through the Licensed Media and to make the same available to end users of the Licensed Media.

2.2 The Supplier, by granting the licence detailed in Clause 2.1, also grants ANL the express right to ANL and each of its Affiliates to grant a sub-licence to end users and readers of Licensed Media to the extent necessary for end users and readers to view

and use the Content in accordance with the Licensed Media’s terms of use from time to time.

2.3 The Supplier agrees that ANL shall be entitled to change, modify and edit the Content for technical or editorial purposes (including, without limitation, cropping or framing the Content).

2.4 ANL shall be entitled to reproduce the whole or any part of any Content in any secondary reproductions of Licensed Media (e.g. compilations, screen shots, stills, thumbnails) in order to promote or market the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including any and all print, digital and electronic publications.

2.5 If the Content includes Videos, ANL shall be entitled to embed, and enable, facilitate and support the embedding and organic sharing of Content by any end user of, all or any part of the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including without limitation, on any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website. ANL shall be entitled to manage, control and change the embedding functionality and settings of any of its media players from time to time as ANL shall determine in its sole discretion.

2.6 ANL agrees that it shall include the credit marked on the Images and Videos or notified by the Supplier on any use or reproduction of the Images and Videos.

2.7 Any inadvertent failure by ANL to accord the credit shall not constitute a breach of these Terms and Conditions by ANL provided that ANL uses its reasonable endeavours to remedy such failure that the Supplier makes ANL aware of, as soon as reasonably practicable and on a prospective basis only. For the avoidance of doubt, ANL will not be required to recall any print or other material already printed nor incur legal costs or expenses.

2.8 The Supplier hereby waives all moral rights in the Content to which the Supplier may be entitled under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) or the Copyright Act 1968 (Australia) as amended from time to time (and under all similar legislation from time to time in force anywhere in the world) to the extent necessary for ANL to exploit the Content in the Licensed Media.

2.9 The Supplier hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Content may be copied or reproduced under separate licences or arrangements with NLA Media Access and all other such database aggregators and services. As such, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL all such licences and rights as are required in order to enable others to access, copy and reproduce all or part of the Licensed Media (whether via press cuttings or similar services) pursuant to those licences or arrangements, including the non-exclusive right to syndicate (including electronic syndication or syndication for use in electronic databases) or distribute the Licensed Media (containing the Content) to NLA Media Access and all other owners of such databases, databanks and services for storage, copying, republication and redistribution to third parties for further storage, copying, publication and distribution in any medium.

2.10 ANL will have the non-exclusive right to store the Content (whether or not the Content has been published by ANL) in any of its electronic databases and to allow access to the databases for research purposes.

3. MARKS

3.1 The Supplier acknowledges and agrees that ANL owns all right, title and interest in and to the Licensed Media and ANL’s Marks. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall confer in the Supplier any right of ownership in the Licensed Media or ANL’s Marks.

3.2 Supplier hereby grants to ANL a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty free licence to use, reproduce, display and transmit the Supplier’s Marks solely for the purposes of performing its obligations under these Terms and Conditions, including in connection with the presentation of the Content within the Licensed Media.

4. FEES AND PAYMENT

4.1 In consideration of the provision of the Content by the Supplier, ANL shall pay the Fees which shall be all inclusive for the rights granted above (including syndication).

4.2 ANL will send Supplier a self-generated invoice (“Invoice”) reflecting the uses along with the payment of the Fee, no more than forty-five (45) days after the use. If the Supplier believes ANL has used Content that is not reflected in an Invoice, or for which payment was not made within forty-five (45) days after the use, the Supplier will promptly notify ANL:

(a) via mailonlinecontributionqueries@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s online digital publication and provide links to the URL(s) or scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment; or

(b) via accountspayable@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s print publications and provide scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment,

Each of (a) and (b) a (“Notification”). If ANL accepts that Content has been used without timely payment of the Fee, it will pay the Fee within fifteen (15) business days of ANL’s receipt of the Notification.

4.3 Payment shall be made direct to the bank account nominated in writing by the Supplier.

4.4 If a party fails to make any payment due to the other under these Terms and Conditions by the due date for payment (due date), then, without limiting the other party's remedies under these Terms and Conditions, the defaulting party may be required to pay interest on the overdue amount at the rate of 2% per annum above the Bank of England base rate from time to time. Such interest shall accrue on a daily basis from the due date until the date of actual payment of the overdue amount, whether before or after judgment. The defaulting party shall pay the interest together

with the overdue amount. This Clause shall not apply to payments that the non-paying party disputes in good faith.

4.5 If ANL disputes any invoice or other statement of monies due, ANL shall immediately notify the Supplier in writing.

4.6 ANL may, without limiting any other rights or remedies it may have, set off any amounts owed to it by the Supplier against any amounts payable by it to the Supplier.

4.7 All Fees are exclusive of VAT or GST, as applicable.

5. WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES

5.1 Each party to these Terms and Conditions represents and warrants to the other party that:

(a) it has the full corporate right, power and authority to enter into these Terms and Conditions and to perform its obligations hereunder;

(b) the execution of these Terms and Conditions by such party, and the performance by such party of its obligations and duties hereunder, do not and will not violate any agreement to which such party is a party or by which it is otherwise bound;

(c) it shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to the performance by it of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions including but not limited to all applicable laws and regulations concerning bribery and corruption; and

(d) when executed and delivered by such party, these Terms and Conditions will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of such party, enforceable against such party in accordance with its terms.

5.2 The Supplier represents and warrants to ANL that:

(a) it has sufficient rights in the Content to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(b) it has secured all third party permissions and releases necessary to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(c) it will take all reasonable precautions in accordance with generally recognised industry standards not to provide Content that contains any matter which is defamatory, libellous, unlawfully threatening or unlawfully harassing, causes injury, invades privacy rights, or is otherwise actionable in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed;

(d) the Content:

(i) does not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights;

(ii) is created, compiled and published using reasonable care and skill and do not violate any law, statute, ordinance, rule, court order, code of practice or regulation (whether on a regulatory or statutory basis) or generally recognised industry standards, in each case in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed, including but not limited to the Editors’ Code of Practice issued by the Editors’ Code of Practice Committee in the UK, and where relevant the Statement of General Principles issued by the Australian Press Council from time to time; and

(iii) does not contain any viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time bombs, cancel bots or other computer programming routines that are intended to damage, detrimentally interfere with, surreptitiously intercept or expropriate any system, data or personal information;

(e) the only costs to be borne by ANL in respect of the use of the Content in the manner envisaged by these Terms and Conditions are the Fees and (with the exception of the Fees) it shall be responsible for all payments, fees, royalties, charges or otherwise due to all and any third parties arising out of the same; and

(f) the Supplier’s Marks do not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights or other rights of any third party.

5.3 The Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless and keep ANL (and each of its employees, directors and agents) fully and effectively indemnified from and against any and all losses, demands, claims, damages, costs, expenses (including consequential losses and loss of profit, legal costs and expenses and VAT or GST thereon) and liabilities suffered or incurred, directly or indirectly by ANL as a result of any breach by the Supplier of the warranties set out in Clauses 5.1 and 5.2.

5.4 Should any legal proceedings against ANL follow from the publication of any Content, then ANL or any other Affiliate shall be entitled, in its absolute discretion (but shall be under no obligation), to take such action as it shall deem fit, including without limitation, settling or defending such claim. The Supplier shall make itself available to assist ANL in every reasonable way possible and hereby acknowledges and agrees that it shall have no claim against ANL in any way relating to ANL's conduct of any such claim where ANL has used the Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

6. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES AND LIABILITY

6.1 Nothing in this Clause 6 shall limit a party’s liability for death or personal injury.

6.2 The liability of the Supplier shall not be limited in respect of a claim by ANL under Clause 5.3.

6.3 Subject to Clauses 6.1 and 6.2, the liability of ANL to Supplier in contract, tort, negligence, pre-contract or other representations or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or the performance or observance of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions shall be limited in aggregate to the aggregate Fees paid by ANL to the Supplier in the six months immediately preceding the incurring of such loss or damage.

6.4 ANL shall not be liable in contract, tort (including negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent misrepresentations) or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions for:

(a) any economic losses (including, without limitation, loss of revenues, profits, contracts, business or anticipated savings); and

(b) any loss of goodwill or reputation; or

(c) any special, indirect or consequential losses, in any case, whether or not such losses were within the contemplation of the Supplier at the date of these Terms and Conditions, or were suffered or incurred by that party arising out of or in connection with the provisions of these Terms and Conditions or any matter arising under these Terms and Conditions.

The following clause 6.5 does not apply to, and shall have no effect in, Australia:

6.5 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereof, whether imposed by statute or by operation of law or otherwise, that are not expressly stated herein, including without limitation, the implied warranties of satisfactory quality and fitness for a particular purpose.

The following clause 6.6 applies to, and has effect in, Australia only:

6.6 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions and to the extent permitted by law, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereto. To the extent that ANL’s liability for breach of an implied warranty or condition cannot be excluded by law, ANL’s liability will be limited, at ANL’s election, to the resupply of the services or the payment of the costs of the resupply of the services.

6.7 Each provision of this Clause 6 excluding or limiting liability shall be construed separately, applying and surviving even if for any reason one or other of these provisions is held inapplicable or unenforceable in any circumstances and shall remain in force notwithstanding the expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions.

6.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in these Terms and Conditions, if ANL believes that any Content may create liability for ANL, ANL may remove such Content from the Licensed Media as ANL believes, in its sole discretion, is prudent or necessary to minimise or eliminate ANL’s potential liability.

7. POST- TERMINATION RETENTION OF CONTENT

7.1 ANL’s right to use the Content as contemplated hereunder is perpetual and shall survive the termination of these Terms and Conditions.

7.2 On expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions for any reason, all provisions of these Terms and Conditions shall cease to have effect, except that any provision which can reasonably be inferred as continuing, including, but not limited to,

the perpetual rights and licences granted under Clause 2.1, shall continue in full force and effect.

7.3 For the avoidance of doubt, neither the termination (for any reason) nor expiration of these Terms and Conditions shall require ANL to delete or destroy copies of, or remove from transmission or display, all or part of any Licensed Media containing Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

8. GENERAL

8.1 Any notice required to be given under these Terms and Conditions shall be in writing and shall only be deemed to have been duly served if hand delivered or sent by first class recorded delivery within the United Kingdom and outside the United Kingdom by registered airmail and to the party’s registered address and in the case of ANL to Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London, W8 5TT with a copy to contracts@assocnews.co.uk

8.2 Any notice pursuant to Clause 8.1 shall be deemed to have been served:

(a) if hand delivered, at the time of delivery;

(b) if sent by post, two days after posting; and

(c) if sent by airmail, seven days after posting.

8.3 Supplier shall not be entitled to assign the benefit and/or burden of these Terms and Conditions in whole or in part without the ANL’s prior written consent.

8.4 Unless a signed and dated agreement exists between the parties, these Terms and Conditions contain the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter covered and supersede any previous agreements, arrangements, written or oral, between the parties in relation to such matters.

8.5 The parties acknowledge that no standard terms and conditions sent to the Supplier by A&N Media Finance Services Limited (A&N) shall apply to these Terms and Conditions. Similarly, no terms or conditions endorsed upon, delivered with or contained in the Supplier's quotation, acknowledgement or acceptance of order, specification, invoice or similar document shall take effect in relation to the licence of Content under these Terms and Conditions and the Supplier waives any right which it otherwise might have to rely on such terms and conditions.

8.6 The parties acknowledge that ANL enters into these Terms and Conditions for the benefit of itself and each of its Affiliates. Any Affiliate from time to time may for its own benefit enforce in its own right any term of these Terms and Conditions subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the terms of these Terms and Conditions may be varied, amended or modified or these Terms and Conditions may be suspended, cancelled or terminated by agreement in writing between the parties or may be rescinded, in each case without the consent of any such Affiliate. Except as provided in this Clause 8.6, a person who is not a party to these Terms and Conditions has no right under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any terms of

these Terms and Conditions but this Clause 8.6 does not affect a right or remedy of a third party which exists or is available apart from that Act.

8.7 If any provision (or part of a provision) of these Terms and Conditions is found by any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain in force.

8.8 If any invalid, unenforceable or illegal provision would be valid, enforceable or legal if some part of it were deleted, the provision shall apply with whatever modification is necessary to give effect to the commercial intention of the parties.

8.9 Each party shall do, sign, execute and deliver all deeds, documents, instruments and acts reasonably required of it by notice from the other party to carry out and give full effect to these Terms and Conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties under it.

8.10 Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture of any kind between the parties or as constituting either party as the agent of the other party for any purpose whatsoever and neither party shall have the authority or power to bind the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the other party in any way or for any purpose.

8.11 These Terms and Conditions and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) are governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England.

8.12 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

The following clause 8.13 shall have apply to, and have effect, in, Australia only:

8.13 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have non-exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

APPENDIX 1

Invoice format:

The invoice for content licensed under this agreement must at a minimum include or be supplemented with the following information:

· Type of content claimed (video, words, pictures)

· Article IDs or links

· Video IDs for video invoices

· Title of caption

· Fee claimed if exclusively negotiated/applicable

Please note that standard rates apply where exclusive rates have not been agreed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Google announced Tuesday that it is blocking ads from targeting children based on their age, gender or interests in a new effort to protect the privacy of users under 18 years old.

The new restrictions also turns off its 'location history' feature for users under 18 globally and includes new default settings in YouTube to protect minors from explicit vides.

The new protection policy allows children, their parent or guardian to request the removal of their images from Google Image results - a feature that is set to roll out in the coming weeks.

Google's move comes as major online platforms have long been under scrutiny from lawmakers and regulators over their sites' impact on the safety, privacy and wellbeing of younger users.

Facebook's Instagram recently launched a similar policy against targeting users under 18 and Apple is using it technology to combat child abuse by scanning iPhone users' photos in search of such material.

Mindy Brooks, Google's general manager for kids and families, wrote in a blog post: 'Some countries are implementing regulations in this area, and as we comply with these regulations, we're looking at ways to develop consistent product experiences and user controls for kids and teens globally.'

Google announced Tuesday that it is blocking ads from targeting children based on their age, gender or interests in a new effort to protect the privacy of users under 18 years old. The new restrictions also turns off its 'location history' feature for users under 18 globally

Google's new policy includes some of its most popular products among children and teens, specifically YouTube.

In a few weeks, the video platform will change the default upload setting to its most private option for teens aged 13 through 17, where content is seen only by the user and people they choose.

However, users have the final say to make their content viewable by the public.

Auto-play will be off by default for kids under 18, and YouTube will turn on break reminders.

Google's new policy includes some of its most popular products among children and teens, specifically YouTube. In a few weeks, the videotaping platform will change the default upload setting to its most private option for teens aged 13 through 17, where content is seen only be the user and people they choose

Online platforms' approach to younger users has been in the spotlight in recent months as US lawmakers and attorneys general slammed Facebook's plans to create a kids-focused version of Instagram.

Search is also protecting young users from being exposed to explicit results when those under the age of 13 are logged into Family Link, which launched in 2017.

Family Link is an app that allows parents to manage and monitor how much time their children spend online, along with see what websites or apps they are scrolling through.

Facebook recently announced changes to ad targeting of minors under the age of 18, though its advertisers can still target these younger users based by age, gender or location.

Instagram also announced in late July that it is making under-16s’ accounts private by default, as part of its drive to make the app ‘safe and private’ for young users.

Prior to the change, new Instagram users’ account were set as public, meaning anyone can see your profile and posts on Instagram.

Apple made headlines last week when it announced a plan to monitor iPhones for child abuse materials.

Apple also made headlines last week when it announced a plan to monitor iPhones for child abuse materials. The Cupertino-based company says it is using an algorithm the scan photos for the explicit images

The Cupertino, California-based company says it is using an algorithm to scan photos for explicit images, which has sparked criticism among privacy advocates who fear the technology could be exploited by the government.

However, Apple released a new Frequently Asked Questions document Monday that explains how the technology will work.

The system will not scan photo albums, Apple clarified, but rather look for matches based on a database of 'hashes' - a type of digital fingerprint - of known child sexual abuse material (CSAM)images provided by child safety organizations.

While privacy advocacies worry about 'false positives, Apple boasted that 'the likelihood that the system would incorrectly flag any given account is less than one in one trillion per year.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The famous Inca site of Machu Picchu is several decades older than previously thought, archaeologists have discovered.

Carbon dating of human remains suggests that it was in use in 1420 – more than 20 years earlier than scientists expected.

Machu Picchu was built as an estate for Emperor Pachacuti, who according to historical records rose to power in 1438 before conquering the area where the site is located.

This led experts to believe it was built after 1440, and perhaps as late as 1450.

Scroll down for video

Surprise discovery: The famous Inca site of Machu Picchu (pictured) is several decades older than previously thought, archaeologists have found

Carbon dating: Researchers dated 26 individuals recovered from three cemeteries in Machu Picchu during excavations in 1912. Archaeologists are pictured at the site in 1911

WHAT IS CARBON DATING AND HOW IS IT USED? Carbon dating, also referred to as radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating, is a method that is used to determine the age of an object. Carbon-14 is a carbon isotope that is commonly used by archaeologists and historians to date ancient bones and artefacts. The rate of decay of carbon-14 is constant and easily measured, making it ideal for providing age estimates for anything over 300 years old. It can only be used on objects containing organic material - that was once 'alive' and therefore contained carbon. Carbon-14 occurs naturally in the atmosphere as part of carbon dioxide, and animals absorb it when they breathe. Animals stop taking it in when they die, and a finite amount of the chemical is stored in the body. Radioactive substances all have a half-life, the length of time it takes for a material to lose half of its radioactivity. Carbon-14 has a long half-life, 5,370 years to be exact. This long half-life can be used to find out how old objects are by measuring how much radioactivity is left in a specimen. Due to the long half-life, archaeologists have been able to date items up to 50,000 years old. Radiocarbon dating was first invented in the 1940s by an American physical chemist called Willard Libby. He won the 1960 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery. Advertisement

'Machu Picchu is among the most famous archaeological sites in the world,' said the study's lead author, Prof Richard Burger from Yale University.

'But until now estimates of its antiquity and the length of its occupation were based on contradictory historical accounts written by Spaniards in the period following the Spanish conquest.'

He added: 'This is the first study based on scientific evidence to provide an estimate for the founding of Machu Picchu and the length of its occupation.'

Prof Burger and a team of experts from several US universities carried out accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) dating of human remains from Machu Picchu.

AMS dating is an advanced form of radiocarbon dating that can date skeletons with only small amounts of organic material left, expanding the pool of remains that can be examined.

In this case, the team dated 26 individuals found at three cemeteries in Machu Picchu and recovered during excavations in 1912.

The study found the site was in use from 1420 to 1530 – ending around the time of the Spanish invasion of the Inca Empire.

It also suggests that Pachacuti ascended to the throne and began his conquests decades before the accepted historical records indicate.

Pachacuti took control of a city-state but his reign put the Inca on the path to becoming the most powerful empire in pre-Columbian America.

Researchers said the discovery could have dramatic implications for our understanding of Inca history, and also challenges the reliability of using historical records of colonial forces.

'The results suggest that the discussion of the development of the Inca empire based primarily on colonial records requires revision,' said Prof Burger.

'Modern radiocarbon methods provide a better foundation for understanding Inca chronology than the contradictory historical records.'

Machu Picchu is located in modern-day Peru's Cusco region, on a 7,970ft-long (2,430m) mountain ridge.

It was built in the classical Inca style, with polished dry-stone walls.

The site was abandoned during the time of the Spanish conquest, but was not discovered by the invading forces.

Geological analysis has suggested that the citadel's location above a network of intersecting tectonic faults was deliberately chosen.

These would have provided an abundance of easy-to-work rock as well as a source of water and drainage.

Carbon dating, also referred to as radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating, is a method that is used to determine the age of an object.

Machu Picchu is pictured during the 1912 expedition when the remains tested were first found

Machu Picchu was built as an estate for Emperor Pachacuti, who according to historical records rose to power in 1438 before conquering the area where the site is located

The study found the site was in use from 1420 to 1530 – ending around the time of the Spanish invasion of the Inca Empire. They analysed the remains from three cemeteries (pictured right)

Carbon-14 is a carbon isotope that is commonly used by archaeologists and historians to date ancient bones and artefacts.

Lat year radiocarbon dating of ancient seafood remains revealed that Aboriginal Australians settled in the continent's Riverland region 22,000 years earlier than previously thought.

The dated shell middens – remnants of 'meals eaten long ago' – captured a record of Aboriginal occupation that goes back 29,000 years in the Katarapko Riverland Floodplains, South Australia.

They had to deal with unpredictable river flows and heavily-salted valley waters that may have limited their seafood options.

Radiocarbon dating was first invented in the 1940s by an American physical chemist called Willard Libby, who won the 1960 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery.

The new study has been published in the journal Antiquity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Parents face forking out more than £4,000 on technology by the time their children reach the age of 16, according to new research.

MoneySuperMarket's findings suggest the costs have more than doubled since 2019, with many parents having to rely on technology to help educate their children during the coronavirus lockdowns.

The figures lay bare the cost of the digital generation, with technology found to cost parents an average of £232 per child a year.

That is more than double the estimate of £102 from two years ago.

Scroll down for video

Parents face forking out more than £4,000 on technology by the time their children reach the age of 16, according to new research (stock image)

AVERAGE YEARLY COSTS PER CHILD BASED ON A TYPICAL FAMILY - SURVEY The average yearly costs and average cost for families over 11 years until children reach 16 are below, based on a typical household with 1.7 children. - Technology, £232.10, £4,340.27 - Pocket money, £226.90, £4,243.03 - Packed lunches, £222.30, £4,157.01 - Uniform, £219.50, £4,104.65 - Extracurricular activities, £211.80, £3,960.66 - Lunch money, £209.50, £3,917.65 - Social activities, £205.00, £3,833.50 - After-school clubs and wraparound care, £196.50, £3,665.20 - School trips, £194.40, £3,635.28 - Transport, £180.20, £3,369.74 Based on analysis by MoneySuperMarket. Advertisement

It means that families typically face spending £4,340 on technology by the time their children are 16 years old, based on MoneySuperMarket's calculations that the average family has 1.7 children.

The research also revealed that parents face paying £4,104 on uniforms, £4,157 on packed lunches and £4,243 on pocket money over the same period.

It was based on a survey of 2,000 parents with school-age children.

More than three quarters of parents surveyed (77%) said they worried about the cost of putting their children through school, with more than a fifth (22%) worrying about it regularly.

Despite many parents having saved money over the past 18 months, around a quarter (27 per cent) of those who have managed to put money aside feel anxious about affording the forthcoming school year.

Parents estimate they typically saved £117 on school trips, £111 on extra-curricular activities and £108 on wraparound care during lockdowns.

Nearly a fifth (17 per cent) of parents said they felt under pressure to buy expensive technology during the pandemic.

When financing school purchases, if they have not been able to afford a school item, 24 per cent of parents have chosen to pay with a credit card.

Dipping into savings (21 per cent) and asking for a helping hand from family and friends (18 per cent) were the next most popular alternatives.

More than one in 10 (12 per cent) had used a buy now, pay later scheme.

MoneySuperMarket's findings suggest costs have more than doubled since 2019, with many parents having to rely on technology to help educate children during lockdown (stock image)

Sasha Evans, a money expert at MoneySuperMarket, said: 'Everyone wants their kids to have the best possible time at school, so it's easy to see how costs can mount up – particularly as education becomes more reliant on tech.

'With funding education causing a lot of Brits stress, it's important to remember there are ways to control costs.

'There's a whole range of measures you can take, from buying second-hand to making use of discount voucher codes, shopping for back-to-school essentials from supermarkets, car-sharing and even walking the school run.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sir Richard Branson said building a hotel off the moon is something he has 'always dreamt of' as he looks to the future after his maiden flight with Virgin Galactic.

The space tourism pioneer and billionaire astronaut said future customers can expect 'a lot more spaceships,' from Virgin, eventually reducing the cost of a trip.

Currently it is thought a ticket to the edge of space with Virgin Galactic, replicating Branson's trip from Sunday, July 11, will cost about $250,000 (£180,000).

Sir Richard said Virgin Galactic's flights may not be the end of his work in space, as the firm plans to build craft that can fly higher and for longer.

Speaking of other dreams he wanted to pursue, he said: 'Whether one day we will build a hotel off the moon, which is something that I've always dreamt of, or whether we'll leave that to my children to do, we'll have to see.

'But that's something which is yet another dream that, if I've got time in my life to do, that would be something I'd love to do one day.'

Virgin Galactic founder Richard Branson, left, receives a Virgin Galactic made astronaut wings pin from Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield after his flight to space from Spaceport America near Truth or Consequences

Branson travelled 53.5 miles above the surface of the Earth, taking him and five crew mates to the edge of space where they experienced weightlessness, telling the Today show on NBC this morning: 'Once you're an astronaut, you're always an astronaut'

Earth rise from the moon taken by Apollo 11 astronauts in 1969. Sir Richard Branson hopes to one day offer space tourists the opportunity to see the Earth from the moon

THE CURRENT VIRGIN GALACTIC FLEET VMS Eve: The launch platform for the SpaceShipTwo and Spaceship III based Virgin Galactic vehicles. VMS stands for Virgin MotherShip and is named after Evette Branson, mother of founder Sir Richard Branson. So far only one has been built and it made its first flight in December 2008. VSS Unity: Based on the SpaceShip Two class of vehicle, it is a rocket powered glider. A replacement for the destroyed VSS Enterprise, Unity first flew to space in December 2018. It has reached an altitude of 50 miles, earning its pilots commercial astronaut wings for the first time in 2018. VSS Imagine: The first Spaceship III class of spaceplane, due to begin glide tests summer 2021. VSS Inspire: The second Spaceship III class of spaceplane currently under construction in California by the Spaceship Company. Advertisement

Branson hopes that following the 'landmark moment' that saw him launch from Spaceport America in New Mexico, the space tourism industry will grow at pace.

Amazon and Blue Origin found, Jeff Bezos, will become the second 'founder-billionaire' to go to space on his own firms vehicle on Tuesday, July 20.

The firm will then look to also offering short hops to the edge of space, similar to Virgin Galactic, for an estimated $200,000 (£140,000) per seat.

Branson hopes that with more spaceplanes and rockets available, it will in time help bring down the cost of a trip to space.

This 'ramping up' was backed up by Virgin Galactic CEO Michael Colglazier, who said one day Virgin Galactic could be operating 400 flights per year from dozens of spaceports worldwide.

VSS Unity is a prototype, which will be replaced with VSS Imagine, a SpaceShip3 class of vehicle that will be easier to maintain and build.

They will also allow for quicker turnarounds between flights, and so allowing for more regular trips to space.

Future versions will be engineered with ease of manufacture in mind, he told MailOnline in an earlier interview.

The firm is selling new shares in the hope of raising $500 million (£360 million) to fund future development of the fleet, including finding other spaceports around the world.

It isn't clear where those spaceports will be, but sister firm Virgin Orbit, has an agreement with Spaceport Cornwall.

With more than 600 people paying for the chance to go to space, and some waiting over 15 years for the opportunity, they'll need to ramp up quickly to meet demand.

There are another 1,000 people waiting int he wings who have each paid a $1,000 (£721) deposit for a chance to travel, and are putting two seats up for grabs in a competition run by Omaze.

Sir Richard said the trip and the experience was 'more extreme than I'd have ever imagined' before hailing his first flight as 'glorious'.

Asked if he had come to terms with his first space flight, he said: 'I'm nearly back down to earth, but not quite.

He was joined in space by chief pilot David Mackay, a Scottish-born test pilot for the Royal Air Force who went on to fly for Sir Richard's Virgin Atlantic, and chief flight instructor Michael Masucci in the cockpit

Branson's flight, the first fully crewed trip to space for Virgin Galactic, was intended as a confidence-boosting plug for the firm, which plans to start taking paying customers on a short trip, allowing them to become astronauts, from 2022

'It was a lifetime dream. Dreams don't often turn into reality, and it was just wonderful – everything I could have possibly dreamt of happened.'

Take-off had been delayed by about 90 minutes on Sunday due to the weather overnight at Spaceport America in New Mexico.

But video streamed live online showed Virgin Galactic in the air at about 15.45 BST, and the spaceship had reached 40,000ft by 16:00 BST.

VSS Unity and its crew, was carried up into the atmosphere by its mothership, VMS Eve, before being released so it could power up to highs of 250,000ft.

Branson wears his astronaut's wings at a news conference, after flying with a crew in Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity

Sir Richard Branson's message to 'the next generation of dreamers' I have dreamt about this moment since I was a child, but nothing could have prepared me for the view of Earth from space. It was magical. I was honoured to test the incredible customer experience onboard Virgin Galactic's spaceship VSS Unity as part of this remarkable crew of mission specialists - and now astronauts. How you feel when you look down on Earth is impossible to put into words, it's just indescribable beauty. I can't wait for you all to get up there. My mission statement, which I wrote inside my spacesuit, is to turn the dream of space travel into a reality - for my grandchildren, for your grandchildren, for everyone. I said a message to all children while I was in space: I was once a child with a dream looking up to the stars. Now I'm an adult in a spaceship looking down to our beautiful Earth. To the next generation of dreamers: if we can do this, just imagine what you can do. Having flown to space, I can see even more clearly how Virgin Galactic is the spaceline for Earth. We are here to make space more accessible to all and turn the next generation of dreamers into the astronauts of today and tomorrow. Imagine a world where people of all ages and backgrounds, from anywhere, of any gender, of any ethnicity have equal access to space. They will in turn, inspire us all back here on Earth. If you've ever had a dream, now is the time to make it come true. Welcome to the dawn of a new space age. Advertisement

Describing the experience, Sir Richard said: 'It's as if time seems to slow down and everything is more extreme than one would expect.

'It's one extreme to the other – the spaceship releases and you're sitting back as the rocket fires and you're going from nought to three mach in seven or eight seconds.

'That's extreme, that's more extreme than I'd have ever imagined – but glorious.

'Then there's the sudden silence when you're drifting into space and you're still travelling at three mach with no noise from the rocket, drifting up and up and up.

'One of the most ridiculous moments is, having said a few words, just unbuckling and just drifting off one's feet, then floating on top of the roof and looking down at our beautiful Earth, and seeing other people floating past you and realising 'I'm an astronaut'.'

He was given his astronaut wings, something every Virgin Galactic passenger will receive, by veteran astronaut Chris Hadfield.

Asked when future customers could expect to have their chance to go to space, Sir Richard said work will begin on creating more spaceships.

'Off the back of the successful flight yesterday, we will be getting out and building a lot more spaceships and in time that will help bring the cost down, but it's not going to be immediate,' he said.

'Our next spaceship will go even higher than our current spaceship, and we'll be building spaceships with even greater capabilities as time goes by.'

Addressing whether he would go into space again, Sir Richard added: 'I think I've been spoiled as much as I should be spoiled in my lifetime.

'We have hundreds of people who have signed up to go to space and they will now be itching to get into the seat.

'Maybe one day, when we have 20 spaceships, they might find room for me again – maybe my 90th birthday or something, maybe they'll let me up for that. But we'll see how we go.'

He did say, in response to the news SpaceX founder Elon Musk had purchased a ticket with Virgin Galactic, that he may buy a ticket with SpaceX one day.

He will travel to space on VSS Unity on Sunday July 11, with a live stream of the event starting at 14:00 BST (09:00 ET) from Spaceport America in New Mexico

Unlike Virgin, SpaceX is currently operating orbital flights to the International Space Station in the Crew Dragon capsule.

So far just for space agencies but they are working to offer the first commercial flights with operator Axiom Space in 2022.

It is thought a ticket on a SpaceX Crew Dragon and ten days on the ISS will cost about $55 million, but that could come down in the future.

The Russian space agency Roscomos is currently developing a new space station, scheduled to launch in 2025, that will include a dedicated 'space hotel' module.

Axiom Space and others are also in discussions with NASA to expand the ISS to make it more compatible for tourist visits and Orbital Assembly Corporation (OAC) hope to have the first fully commercial 'space hotel' operational by 2027.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rating:

With the rise of cheap smart speakers, virtually disposable headphones and booming TV soundbars, its been a tough few years for high quality audio.

However, British brand Naim may have the answer.

It's $2,999 Uniti Atom is a revelation, an integrated amplifier than makes it easy to stream music at a quality you've probably never heard before.

Scroll down for video

The tiny Atom packs a huge punch - and it the most impressive mix of tried and tested hifi and modern technology we've seen

It fact, I'd go so far as to say it can help you rediscover the lost art of listening to music - and has without doubt given me more enjoyment in the few weeks I've been using it that any other piece of technology over the past few years.

Everything about the Atom screams quality, from the industrial 'monolith' design with its metal fins to the screen that dominates the front of the unit.

Looks wise, it owes more to Apple and Braun than the historic hi-fi designs that were dominated by buttons and dials.

In fact, there are just four buttons - and you'll rarely use any of them.

However, there is the mother of all dials - a brilliantly designed volume control on the top of the unit.

It lights up to show how loud the system is, and is perfectly weighted, making it strangely addictive to use.

The amount of detail and presence in the system is amazing - with the very best recordings, you really do get a sense of being in the studio, and can hear exactly where each instrument is.

For most functions, however, there's a choice of a slightly overly complicated remote, or a superb app.

I found myself using the app 99% of the time, other than wanting to change the volume while watching TV.

But while the specs and design are all well and good, the key to the Atom is the sound.

It's simply jaw dropping.

I regularly found myself up until 2am listening (sorry neighbours) remembering a favourite song and being unable to contain the urge to listen to it.

The amount of detail and presence in the system is amazing - with the very best recordings, you really do get a sense of being in the studio, and can hear exactly where each instrument is.

On tracks like The Streets' Blinded by the Lights the bass is precise and undistorted, while classic Beatles tracks (particularly the recently remastered albums) reveal new detail in music you've been listening to your whole life.

The most interesting thing about the Atom is that it's so compelling, its almost impossible to have music on in the background.

The front display is extremely bright, and shows off album artwork while you play

I found myself having to go sit down to repeat tracks constantly just to hear them from the optimum position, and its all encompassing - even reading at the same time is often impossible.

I also used the Atom for my TV sound, and this worked very well - obviously you're not getting any kind of surround sound, but the sound you are getting is exceptionally clear and precise.

If you're worried about the Uniti being loud enough, don't be - Naim claims 40 watts per channel into 8 ohms, which in reality means it'll be more than loud enough for pretty much anything other than the biggest speakers.

Crucial to the Atom is the integration of streaming services, with Spotify and Tidal being being in.

Spotify sounds great on the Atom, but to really get the most out of it, you'll need a Tidal Hi-Fi subscription for its lossless service.

The combination of Tidal and the Atom is a revelation, and makes you realise just what most streaming services are lacking in terms of quality (although that said, on the average headphones or hifi setup you probably won't hear much of a difference).

There's also Chromecast support, meaning there's a plethora of other apps available that can use the Atom, along with bluetooth support.

Basically, you can hook up pretty much anything.

It's also possible to use the Atom for TV sounds, which I did using the digital input on the back of the unit - but there's also an option to get a HDMI input.

The attention to detail in getting the best sound is almost terrifying at times.

Q ACOUSTICS CONCEPT 40 The floorstanding speakers look amazing, with a white laquer finish that gives then a modern, but not too space age, feel. Finding the perfect speaker to go with the Uniti can be tough - but we were able to try it out with the $999 Q Acoustic Concept 40s, and they're a perfect combination. The floorstanding speakers look amazing, with a white laquer finish that gives then a modern, but not too space age, feel. However, its the sound that is jaw dropping. Put simply, you've probably never heard music like this before. It's incredible precise, especially if you spend a little bit of time getting the speakers in the perfect position. The combination can seem a little unforgiving at time, particularly with stereo effect - you really do need to be sat in the right place to get the best out of them. But sit in the sweet spot and it's truly mind blowing - and as with the Uniti, you'll see exactly why these speakers carry such a high price, and realise what you've been missing with any other setup. Advertisement

From a power supply with floating pins aimed at ensuring a better connection to hand-wired analogue and digital circuitry, every element of the design in Uniti Atom has been considered for its effect on sound quality.

The Atom also looks great, in a very industrial way.

The screen is sharp and clear - although it really feels like it should be a touchscreen, and you'll without doubt reach out the first few times you use it.

Overall, it's incredible difficult to fault the Atom.

The app can be a little confusing at times, but with each update, it has improved.

But overall, this really is the perfect combination of old school hi-fi know how and modern technology.

It manages to bring the slightly archaic and ultra nerdy world of high end hifi into the world of streaming without compromising quality.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Meet Grace: Makers of Sophia the robot unveil an eerily human-like robotic NURSE designed to interact with the elderly and those isolated by the Covid-19 pandemic

Super-intelligent humanoid 'Sophia' can now move forward in a series of clunky steps.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seabirds are coming under increasing threat from plastic waste, with thousands of nests across Britain and Europe found to contain the pollutant, researchers warned.

Over four years data on 10,274 nests across the UK, Norway, Iceland, Sweden and the Faroe Islands were studied by the University of the Highland and Islands.

Observers visiting seabird colonies for other monitoring activities were asked to help gather data as a cost effective and environmentally friendly way to conduct the study, which discovered 12 per cent of them contained plastic debris.

Information was collected from 14 seabird species in 84 colonies between 2016 and 2020, with Atlantic puffins most affected by plastic in their nests, they found.

In total 67 per cent of Atlantic puffin nests were found to contain plastic by the Scottish researchers, using data from people studying nests for other purposes.

The research found Atlantic puffins were the most affected species with 67 per cent of their nests containing some amount of plastic pollution

ATLANTIC PUFFINS WORST AFFECTED BY PLASTIC IN NESTS TABLE TITLE Species Nests studied Containing plastic Atlantic Puffin 130 87 Herring Gull 1728 450 European Shag 1243 312 Great Black-backed Gull 348 61 Great Cormorant 216 27 Lesser Black-backed Gull 894 82 Arctic Tern 108 8 Little Tern 49 3 Black-legged Kittiwake 3681 139 Common Eider 338 11 Common Guillemot 20 0 Black-headed gull 214 0 Common Gull 119 0 Common Tern 26 0 Advertisement

No data was collected on Atlantic Puffins in the UK as they tend to breed in deep burrows rather than more open nests.

This means that it is difficult to record the contents of the nests compared to the shallower nest cavities in places like Norway and Svalbard.

Although Atlantic Puffin typically nest in burrows, they can line their nest with small items such as vegetation.

Occasional fragments of paper and fishing net have also been reported in burrows in the UK, although that wasn't confirmed by this study.

Monitoring burrow nesting species for debris presents different challenges to those nesting on the surface.

However visual observation could be made of individuals returning to the burrow with nesting material, whilst endoscope cameras could be used to investigate the presence of debris within accessible burrow nests in future.

Dr Neil James, a post-doctoral research associate at the Environmental Research Institute, was one of the scientists involved in the project, and said marine plastic pollution is an increasing global environmental issue.

He said it poses a serious threat to marine biodiversity and 'seabirds are particularly affected because of the risk of entanglement or ingestion.'

'Our study found that a significant number of nests included plastic debris, with some species more likely to incorporate it than others,' Dr James explained.

'As well as providing important information about our seabird populations, this type of study can also reveal valuable insights into the prevalence of plastic in the marine environment.'

Over four years data on 10,274 nests across the UK, Norway, Iceland, Sweden and the Faroe Islands were studied by the University of the Highland and Islands

The extent to which seabirds incorporated debris into their nests across the UK, and northwest Europe, varied by species and location.

Cormorants and shags, and the three large gull species, showed a greater tendency to incorporate debris into their nests than other species.

Conversely, despite a large number of monitored nests and colonies, only a small number of Black-legged Kittiwake nests were found to contain debris.

Although, four colonies had more than 10 per cent of their nest made of debris, indicating that at a local level, particularly where thread-like debris is available, kittiwakes will incorporate debris into their nests.

Data was collected from 84 seabird colonies and analysed for evidence of plastic pollution

One nest, found on an oil rig in the Norwegian Sea, was nearly half plastic debris, likely due to a lack of local vegetation.

The team behind the study said using people already visiting seabird colonies for monitoring purposes to gather scientific data was an effective sollution.

It allowed them to study the spread of 'debris over a large geographical scale, and wide range of species' that wouldn't otherwise be possible

'Collecting data in this opportunistic way reduced the time and cost that would be required if all the seabird colonies included in this study were visited independently, especially colonies which require considerable planning and effort,' they wrote.

The extent to which seabirds incorporated debris into their nests across the UK, and northwest Europe, varied by species and location

It also considerably reduced the amount of carbon emissions that would have been produced if they had to send a researcher to study each nest independently.

The cost of collecting the data included in this study by a single researcher would have been about £18,000 and would have involved travelling 13,000 miles.

This would have resulted in carbon emissions of 3.76 metric tons, all of which was avoided by using people already visiting the nests to gather extra information.

'This approach also removed the potential of additional disturbance to breeding seabirds from extra visits to colonies during the breeding season,' the team said.

The results of the study are published in the Marine Pollution Bulletin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: The smallest 3D spectacles in the world? Praying mantises with tiny glasses will be used by scientists to sharpen ROBOT sight

Meet the robo-MANTIS: Four-legged, four-wheeled robot unveiled at CES can walk or drive to handle any terrain
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The next SpaceX 160ft Starship prototype, known as SN20, will be launched into orbit as early as next month strapped to the massive Super Heavy booster.

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined the two reach a whopping 394ft tall, much larger than the Statue of Liberty with its full plinth, which reaches 305ft. Without the plinth Lady Liberty is closer is 151ft, closer in size to the upper stage of Starlink, which stands at 160ft.

SN20 will launch for low Earth orbit once construction has finished of the orbital launch tower at the SpaceX Boca Chica facility in Texas later this month.

According to a filing with the FCC, the prototype will launch from Texas and make a 'soft ocean landing' off the coast of Hawaii after 90 minutes in orbit.

The Elon Musk-owned space firm hasn't confirmed when they will launch the prototype, but experts predict it could be as soon as early August.

Once the booster gets Starship into orbit it will come back to Earth making a landing in the Gulf of Mexico about 20 miles from shore, ready to fly again in future.

SpaceX has completed a number of tests on the 160ft Starship upper stage, with the most recent, SN15, landing on the launch pad after a short high-altitude flight, but this will be the first test of the full Starship system, including the booster stage.

The fully re-usable Starship rocket will be able to carry a payload of more than 220,000lb into low Earth orbit, and even send humans to Mars in future.

Scroll down for video

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined the two reach a whopping 394ft tall, larger than the Statue of Liberty and its full plinth

An artist's impression reveals what the Starship SN20 and Super Heavy booster will look like on SpaceX’s Orbital Launch Mount

The Super Heavy booster is required to give the 160ft Starship the lift necessary to get into orbit, once it performs its service it will come back to Earth making a landing in the Gulf of Mexico about 20 miles from shore

STARSHIP AND SUPER HEAVY LAUNCHER SpaceX Starship is made up of two stages, the Super Heavy booster and the Starship vehicle on top. Super Heavy fires and gives Starship the boost it needs to reach orbit. Once in space, Starship separates and continues its journey, while Super Heavy returns to land on the ground. It is designed to be a reusable launch vehicle that could put humans on Mars, according to founder Elon Musk. Super Heavy The first stage, or booster, of the next-generation launch system with a gross liftoff mass of over three million kg. It uses sub-cooled liquid methane and liquid oxygen (CH4/LOX) propellants. The booster will return to land at the launch site on its six legs. Height: 70m (230ft) Diameter: 9m (30ft) Starship Starship is the fully reusable spacecraft and second stage of the Starship system. It offers an integrated payload section and is capable of carrying passengers and cargo to Earth orbit, planetary destinations, and between destinations on Earth. Height: 50m (160ft) Diameter 9m (30ft) Advertisement

According to SpaceX, Starship is both the Super Heavy and the upper stage combined, with the upper stage the only portion so far tested by the firm.

The Super Heavy Booster BN4 prototype is currently being built and when finished it will be moved to the launch pad where a massive orbital launch tower is currently under construction.

The seventh section of the tower was lifted into place last week, and final construction is due for completion by the end of the month.

Musk shared photos of the earlier BN3 prototype on July 1, showing the mammoth booster towering over Starbase.

Alone, the booster stands at 230ft and when the Starship is added it will reach almost 400ft - the tallest rocket ever made.

SpaceX had originally hoped to launch this month, but Elon Musk said he'd be happy to have Starship stacked on top of the Super Heavy by the end of the month, with a launch the following month.

For the next test, once launched into orbit, Starship will perform a powered, targeted landing after achieving orbit, coming down 60 miles off the Hawaii coast.

The FCC filing explains: 'The Starship Orbital test flight will originate from Starbase,' the home of SpaceX in Boca Chica, Texas, then the booster stage will separate 170 seconds into the flight.

'The Booster will then perform a partial return and land in the Gulf of Mexico approximately 20 miles from the shore,' the filing says.

'The Orbital Starship will continue on flying between the Florida Straits.

'It will achieve orbit until performing a powered, targeted landing approximately 100km (~62 miles) off the northwest coast of Kauai in a soft ocean landing.'

A year ago, Elon Musk announced to SpaceX employees that Starship progress was a top priority, with progress accelerating 'dramatically and immediately.'

When Super Heavy and Starship are combined they stand 394ft tall, and will be able to carry a payload of more than 220,000lb into low Earth orbit and be fully reusable. Making it the largest rocket ever created

The Super Heavy Booster BN4 prototype is currently being built and when finished it will be moved to the launch pad where a massive orbital launch tower is currently under construction

The orbital part of Starship, the portion tested so far, will perform a powered, targeted landing after achieving orbit, coming down 60 miles off the Hawaii coast

A map provided as part of SpaceX's FCC filing shows how the Starship rocket would launch from Texas before reaching orbit

That resulted in a rapid increase in Starship prototypes being built, often with a new prototype ready before the previous one had even been tested.

The test flights have ranged from static firing the engines, to launching up to six miles into the air and attempting to land back down on the launch pad.

The first time SpaceX achieved a landing without blowing up was on May 5, when the SN15 rocket flew six miles up then returned safely to the landing pad.

SpaceX has completed a number of tests on the 160ft Starship upper stage, with the most recent, SN15, landing on the launch pad after a short high-altitude flight, but this will be the first test of the full Starship system, including the booster stage

When Super Heavy and Starship are combined they stand 394ft tall, and will be able to carry a payload of more than 220,000lb into low Earth orbit and be fully reusable

SpaceX is working with the FCC, US Air Force, NASA and the FAA for the flight to arrange the safest time to launch.

One of SpaceX's key goals is to ensure that the Starship rockets are reusable, and future tests will see both stages return to the launch pad, rather than the ocean.

Musk has calculated that to put one million humans on Mars by 2025, his Starship rockets would need to conducted around three flights a day and a total of 1,000 flights a year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you thought your cat was lazy, chances are, you're probably right.

A new study from researchers at the University of California, Davis has found that most cats, unlike most mammals, would rather eat a free meal than put out effort to eat, a behavior known contrafreeloading.

Researchers at the university looked at 17 different, domestic, neutered cats (including ones who had previous experience with a food puzzle) who were presented with a food puzzle and a tray of food.

Scroll down for video

Cats, unlike most mammals, would rather eat a free meal than put in effort to eat, according to a new study

Four cats put effort into getting the food out of the puzzle. Five cats showed 'weak contrafreeloading tendencies,' while eight did not contrafreeload at all.

The food puzzle let the cats see the food, but it required effort to get it out.

'There is an entire body of research that shows that most species including birds, rodents, wolves, primates—even giraffes—prefer to work for their food,' said the study's lead author, Mikel Delgado, in a statement.

'What's surprising is out of all these species cats seem to be the only ones that showed no strong tendency to contrafreeload.'

17 domestic, neutered cats were presented with a food puzzle and a tray of food. Four cats tried to get the food out of the puzzle, 5 showed 'weak contrafreeloading tendencies' and 8 did not contrafreeload at all

Unlike cats, most species including birds, wolves and primates, prefer to work for their food

Delgado continued: 'It wasn't that cats never used the food puzzle, but cats ate more food from the tray, spent more time at the tray and made more first choices to approach and eat from the tray rather than the puzzle.'

The concept of contrafreeloading has been observed in a number of different animal species, including dogs, goats, mice and even birds.

Even primates have been known to contrafreeload for their food, as some experts suggest it gives them information on their surroundings and environment.

All 17 cats wore activity monitors throughout the study, but what surprised the researchers is that those cats that were seen as more active than others, still largely picked the free food than those that wanted to work for it.

It's unclear why cats freeload for their food, but it may be because some cats prefer to use natural hunting instincts

'Cats who consumed more food from the puzzle, consumed more food in general, suggesting a relationship between hunger and effort,' the authors wrote in the study.

While it's clear that many cats, like your crazy second cousin, prefer to freeload, however, it's unclear why they do so.

Food puzzles have been used in the past and some cats prefer to use their instincts to ambush their prey, utilizing their natural hunting instincts, Delgado, who is a cat behaviorist and research affiliate at UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, added.

The study was published last month in the journal Animal Cognition.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A Swiss startup has revealed plans for a hyperloop system that could transport passengers at speeds of up to 745 miles per hour beneath the Alps.

Monthey-based firm Swisspod is promising a hyperloop system capable of transporting passengers and cargo from Geneva to Zurich in only 17 minutes or New York City to Washington, DC in just 30 minutes.

This is about one ninth the duration of the equivalent train journey in Switzerland and one seventh the duration of the US journey, all at a fraction of the carbon footprint of plane travel.

Swisspod plans to bring its hyperloop to the market in four to five years, according to Denis Tudor, its CEO and co-founder, and will 'know within nine months from now' how to implement the technology based on its work at a mini test site.

Tudor previously said his company's vessels will travel somewhere between 620-745 miles per hour (1,000-1,200 kilometres per hour), if it can successfully build the propulsion system required.

The firm hasn't revealed costs for the ambitious project, but if rolled out, the passenger vessels will be able to automatically decelerate during tunnel curvatures 'for a ride that’s as smooth as silk', according to the firm.

Scroll down for video

Swisspod is a Hyperloop startup founded in 2019. Its passenger pods, pictured here in an artist's impression, will be capable of transporting passengers at high speeds

The vessels will travel somewhere between 1,000-1,200 kilometres per hour, or 620-745 miles per hour, if the firm can successfully build the propulsion system required

Swisspod plans to bring its hyperloop to the market in four to five years, according to Denis Tudor, its CEO and co-founder. The firm was only founded two years ago and is based in Monthey, Switzerland

Swisspod is promising a hyperloop system capable of transporting passengers and cargo from Geneva to Zurich in only 17 minutes or New York City to Washington, DC in just 30 minutes. This is about one ninth the duration of the equivalent train journey in Switzerland and one seventh the duration of the US journey, all at a fraction of the carbon footprint of plane travel.

HOW DOES IT WORK? One of the big challenges of a Hyperloop is its propulsion system. To keep costs down, the energy required for propulsion in the EPFL design will not come from the track – as it does for Maglev trains – but will be carried by the pods themselves. They will be equipped with linear induction motors, although further development work is needed to reduce the pods’ power consumption. Linear induction motors produce motion in a straight line, as opposed to the rotational motion of a wheel. The target is to reach a power consumption of 10–50 Wh/km per passenger (depending on how long the trip is), compared with 97–100 Wh/km for electric cars and 515–600 Wh/km for planes. Advertisement

Hyperloop is a proposed method of travel being worked on by several companies that would transport people at top speeds between distant locations.

The concept – first proposed in 1910 by US engineer Robert Goddard – received renewed interest in 2013 due to a white paper by billionaire entrepreneur and SpaceX founder Elon Musk.

But the Swisspod project is unique in that it relies on linear induction motor within its high-speed autonomous vessels.

Linear induction motors directly produce motion in a straight line, as opposed to the rotational motion of a wheel.

Other hyperloop projects make use of the 'Maglev' system, which involves two sets of magnets – one set to repel and push the train up off the track, and another set to move the elevated train ahead, taking advantage of the lack of friction.

'To keep costs down, the energy required for propulsion in the EPFL design will not come from the track – as it does for Maglev trains – but will be carried by the pods themselves,' EPFL says in a statement.

'They will be equipped with linear induction motors, although further development work is needed to reduce the pods’ power consumption.'

Swisspod and EPFL have just finished construction of its miniature prototype track for the project, funded by a Swiss government grant.

Hyperloop is a proposed method of travel being worked on by several companies that would transport people at top speeds between distant locations

The interior and exterior of the moving vessels, as well as the huge underground tubes, will feature a minimalist red and white design in a nod to Switzerland's national flag

Artist's impression of the interior where passengers would be sat, in plush red seats. One disadvantage of travelling underground is the lack of view

Hyperloops stand to revolutionize long-distance travel. The concept, first proposed back in 1910 by US engineer Robert Goddard - received renewed interest in 2013 thanks to a white paper by Elon Musk

The small circular version of the final system, about 130 feet in diameter, is based at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL).

The large vacuum tube will allow experts to test the linear induction motor that will propel the real thing.

'With this reduced-scale test track, we will be able to study the fundamental aspects of our pod’s electromagnetic propulsion and levitation system,' said Mario Paolone, head of the EPFL’s distributed electrical systems laboratory.

Swisspod and EPFL have just finished construction of its miniature prototype track for the ambitious project, funded by a Swiss government grant

The miniature circular version of the final system, about 130 feet in diameter, is based at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)

'We'll use the results to enhance the pod design and make the loop operate more efficiently.'

Swisspod was founded in 2019 by Tudor and Cyril Dénéréaz, multiple-award winners of the SpaceX Hyperloop Competition run by Musk's firm.

Hyperloop projects are already under way the Port of Hamburg, Toulouse, the Near East, China and in the Nevada desert, courtesy of Sir Richard Branson's company Virgin Hyperloop.

Last November, Virgin Hyperloop staff rode a pod along a portion of massive white tube, which is still being constructed in Nevada.

Virgin Hyperloop co-founder Josh Giegel said the experience will feel like an aircraft at take-off and at speed for passengers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have discovered two giant rocks in the asteroid belt between the orbits of Jupiter and Mars that shouldn't be there.

The asteroids, called 203 Pompeja and 269 Justitia, resemble trans-Neptunian objects – those that are found beyond the eighth planet in our Solar System.

Both have 'complex organic matter' on their surface and are redder than any other object in the asteroid belt.

It's possible they formed in the vicinity of Neptune in the early life of the Solar System before being transplanted to the asteroid belt during a violent phase of 'planetary migration', the experts reveal.

The two asteroids - 203 Pompeja and 269 Justitia - could have formed in the vicinity of Neptune and been transplanted to the main belt region during a violent phase of 'planetary migration'

THE ASTEROID BELT The asteroid belt is a region of space between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where most of the asteroids in our Solar System are found orbiting the Sun. Astronomers think that the asteroid belt is made up of material that was never able to form into a planet, or of the remains of a planet which broke apart a very long time ago. The asteroids in the asteroid belt come in a variety of sizes. Some are very small (less than a mile across), while others are quite large. The largest asteroid is called Ceres. It is about one-quarter the size of our moon. Source: Caltech Advertisement

'This discovery therefore provides new evidence that planetesimals formed at the outer edge of the Solar System have moved to the asteroid belt within Jupiter's orbit,' says JAXA, the Japanese space agency, in a statement.

203 Pompeja is about 70 miles (110 km) in diameter, while 269 Justitia is 35 miles (55km), according to JAXA.

203 Pompeja is the only 'very red' asteroid known so far among the approximately 250 bodies with diameter larger than 70 miles found in the asteroid belt, the experts report.

Both were discovered in the 19th century, but their colour was detected through visible and near-infrared spectroscopic observations from the Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF) in Hawaii and Seoul National University Astronomical Observatory (SAO) in Korea.

Generally, objects in the inner solar system tend to reflect more blue light because they don't have complex organic compounds like carbon and methane.

Objects in the outer solar system – past Neptune – are redder because they do have a lot of these compounds, which are red in the visible and near-infrared light wavelengths.

So the fact that both are redder than any other 'D-type' body (which were thought to be the reddest objects in the asteroid belt until now) suggests they originated from the outer solar system.

Figure showing the evolution of the Solar System shows how the two 'very red' asteroids ended up in the asteroid belt (often referred to as the 'main' belt). D-type bodies are generally 'reddish' and were thought to be the reddest objects in the asteroid belt until now

'In order to have these organics, you need to initially have a lot of ice at the surface,' study author Michaël Marsset from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) told the New York Times.

'So they must have formed in a very cold environment. Then the solar irradiation of the ice creates those complex organics.'

If the asteroids were too close to the Sun, temperatures would not allow those ices to exist, Marsset said.

What's more, the characteristics of 203 Pompeja and 269 Justitia are supportive of a theory known called the Nice model.

The theory – developed in the French city of the same name – goes that that when the giant planets first formed they were closer to the Sun than they are today.

Artist's impression of the asteroid belt - the region of space between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter where most of the asteroids in our Solar System are found orbiting the Sun

NASA explains: 'The planets interacted with each other and with the surrounding small bodies and eventually underwent an instability, in which Neptune, Uranus and Saturn moved outwards and Jupiter moved inwards.'

This theoretically would have brought the two ultra-red asteroids from beyond Neptune into the asteroid belt over several millions of years.

The Nice model also supports the idea that there was an additional Neptune-like planet that was ejected from the Solar System, commonly referred to as Planet Nine.

The new research was led by Sunao Hasegawa at JAXA and published in the journal Astrophysical Journal Letters.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The world's oldest known coin mint, beginning operation between 640 and 550 BC, has been discovered in China.

It produced the first metal 'spade coins' – named because of their similarity to the gardening tool – more than 2,600 years ago.

The 'highly-organised' site was capable of mass-producing the first metal currency and helps shed light on the origins of money, archaeologists said.

Scroll down for video

The world's oldest known coin mint, beginning operation between 640 and 550 BC, has been found in China. It produced the first metal 'spade coins' (pictured with the tip reconstructed based on a coin mould from the site) – named because of their similarity to the gardening tool

View from above: The 'highly-organised' site was capable of mass-producing the first metal currency, archaeologists said. Pictured is an aerial view of the foundry in Guanzhuang

Previous research has suggested that coins were first issued by merchants, making it much easier to trade, transport and count wealth. However, the mint at Guanzhuang is located close to the edge of the outer city, near the gates to the administrative inner city (pictured)

WHAT IS CARBON DATING AND HOW IS IT USED? Carbon dating, also referred to as radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating, is a method that is used to determine the age of an object. Carbon-14 is a carbon isotope that is commonly used by archaeologists and historians to date ancient bones and artefacts. The rate of decay of carbon-14 is constant and easily measured, making it ideal for providing age estimates for anything over 300 years old. It can only be used on objects containing organic material - that was once 'alive' and therefore contained carbon. Carbon-14 occurs naturally in the atmosphere as part of carbon dioxide, and animals absorb it when they breathe. Animals stop taking it in when they die, and a finite amount of the chemical is stored in the body. Radioactive substances all have a half-life, the length of time it takes for a material to lose half of its radioactivity. Carbon-14 has a long half-life, 5,370 years to be exact. This long half-life can be used to find out how old objects are by measuring how much radioactivity is left in a specimen. Due to the long half-life, archaeologists have been able to date items up to 50,000 years old. Radiocarbon dating was first invented in the 1940s by an American physical chemist called Willard Libby. He won the 1960 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery. Advertisement

They made the discovery during excavations at Guanzhuang, a city and administrative centre of the Zheng state – a regional power before the rise of Imperial China.

Researchers uncovered part of a bronze foundry with dozens of used and unused coin moulds along with coin fragments and metal debris. Together, these confirm this part of the foundry was a coin mint.

Analysis of the finds reveals the mint was 'highly organised' and produced 'spade coins' in a standardised fashion.

Spade coins are the oldest known Chinese metal currency and possibly the first in the world, estimated to have been first minted between 750-500 BC.

They were used by the Zheng and surrounding regions until they were abolished by the first emperor of China in 221 BC.

'The Guanzhuang foundry started around 770 BC, but at first it mainly produced ritual vessels, weapons and tools,' said lead author of the research Dr Hao Zhao from Zhengzhou University.

'It is about 150 years later that the minting activities appeared in this foundry.'

Radiocarbon dating of the Guanzhuang mint indicates it started operation sometime between 640-550 BC.

This places it early in the spade coin's history and means those found at the site are the oldest examples of metal currency ever discovered in China. Although other early mints have been found, none have been radiocarbon dated.

Researchers hope this new site, located in Henan Province, can shed light on the chronology of money and how it developed.

Previous research has suggested that coins were first issued by merchants, making it much easier to trade, transport and count wealth.

However, the mint at Guanzhuang is located close to the edge of the outer city, near the gates to the administrative inner city.

This could indicate that the government was involved in the early history of currency, archaeologists believe, although the limited number of artefacts found at the site means the exact affiliation of the foundry cannot yet be confirmed.

Archaeologists made the discovery during excavations at Guanzhuang (pictured), a city and administrative centre of the Zheng state – a regional power before the rise of Imperial China

Spade coins are the oldest known Chinese metal currency and possibly the first in the world, estimated to have been first minted between 750-500 BC

Researchers hope this new site, located in Guanzhuang, Henan Province, can shed light on the chronology of money and how it developed

Radiocarbon dating of the Guanzhuang mint indicates it started operation sometime between 640-550 BC

While the mint at Guanzhuang was a later addition, it proved so successful that subsequently dedicated coin mints were built from scratch elsewhere in China.

For the next 2,000 years, money would be the main output of the copper industry.

'Making coins was one of the most revolutionary financial innovations in human history,' said Dr Zhao, adding that it allowed wealth to be easily traded, counted and hoarded.

The carbon dating used by archaeologists, also referred to as radiocarbon dating or carbon-14 dating, is a method that is used to determine the age of an object.

Analysis of the finds reveals the mint was 'highly organised' and produced 'spade coins' in a standardised fashion

Spade coins are the oldest known Chinese metal currency and possibly the first in the world

They are estimated to have been first minted between 750-500 BC, according to researchers

The coins were used by the Zheng state and surrounding regions until they were abolished by the first emperor of China in 221 BC

Carbon-14 is a carbon isotope that is commonly used by archaeologists and historians to date ancient bones and artefacts.

Earlier this week archaeologists also revealed they had used carbon dating of human remains to establish that the famous Inca site of Machu Picchu is several decades older than previously thought.

The research suggests it was in use in 1420 – more than 20 years earlier than scientists expected.

Machu Picchu was built as an estate for Emperor Pachacuti, who according to historical records rose to power in 1438 before conquering the area where the site is located.

This had led experts to believe it was built after 1440, and perhaps as late as 1450.

The latest research has been published in the journal Antiquity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How Apple will scan your phone for 'child abuse images' - and send suspicious photos to a company employee who will check it before sending them to police The new image-monitoring feature is part of a series of tools heading to Apple mobile devices, according to the company. Here is how it works: 1.) User's photos are compared with 'fingerprints' from America's National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC) from its database of child abuse videos and images that allow technology to detect them, stop them and report them to the authorities. Those images are translated into "hashes", a type of code that can be "matched" to an image on an Apple device to see if it could be illegal. 2.) Before an iPhone or other Apple device uploads an image to iCloud, the 'device creates a cryptographic safety voucher that encodes the match result. It also encrypts the image's NeuralHash and a visual derivative. This voucher is uploaded to iCloud Photos along with the image.' 3.) Apple's 'system ensures that the contents of the safety vouchers cannot be interpreted by Apple unless the iCloud Photos account crosses a threshold of known CSAM content,' Apple has said. At the same time Apple's texting app, Messages, will use machine learning to recognize and warn children and their parents when receiving or sending sexually explicit photos, the company said in the statement. 'When receiving this type of content, the photo will be blurred and the child will be warned,' Apple said. 'As an additional precaution, the child can also be told that, to make sure they are safe, their parents will get a message if they do view it.' Similar precautions are triggered if a child tries to send a sexually explicit photo, according to Apple. Personal assistant Siri, meanwhile, will be taught to 'intervene' when users try to search topics related to child sexual abuse, according to Apple. 4.) Apple says that if their 'voucher' threshhold is crossed and the image is deemed suspicious, its staff 'manually reviews all reports made to NCMEC to ensure reporting accuracy' Users can 'file an appeal to have their account reinstated' if they believe it has been wrongly flagged. 5.) If the image is a child sexual abuse image the NCMEC can report it to the authorities with a view to a prosecution. Advertisement

Data privacy campaigners are raging today over Apple's plans to automatically scan iPhones and cloud storage for child abuse images and report 'flagged' owners to the police after a company employee has looked at their photos.

The new safety tools will also be used to look at photos sent by text messages to protect children from 'sexting', automatically blurring images Apple's algorithm's could detect child sexual abuse material [CSAM].

But campaigners have accused the tech giant of opening a new back door to accessing personal data and 'appeasing' governments who could harness it to snoop on citizens.

While the measures are initially only being rolled out in the US, Apple plans for the technology to soon be available in the UK and other countries worldwide.

But the controversial plans have already been blasted as a 'huge and regressive step for individual privacy' over fears the system could easily be adapted to spot other material and is open to abuse.

Greg Nojeim of the Center for Democracy and Technology in Washington DC said that 'Apple is replacing its industry-standard end-to-end encrypted messaging system with an infrastructure for surveillance and censorship.'

The iPhone maker said the new detection tools have been designed to protect user privacy and do not allow the tech giant to see or scan a user's photo album.

Instead, the system will look for matches, securely on the device, based on a database of 'hashes' - a type of digital fingerprint - of known CSAM images provided by child safety organizations.

As well as looking for photos on the phone, cloud storage and messages, Apple's personal assistant Siri will be taught to 'intervene' when users try to search topics related to child sexual abuse.

The technology will allow Apple to:

Flag images to the authorities after being manually checked by staff if they match child sexual abuse images compiled by the US National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC);

Apple will scan images that are sent and received in the Messages app. If nudity is detected, the photo will be automatically blurred and the child will be warned that the photo might contain private body parts;

If a child under the age of 13 sends or receives a suspicious image 'parents will get a notification' if the child's device is linked to Family Sharing;

Siri will 'intervene' when users try to search topics related to child sexual abuse;

Child safety campaigners who for years have urged tech giants to do more to prevent the sharing of illegal images have welcomed the move - but there are major privacy concerns emerging about the policy.

There are concerns that it could be a gateway to snoop on iPhone users and also target parents innocently taking or sharing pictures of their children because 'false positives' are highly likely. But Apple insists there is a 1-in-1 trillion probability of a false positive.

Others fear that totalitarian governments with poor human rights records, could, for instance, harness it to convict people for being gay if homosexuality is a crime.

This is how the system will work. Using 'fingerprints' from a CSAM database, these will be compared to pictures on the iPhone. Any match is then sent to Apple and after being reviewed again they will be sent to America's National Center for Missing and Exploited Children

Privacy campaigners have said they fear Apple's plans to scan iPhones for child abuse images will be a back door to access user's personal data after the company unveiled a trio of new safety tools on Thursday

Its Messages app will use on-device machine learning with a tool known as 'neuralHash' to look for sensitive content. In addition, iOS and iPadOS will 'use new applications of cryptography to limit the spread of Child Sexual Abuse Material online'

The key areas for concern about Apple's new plan to scan iPhones for child abuse images 'False positives' The system will look for matches, securely on the device, based on a database of 'hashes' - a type of digital fingerprint - of known CSAM images provided by child safety organisations. These fingerprints do not search for identical child abuse images because paedophiles would only have to crop it differently, rotate it or change colours to avoid detection. As a result the technology used to stop child abuse images will be less rigid, making it more likely flag perfectly innocent files. In the worst cases the police could be called in and disrupt the life or job of the person falsely accused just, perhaps, for sending a picture of their own child. Misuse by Governments There are major concerns that the digital loophoile could be adapted by an authoritarian government to enforce other crimes and infringe human rights. For example, in countries where being gay is illegal, private photos of someone with a partner could be hoovered up and used against them in court, experts warn. Expansion into texts This new Apple policy will be looking at photos and videos. But there are concerns that the technology could be used to allow companies to see usually encrypted messages such as iMessage or WhatsApp. 'Collision attacks' There are concerns that somebody could send someone a perfectly innocent photograph to someone - knowing it will get them in trouble, If the person, or government, has a knowledge of the algorithm or 'fingerprint' being used, they could use it to fit someone up for a crime. Backdoor through privacy laws If the policy is rolled out worldwide, privacy campaigners fear that the tech giants will soon be allowed unfettered access to files via this backdoor. Advertisement

The iPhone maker said the new detection tools have been designed to protect user privacy and do not allow the tech giant to see or scan a user's photo album.

Instead, the system will look for matches, securely on the device, based on a database of 'hashes' - a type of digital fingerprint - of known CSAM images provided by child safety organizations.

Security researcher Alex Muffett said Apple was 'defending its own interests, in the name of child protection' with the plans and 'walking back privacy to enable 1984'.

He raised concerns the system will be deployed differently in authoritarian states, asking 'what will China want [Apple] to block?'

Matthew Green, a top cryptography researcher at Johns Hopkins University, warned that the system could be used to frame innocent people by sending them seemingly innocuous images designed to trigger matches for child pornography.

That could fool Apple's algorithm and alert law enforcement.

'Researchers have been able to do this pretty easily,' he said of the ability to trick such systems.

Other abuses could include government surveillance of dissidents or protesters. 'What happens when the Chinese government says, 'Here is a list of files that we want you to scan for,'' Green asked. '

'Does Apple say no? I hope they say no, but their technology won't say no.'

'This will break the dam — governments will demand it from everyone,' Green told the news outlet.

'The pressure is going to come from the UK, from the US, from India, from China. I'm terrified about what that's going to look like', Green told WIRED.

Ross Anderson, professor of security engineering at Cambridge University, branded the plan 'absolutely appalling'.

'It is an absolutely appalling idea, because it is going to lead to distributed bulk surveillance of our phones and laptops', he said.

India McKinney and Erica Portnoy of the digital rights group Electronic Frontier Foundation said in a post that 'Apple's compromise on end-to-end encryption may appease government agencies in the United States and abroad, but it is a shocking about-face for users who have relied on the company's leadership in privacy and security.'

'Child exploitation is a serious problem and Apple isn't the first tech company to bend its privacy-protective stance in an attempt to combat it.

'At the end of the day, even a thoroughly documented, carefully thought-out, and narrowly-scoped backdoor is still a backdoor,' they added.

Electronic Frontier Foundation said Apple's system would 'break key promises of the messenger's encryption.. and open the door to broader issues', describing the system as Apple 'watching over the user's shoulder'.

While the measures are initially only being rolled out in the US, Apple plans for the technology to soon be available in the UK and other countries worldwide

How police relied on photo-developing labs to tip them off about child pornography Historically photo-developing kiosks in high street stores were a key source of information for police trying to track down paedophiles. Staff given reels of film to develop were encouraged to reveal the terrible secrets they found in the frames they developed. Often the pictures gave detectives important breakthroughs to break child trafficking and child abuse rings. But as photo labs routinely copy and secretly deliver to the contents to police if they deemed them suspicious, there were often occasions when parents were arrested after innocently photographing their children naked. On other occasions mix ups over whose reel of film it was led to people being in the dock wrongly accused of child offences. Advertisement

Under the plan, when a child receives a sexually explicit photo, the photo will be blurred, the child warned and told it is okay if they do not want to view the photo.

The child can also be told that their parents will get a message if they view the explicit photo.

Similar measures are in place if a child tries to send a sexually explicit image.

In addition to the new features in the Messages app, iOS and iPadOS will 'use new applications of cryptography to help limit the spread of [Child Sexual Abuse Material] online, while designing for user privacy,' the company wrote on its website.

'CSAM detection will help Apple provide valuable information to law enforcement on collections of CSAM in iCloud Photos.'

It was not clear if the system would still work if iCloud syncing was turned off.

Additionally, Apple is updating Siri and Search with expanded information on what to do if parents and children 'encounter unsafe situations,' with both technologies intervening if users try to search for CSAM related topics.

The updates will be a part of iOS 15, iPadOS 15, watchOS 8 and macOS Monterey later this year.

Apple outlined CSAM detection, including an overview of the neuralHash technology, in a 12-page white paper listed here.

The company has also posted a third-party review of the cryptography used by Apple.

Other tech companies, including Microsoft, Google and Facebook have shared what are known as 'hash lists' of known images of child sexual abuse.

Apple said Thursday it will scan US-based iPhones for images of child abuse

In June 2020, 18 companies in the Technology Coalition, including Apple and the aforementioned three companies, formed an alliance to get rid of child sexual abuse content in an initiative dubbed 'Project Protect'.

Child protection groups and advocates lauded Apple for its moves, with some calling it a 'game changer.'

'Apple´s expanded protection for children is a game changer,' John Clark, President & CEO, National Center for Missing & Exploited Children, said in a statement.

What are 'hashes' used by Apple, Facebook, Google and Twitter to locate child abusers? The technology works by creating a unique fingerprint, called a 'hash', for each image reported to the foundation. These fingerprints are then passed on to internet companies to be automatically removed from the net. Once an image has been targeted, an employee will look at the content of the file and analyze the message to determine if it should be handed over to the right authorities. The system that uses the same technology as Facebook, Twitter and Google employ to locate child abusers. Advertisement

'With so many people using Apple products, these new safety measures have lifesaving potential for children who are being enticed online and whose horrific images are being circulated in child sexual abuse material,'

Julia Cordua, the CEO of anti-human trafficking organization Thorn, said that Apple's technology balances 'the need for privacy with digital safety for children.'

Former Attorney General Eric Holder said Apple's efforts to detect CSAM 'represent a major milestone' and demonstrate that child safety 'doesn't have to come at the cost of privacy.'

America's National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC) has shared its 'fingerprints' of child abuse videos and images that allow technology to detect them, stop them and report them to the authorities.

Apple's texting app, Messages, will use machine learning to recognize and warn children and their parents when receiving or sending sexually explicit photos, the company said in the statement.

'When receiving this type of content, the photo will be blurred and the child will be warned,' Apple said.

'As an additional precaution, the child can also be told that, to make sure they are safe, their parents will get a message if they do view it.'

Similar precautions are triggered if a child tries to send a sexually explicit photo, according to Apple.

Messages will use machine learning power on devices to analyze images attached to missives to determine whether they are sexually explicit, according to Apple.

The feature is headed to the latest Macintosh computer operating system, as well as iOS.

The new tools are set to be introduced later this year as part of the iOS and iPadOS 15 software update due in the autumn, and will initially be introduced in the US only, but with plans to expand further over time.

The company reiterated that the new CSAM detection tools would only apply to those using iCloud Photos and would not allow the firm or anyone else to scan the images on a user's camera roll.

The announcement is the latest in a series of major updates from the iPhone maker geared at improving user safety, following a number of security updates early this year designed to cut down on third-party data collection and improve user privacy when they use an iPhone.

In January 2020, Jane Horvath, a senior privacy officer for the tech giant, confirmed that Apple scans photos that are uploaded to the cloud to look for child sexual abuse images.

Speaking at the Consumer Electronics Show, Horvath said other solutions, such as software to detect signs of child abuse, were needed rather than opening 'back doors' into encryption as suggested by some law enforcement organizations and governments.

'Our phones are small and they are going to get lost and stolen', said Ms Horvath.

'If we are going to be able to rely on having health and finance data on devices then we need to make sure that if you misplace the device you are not losing sensitive information.'

She added that while encryption is vital to people's security and privacy, child abuse and terrorist material was 'abhorrent.'

The company has been under pressure from governments and law enforcement to allow for surveillance of encrypted data.

Apple was one of the first major companies to embrace 'end-to-end' encryption, in which messages are scrambled so that only their senders and recipients can read them.

Apple has built its reputation on defending privacy on its devices and services despite pressure from politicians and police to gain access to people's data in the name of fighting crime or terrorism.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mount Etna has grown in height to a record 11,013ft after six months of activity, according to Italy's volcano monitoring agency.

Experts said the southeast and youngest crater of Europe's most active volcano is now much higher than its 'older brother', the northeast crater, which was the 'undisputed peak of Etna' for 40 years.

Some 50 episodes of ash and lava have been belching from the mouth of the crater since mid-February, the National Institute for Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV) said, giving Etna a new peak.

Scroll down for video

Mount Etna has grown in height to a record 11,013ft after six months of activity, according to Italy's volcano monitoring agency. Experts said the southeast and youngest crater of Europe's most active volcano is now much higher than its 'older brother', the northeast crater (pictured)

Each year, Etna produces around 7.7 million tons of carbon dioxide, water and sulphur dioxide

The southeastern crater is shown here on the graphic and in satellite images above along with the other three craters at Etna's summit: the northeastern, West Chasm or Bocca Nuova (new mouth) and the central Voragine craters

How can researchers predict volcanoes? According to Eric Dunham, an associate professor of Stanford University's School of Earth, energy and Environmental Sciences, 'Volcanoes are complicated and there is currently no universally applicable means of predicting eruption. In all likelihood, there never will be.' However, there are indicators of increased volcanic activity, which researchers can use to help predict volcanic eruptions. Researchers can track indicators such as: Volcanic infrasound : When the lava lake rises up in the crater of an open vent volcano, a sign of a potential eruption, the pitch or frequency of the sounds generated by the magma tends to increase.

: When the lava lake rises up in the crater of an open vent volcano, a sign of a potential eruption, the pitch or frequency of the sounds generated by the magma tends to increase. Seismic activity : Ahead of an eruption, seismic activity in the form of small earthquakes and tremors almost always increases as magma moves through the volcano's 'plumbing system'.

: Ahead of an eruption, seismic activity in the form of small earthquakes and tremors almost always increases as magma moves through the volcano's 'plumbing system'. Gas emissions : As magma nears the surface and pressure decreases, gases escape. Sulfur dioxide is one of the main components of volcanic gases, and increasing amounts of it are a sign of increasing amounts of magma near the surface of a volcano.

: As magma nears the surface and pressure decreases, gases escape. Sulfur dioxide is one of the main components of volcanic gases, and increasing amounts of it are a sign of increasing amounts of magma near the surface of a volcano. Ground deformation : Changes to a volcano's ground surface (volcano deformation) appear as swelling, sinking, or cracking, which can be caused by magma, gas, or other fluids (usually water) moving underground or by movements in the Earth's crust due to motion along fault lines. Swelling of a volcano cans signal that magma has accumulated near the surface. Source: United States Geological Survey Advertisement

The northeastern crater of Etna reached a record height of 10,990ft in 1981, but a collapse at its edges reduced that to 10,912ft, recorded in 2018.

Satellite suggest the southeast crater has now surpassed that and stands at 11,013ft.

Etna is Europe's most active volcano, producing enough lava every year to fill a 108-story skyscraper.

It has been churning out smoke and ash since February, dirtying streets, slowing traffic and damaging crops.

Although it poses little danger to surrounding villages, Sicily's government estimated in July that 300,000 metric tones of ash had so far been collected as part of the clean-up operation.

The INGV, based in the Sicilian city of Catania, said this increase in volcanic activity had led to a 'conspicuous transformation of the volcano's outline'.

'Thanks to the analysis and processing of satellite images, the southeast crater is now much higher than its "older brother", the northeast crater, for 40 years the undisputed peak of Etna,' the INGV wrote in a press release.

'The summit of Etna, since 1980, has always been considered the northeast crater which, with the paroxysms of September 1980 and February 1981, reached a maximum height of 3,350m (10,990ft).

'This height, which has decreased over the years due to the collapse of its edges, in the summer of 2018 settled at 3,326m (10,912ft).

'This record, however, has now been surpassed by the cone of the southeast crater and, today, Etna has a new peak.'

The 700,000-year-old volcano is the second most active on Earth, after Hawaii's Mount Kilauea.

Situated between the African and Eurasian tectonic plates, it generates nearly constant eruptions of varying degrees.

Each year it produces more than tens of million tons of lava and over 7 million tons of carbon dioxide, water and sulfur dioxide.

It's most severe recent eruption occurred in March of 2017, when nearly a dozen people were injured.

But eruptions have been recorded as far back as 1500 BC, with a devastating eruption in 1169 causing an earthquake that killed an estimated 15,000 people.

Some 50 episodes of ash and lava have been belching from the mouth of the crater since mid-February, the National Institute for Geophysics and Volcanology said, giving Etna a new peak

Europe's most famous volcano was already known to be edging slowly towards the Mediterranean. But a new analysis shows the movement is mainly being driven by it collapsing under its own weight - a phenomenon known as 'gravitational instability'

Research from 2018 revealed that Mount Etna is slowly sliding into the sea and when it finally goes it could trigger a tsunami.

It was already known to be edging slowly towards the Mediterranean, but the analysis showed the movement is mainly being driven by it collapsing under its own weight — a phenomenon known as 'gravitational instability'.

This has caused one of the sides of the notorious mountain on the east coast of Sicily to weaken, increasing the risk of a devastating tidal wave.

Previously it had been assumed the lava bubbling inside was the root cause of the volcano's movement.

Separately, scientists have also argued that the title of the world's highest mountain should go to a volcanic peak in Ecuador, rather than Everest.

HOW EARTH'S 'HIGHEST' MOUNTAINS MEASURE UP Mount Everest Mount Chimbarazo Location

Himalayas, Nepal and Tibet Cordillera Occidental, Equador Height above sea level 29,029 feet 20,500 feet Height from centre of Earth 3,965 miles 3,967 miles Average climbing time 40 days from base camp 14 days First ascent 1953 1802

They said in 2016 that when measured from the centre of the planet, Mount Chimborazo extends further out into the atmosphere than Mount Everest.

This is because the Earth is not a perfect sphere and bulges around the equator.

When measured from sea level, Mount Chimborazo, which rises 20,500 feet, falls short of Everest by 8,529 feet, which stands at a mighty 29,029 feet.

But when measured from the centre of the Earth, researchers at the Institut de Recherche pour le Développement in France confirmed that Chimborazo's apex reaches 3,967 miles.

Everest, by comparison, does not even make the cut for the Earth's top 20 highest mountains, measuring 3,965 miles from the planet's centre.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Skywatchers will be able to enjoy one of the most impressive meteor showers of the year as the Perseid meteor shower peaks on Thursday, with up to 40 shooting stars visible every hour.

The Perseid meteor shower is the result of the Earth ploughing through debris left behind by the Swift-Tuttle Comet during its trips through the inner solar system.

Also known as the 'fiery tears of Saint Lawrence', it will be visible both north and south of the equator, although those in mid-northern latitudes will be treated to the best views and see the most space rocks hurtling through the sky.

The Perseids, like all meteor showers, are best viewed with the naked eye in areas with clear skies and low light pollution and smog with a wide view of the sky.

With blustery showers and strong winds forecast for Thursday across the northwest, and drizzle and cloud cover in the south, it may be harder to spot from the UK.

This, combined with light pollution, means that rather than 40 per hour, many will see fewer than 20 and in heavy cloud cover, possibly none at all, astronomers say.

Scroll down for video

The meteors are called Perseids because they seem to dart out of the constellation Perseus and can be seen with the human eye anywhere in the world

A long exposure picture shows a Perseid meteor crossing the night sky and stars trails above the ruins of a medieval castle in the village of Kreva, some 100 km northwest of Minsk in 2019

Where do meteors come from? Meteors come from leftover comet particles and bits from broken asteroids. When comets come around the sun, they leave a dusty trail behind them. Every year Earth passes through these debris trails, letting the bits collide with our atmosphere and disintegrate, creating fiery streaks in the sky. Source: NASA Advertisement

The peak of the Perseid meteor shower is expected to take place on Thursday night into the early hours of Friday when the sky is at its darkest.

The shower is often dubbed the best of the year because of how bright and active it is, with up to 40 meteors per hour expected this year.

'If you're in the Northern Hemisphere, and far away from light pollution, you might spot more than 40 Perseids an hour,' NASA said.

'If you're in a city, you may only see a few every hour; skywatchers in the Southern Hemisphere will also see fewer Perseids, with none visible below about 30 degrees south latitude.'

The quality of the show from a meteor shower depends on a number of factors and can vary dramatically year-by-year, according to NASA, with light pollution having a major impact.

Bill Cooke from the US space agency said the Persieds have a theoretical maximum of 100 per hour, but in reality many people will see far fewer.

'In the 1980s, meteor researchers were searching for a way to compare the meteor shower rates observed by various individuals and groups across the globe,' he said.

The rate published each year, in this case 40 per hour, known as the Zenithal Hourly Rate, is based on what the perfect observer would see under perfect skies if it was straight ahead. That never happens, said Cooke.

Conditions in the area, such as light pollution levels, cloud cover and the position of the radiant of the shower, all play a part in the true number visible per hour.

In the UK and US countryside, with clear skies and no cloud, you should expect to see about 40 per hour this year, or one every couple of minutes.

A clearly visible shooting star can be seen blazing across the sky in Salgotarjan, Hungary in 2019

However, in an area of higher light pollution that will drop to about 10 or less per hour, and in a city such as London it will drop to one or two at most.

With this in mind, the best way to catch a glimpse of the show, is away from the lights of towns, cities, buildings, and trees and where there is a clear view of the horizon.

At this year's peak, the moon will be in a thin crescent phase, creating perfect viewing conditions without interference from moonlight because it will only be at about 20 per cent illumination.

A meteor streaks past stars in the night sky above medieval tombstones during the Perseid meteor shower in Radimlja near Stolac, in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2019

For stargazers in the Northern Hemisphere, experts recommend watching for the meteor shower after 22:00 local time, wherever you are, but it will be at its best during the early hours of the morning just before sunrise.

'The light of the moon won't interfere with the shower, so you stand a much better chance of seeing more meteors,' said Dr Robert Massey, deputy executive director of the Royal Astronomical Society.

'If there is a full moon in the sky, then you might as well be in the city because it will light up the whole sky, but this year the moon really will help us see more Perseid meteors.'

The Perseids actually started in mid-July but won't reach their full illumination until the Earth passes through the bulk of the debris later this week.

The Perseids (pictured), which peak during mid-August, are considered the best meteor shower of the year. The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle

WHAT IS THE SWIFT-TUTTLE COMET? The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle. This annual meteor shower takes place each August, and peaks mid-month. It was Giovanni Schiaparelli who realised in 1865 that this comet was the source of the Perseids. Comet Swift-Tuttle was discovered in 1862 independently by both Lewis Swift and Horace Tuttle. Swift-Tuttle is a large comet – its nucleus is 16 miles (26 kilometers) across – and it last passed near Earth in 1992. Source: NASA Advertisement

In previous years the peak meteor count for the Perseids has been up to 100 meteors per hour, according to NASA, but this week the US space agency expects around 40.

'In 2021 the Perseid meteor shower is active between 16 July and 23 August, with the number of meteors increasing every night until it reaches a peak in mid-August, after which it will tail off,' according to the Royal Museums Greenwich.

When comets travel close to the sun, they heat up and disintegrate. If this happens in Earth's path around the sun, they can head towards our atmosphere at high speeds.

The superheated air around the meteors glows and leaves behind trails of light and explosions in the form of fireballs.

The Swift-Tuttle Comet, which causes the Perseids, spans 16-miles wide and is formed of ice and rock.

It ploughs through our Solar System once every 133 years, with the last pass in 1992.

The comet will come within one million miles of Earth on August 5, 2126 and August 24, 2261.

The name 'Perseids meteor shower' comes from the fact meteors appear to shoot out from the Perseus constellation – the 24th largest constellation in the sky.

Stunning nature in action: A meteor of the Perseids meteor shower burns up in the atmosphere behind a huge statue of a bison near the village of Petkovichi, Belarus, 12 August 2019

The event is best for viewing in the Northern Hemisphere, as Dr Massey explains.

'The radiant for the Perseids – the point in the sky the meteors appear to come from – is in Perseus, and high in the Northern Hemisphere of the sky,' he said.

'It's 58 degrees north of the celestial equator, which means it would be overhead from 58 degrees north (the latitude of places like Ullapool in Scotland).

'This also means the radiant never rises for places south of 32 degrees south, so the southernmost parts of Australia, and much of Argentina and Chile.

'The upshot is that the Northern Hemisphere has the best potential view, as the radiant is higher in the sky and visible for longer, so in theory more meteors are visible.

'As you move further south the number declines, and south of 32 degrees south essentially none are seen.'

The sparkling show is set to continue over the Northern Hemisphere for a few days after the peak with reduced activity.

Observers have been advised to plan and check the forecast before in case the weather is unpleasant, so they can travel to a new location or go out on a different day.

The next major meteor shower will be the Draconids in October, although it tends to be a less active shower than the Perseids.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple has finally released iOS 12, the latest and greatest version of its operating system for iPhones an iPads.

Rather than cram in a plethora of new features, Apple has said the update is about boosting stability, with improvements in everything from FaceID and battery life.

And the approach has really paid off - this is the most stable, impressive version of iOS I've ever used, and an update I would recommend to everyone with a device capable of running it.

Scroll down for video

Apple has rolled out the latest version of its operating system to iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch models worldwide. Pictured is Apple's preview of the new software, dubbed iOS 12, on its website prior to launch

HOW TO INSTALL iOS 12 To install iOS 12, you must have a device running its predecessor, iOS 11. Once the update is available, head to your settings. Tap tap General, and then Software Update on your Apple device. You will need a WiFi connection and have to be connected to a charger if your battery is lower than 50 per cent. Advertisement

In addition to iOS 12, Apple's latest Mac operating system, Mojave, is also now available, along with watchOS 5, the latest software for the Apple Watch, and tvOS for the Apple TV.

One of the first things you realise about iOS 12 is that, well, nothing has really changed.

There are some new apps such as Screen Time, a boost to Animoji and lots of smaller tweaks, but nothing major - and this is a really, really good thing.

What iOS 12 lacks in jaw dropping new features, it has in general stability and boosts to everything from battery life to app launching speeds.

It really is noticeable to the average users, and your phone feels rather like you've hit to turbo button at first.

On four-year-old smartphone models, like the iPhone 6, the software is expected to increase the speed of some operations by 70 per cent - but I found even on my iPhone X there was a very noticeable difference.

The new iOS 12, which has been available to beta users and developers since Apple's WWDC event in June, promises to pack a slew of improvements for iPhones and iPads from iOS 11

One of the new features that has garnered a lot of attention is Screen Time, which records how many hours you spend using your device.

As a self confessed iPhone (and iPad) addict, it's both incredibly useful and pretty terrifying - although the setting can be a little confusing at first.

But for those concerned about their own usage or that of their kids, its a great weapon in the fight against addiction.

iOS 12 has a new Screen Time feature that tells users exactly how much time they're using their device. It also comes with AR Kit 2, an updated version of Apple's AR platform for developers

HOW TO USE APPLE'S SCREEN TIME FEATURE Screen Time is a setting, and does not have its own dedicated to app. To use the feature in iOS 12, head to the Settings menu on your device. Scroll down to the new 'Screen Time' section. The tool is buried among your settings for Notifications and Sounds. Tap on Screen Time to see your device statistics. You can see how often you pick up your iOS device, which apps you're using, which apps are sending the most notifications, and other details. You can toggle the statistics between the last 24 hours and the last seven days. Advertisement

Screen Time reveals the total number of hours spent on all your Apple devices, as well as a breakdown of the number of times you've picked up your handset.

The App Limits feature allows you to set a specific amount of time to be in an app, and a notification will display when a time limit is about to expire - although sadly Apple doesn't offer any recommendations.

Parents can access their child’s Activity Report right from their own iOS devices to understand where their child spends their time and can manage and set App Limits for them.

Another major annoyance for many users has been the sheer number of notifications you recieve, and iOS 12 helps dramatically by grouping them together, and letting you easily tweak the settings for each app.

Siri has also got a big boost, and there's a new Shortcuts app letting users customise their commands, which could be a huge boost boost once apps are updated to use it, as you'll be able to use Siri to ask questions like 'how is my commute looking' using CityMapper, for instance.

It also comes with AR Kit 2, an upgraded version of Apple's augmented reality platform for developers, that includes the ability to measure the size of real-world objects.

Having recently moved apartment, I found using the new Measure tool very useful, along with Ikea's great AR app.

Also included is a revamped Photos app which uses AI to find photos you'll like in new 'moments', new Animoji characters, and doznes of other small tweaks.

Apple's bookreading app, now called Apple Books, has also received an overhaul, adding a really useful recommendations section, and a dedicated Audiobooks tab for the first time.

Overall, there's no real killer feature in iOS 12, but that's not a bad thing - as pretty much everything is better.

This is one of the very few updates that really does improve things across the board - and make it an essential upgrade.

To download the latest operating system update, head to Settings, then tap on General and Software Update.

WHAT IS NEW IN APPLE'S iOS 12? Once Apple users upgrade to iOS 12 they will see a host of changes to how their device works. It will power the iPhone and iPad and packs a slew of new features aimed at improving your device's performance, as well as fun augmented reality tools. Here's what's new in iOS 12: Augmented reality Apple has released the next version of its augmented reality platform for developers, called ARKit 2. ARKit, which was first launched in 2017, now has improved face tracking, 3D, object detection and a more persistent experience. Multi-user virtual environments are also featured in the ARKit 2, so that more than one person can see the same perspective in real time. Apple also announced a new AR app called 'Measure' that lets you see the dimensions of objects, like photos or chairs, and get automatic measurements Photos Apple's Photos app has seen a significant upgrade in order to allow the feature to become smarter. In iOS 12, the Photos app will now display search suggestions when a user is looking for a specific picture, based on things that appear in the photo, including cars, dogs and flowers. There's also a new 'For You' tab, that shows memories, as well as sharing suggestions. It suggests that you share photos with a friend if they appear in a photo and then prompts the friend to share photos with you if you appear in their photos. Apple has added a 'For You' tab to the Photos app that will show memories, as well as produce sharing suggestions. It will suggest you share photos with other users Siri Apple has rolled out a new feature in iOS12 called Shortcuts, which adds 'quick actions' for any app. For example, a user can change their settings so that if they say 'I lost my keys', it will prompt Siri to pull up the Tile app and show you where your keys are. Another new tool is called Suggestions, where Siri prompts the user to take certain actions in iOS, such as order their favorite coffee that they drink every morning. Another new tool is called Suggestions, where Siri prompts the user to take certain actions in iOS, such as order their favourite coffee that they drink every morning Apps The Stock app has received a major upgrade and now lets users tap on certain stocks to get detailed information. It'll also show relevant news headlines under the stock, which users can click on to see the full article. The Stock app has received a major upgrade and now lets users tap on certain stocks to get detailed information. It'll also show relevant news headlines under the stock Apple has also revealed a new and improved Books app, renaming it Apple Books from iBooks. There's a new preview screen that shows users where they last left off in an eBook, as well as a new store that 'makes browsing through eBooks and audiobooks better than ever'. Screen Time Apple ha snow formally launched a suite of tools aimed at helping people curb their smartphone addiction. Users can view and control how they spend their time on apps, set time limits and more. Apple has also launched a suite of tools aimed at helping people curb their smartphone addiction. Users can view and control how they spend their time on apps and more It also comes with new parental controls that let parents view how their child is spending their time in apps and set time limits. New Do Not Disturb features limit what notifications users see on their lock screen at night and in the morning. Notifications Users can now 'fine tune' their notifications and change the settings so that specific notifications only show up in the notifications centre and turn other notifications off altogether. Siri will also suggest that users turn off some notifications if the user hasn't opened the app in a while. Users can now 'fine tune' their notifications and change the settings so that specific notifications only show up in the notifications centre and turn other notifications off A new grouped notifications tool categorises app notifications by apps and topics. Users can swipe on a group of notifications and choose to view them later, removing them from the lock screen. Better performance Apple said iOS 12 will significantly improve how apps load and other performance features on iOS devices. In iOS 12, apps will load up to 40 per cent faster, the keyboard will come up 50 per cent faster and sliding open to the camera will be 70 per cent faster, even on older devices like the iPhone 5S. Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stargazers will be able to enjoy one of the most spectacular meteor showers of the year when it peaks on Thursday, with up to 40 shooting stars visible every hour over the UK.

The Perseid meteor shower, also known as the 'fiery tears of Saint Lawrence', takes place when the Earth ploughs through galactic debris left by the passing of the Swift-Tuttle Comet.

It will be visible both north and south of the equator, although those in mid-northern latitudes will be treated to the best views.

The Perseids can be seen with the naked eye in areas with clear skies and low light pollution and smog.

Scroll down for video

The meteors are called Perseids because they seem to dart out of the constellation Perseus and can be seen with the human eye anywhere in the world

WHERE DO METEORS COME FROM? Meteors come from leftover comet particles and bits from broken asteroids. When comets come around the sun, they leave a dusty trail behind them. Every year Earth passes through these debris trails, which allows the bits to collide with our atmosphere and disintegrate to create fiery and colorful streaks in the sky. Source: NASA Advertisement

The peak of the Perseids is expected to take place on Thursday night into the early hours of Friday when the sky is at its darkest.

The meteor shower is often dubbed the best of the year because of how bright and active it is, with up to 40 meteors per hour expected this year.

'If you're in the Northern Hemisphere, and far away from light pollution, you might spot more than 40 Perseids an hour,' NASA said.

'If you're in a city, you may only see a few every hour; skywatchers in the Southern Hemisphere will also see fewer Perseids, with none visible below about 30 degrees south latitude.'

The best way to catch a glimpse of the show, which happens every year, is away from the lights of towns, cities, buildings, and trees and where there is a clear view of the horizon.

At this year's peak, the moon will be in a thin crescent phase, creating perfect viewing conditions without interference from moonlight because it will only be at about 20 per cent illumination.

For stargazers in the Northern Hemisphere, experts recommend watching for the meteor shower after 10pm local time, but it will be at its best during the early hours of dawn.

'The light of the moon won't interfere with the shower, so you stand a much better chance of seeing more meteors,' said Dr Robert Massey, deputy executive director of the Royal Astronomical Society.

'If there is a full moon in the sky, then you might as well be in the city because it will light up the whole sky, but this year the moon really will help us see more Perseid meteors.'

The Perseids actually started in mid-July but won't reach their full illumination until the Earth passes through the bulk of the debris later this week.

The Perseids (pictured), which peak during mid-August, are considered the best meteor shower of the year. The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle

WHAT IS THE SWIFT-TUTTLE COMET? The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle. This annual meteor shower takes place each August, and peaks mid-month. It was Giovanni Schiaparelli who realised in 1865 that this comet was the source of the Perseids. Comet Swift-Tuttle was discovered in 1862 independently by both Lewis Swift and Horace Tuttle. Swift-Tuttle is a large comet – its nucleus is 16 miles (26 kilometers) across – and it last passed near Earth in 1992. Source: NASA Advertisement

In previous years the peak meteor count for the Perseids has been up to 100 meteors per hour, according to NASA, but this week the US space agency expects around 40.

'In 2021 the Perseid meteor shower is active between 16 July and 23 August, with the number of meteors increasing every night until it reaches a peak in mid-August, after which it will tail off,' according to the Royal Museums Greenwich.

When comets travel close to the sun, they heat up and disintegrate. If this happens in Earth's path around the sun, they can head towards our atmosphere at high speeds.

The superheated air around the meteors glows and leaves behind trails of light and explosions in the form of fireballs.

The Swift-Tuttle Comet, which causes the Perseids, spans 16-miles wide and is formed of ice and rock.

It ploughs through our Solar System once every 133 years, with the last pass in 1992.

The comet will come within one million miles of Earth on August 5, 2126 and August 24, 2261.

The name 'Perseids meteor shower' comes from the fact meteors appear to shoot out from the Perseus constellation – the 24th largest constellation in the sky.

The event is best for viewing in the Northern Hemisphere, as Dr Massey explains.

'The radiant for the Perseids – the point in the sky the meteors appear to come from – is in Perseus, and high in the Northern Hemisphere of the sky,' he said.

'It's 58 degrees north of the celestial equator, which means it would be overhead from 58 degrees north (the latitude of places like Ullapool in Scotland).

'This also means the radiant never rises for places south of 32 degrees south, so the southernmost parts of Australia, and much of Argentina and Chile.

'The upshot is that the Northern Hemisphere has the best potential view, as the radiant is higher in the sky and visible for longer, so in theory more meteors are visible.

'As you move further south the number declines, and south of 32 degrees south essentially none are seen.'

The sparkling show is set to continue over the Northern Hemisphere for a few days after the peak with reduced activity.

Observers have been advised to plan and check the forecast before in case the weather is unpleasant, so they can travel to a new location or go out on a different day.

The next major meteor shower will be the Draconids in October, although it tends to be a less active shower than the Perseids.

The Draconid meteor shower comes from the debris of comet 21 P/ Giacobini-Zinner – a small comet with a diameter of 1.24 miles (2 kilometers).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TikTok has become the latest social media app to copy Snapchat.

The Chinese-owned video sharing app has confirmed a new feature, called TikTok Stories, that automatically deletes video clips after just a day.

Currently, videos posted to TikTok stay displayed on users' profiles unless they manually delete them – but TikTok Stories gives users the option to have their content deleted automatically.

TikTok is currently testing the feature as part of a 'pilot' before a potential full-scale roll out, the firm told MailOnline.

Ephemeral content is all the rage with the big social media apps, which have scrambled to copy each other's features in a bid for new users.

WhatsApp is currently rolling out a very similar Snapchat-inspired feature called View Once, which causes photos and videos to 'self-destruct' after they've been opened.

Fellow rival Twitter also briefly dipped its toes into disappearing content with Fleets, which it's just killed off after only eight months after it proved unpopular with users.

TikTok Stories are described as 'a new way to interact with your fans'. Stories are visible for 24 hours before they are deleted

TikTok says: 'Share daily highlights that disappear after 24 hours. Snapchat has led the way with ephemeral content

WHAT IS TIKTOK? TikTok is a Chinese social media app where users can create videos, live streams and Gifs with a host of functions. TikTok is known in China as Douyin where it was launched in 2016 and then made more widely available around the world in 2017. Douyin is still the version of the app used in China, available to download separately to TikTok. The app is most popular among children and young people who use it to film themselves dancing and lip-syncing to chart hits. It offers users a raft of colourful modification and editing tools including overlaying music, sound, animated stickers, filters and augmented reality (AR) for creating short videos. In 2019, it became the second-most downloaded app globally behind Whatsapp. Advertisement

TikTok, owned by Chinese company Bytedance, lets users make clips to share with their followers that are up to three minutes in length.

The firm has confirmed TikTok Stories in a statement, but is yet to make an official announcement on its blog pages and social media channels.

A spokesperson for the social network said TikTok is 'always thinking about new ways to bring value to our community and enrich the TikTok experience'.

'Currently we're experimenting with ways to give creators additional formats to bring their creative ideas to life for the TikTok community,' the spokesperson said.

But they wouldn't give MailOnline any further information regarding where TikTok Stories is being trialed, or if users in the UK are getting to try it out prior to the possible rollout.

The company spokesperson also wouldn't comment on what proportion, percentage wise, of TikTok users are getting to try it.

Screenshots posted to Twitter by social media expert @MattNavarra show TikTok users will be able to choose whether they want to create a Story, as opposed to a normal video – meaning users can still opt to share clips that don't vanish after 24 hours.

@MattNavarra also posed a TikTok video outlining the feature. It appears the video is yet to be officially released by TikTok.

Users will also be able to check who has watched and interacted with their Stories by clicking on a feedback panel, the video reveals.

Stories are displayed in a newly added slide-over sidebar, the Verge reports, and other users will be able to react and comment on them.

Since its release a decade ago, US social media app Snapchat has pioneered the concept of content that's only available for a short period of time.

The firm has confirmed TikTok Stories in a statement, but is yet to make an official announcement on its blog pages and social media channels

In October 2013, Snapchat introduced Stories – a collection of Snaps captured within the past 24 hours. Prior to this it focused on person-to-person video sharing.

After the success of Stories, other social media rivals soon followed suit with their own versions.

Facebook-owned photo sharing app Instagram introduced its own Stories feature in August 2016, which are visible at the top of the app's landing page.

Facebook itself introduced Stories in a horizontal layout over users' news feeds the following year.

More recently, Facebook-owned WhatsApp announced it is rolling out View Once this week, with the idea that disappearing content will make it easier and safer for users to send sensitive information.

Twitter, meanwhile, didn't have much luck with its ephemeral Fleets feature, which it introduced last November and officially expunged this week.

Announcing the news of the removal of Fleets last month, Twitter poked fun of itself with the failure: 'We're sorry or you're welcome.'

Ilya Brown, Twitter's head of product, brand and video ads, said users hadn't taken to the option the way the company had predicted.

'We built Fleets as a lower-pressure, ephemeral way for people to share their fleeting thoughts,' Brown said.

'We hoped Fleets would help more people feel comfortable joining the conversation on Twitter. But, in the time since we introduced Fleets to everyone, we haven't seen an increase in the number of new people joining the conversation with Fleets like we hoped.'

Announcing the news of the removal of Fleets last month, the official Twitter account joked: 'We're sorry or you're welcome'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is planning to install 'water generators' that turn moisture in the air into drinking water for public consumption.

Powered by environmentally-friendly solar energy, the 'hyper-dehumidifiers' provide a plentiful and uninterrupted water supply from the humid UAE air.

About 20 of the dehumidifiers can produce 6,700 litres of fresh water a day when local conditions are at 78°F (26°C) and 60 per cent humidity.

The technology is being tested as part of a pilot this October, but if successful it will be rolled out in Masdar – a futuristic 'sustainable city' currently being built next to Abu Dhabi airport.

The 'hyper-dehumidifiers' (pictured) provide an uninterrupted water supply that's safe for the public to drink. The water generators will be installed at Khalifa University's Masdar Institute Solar Platform in Masdar City as part of a pilot this year

DEW POINT AND RELATIVE HUMIDITY The machines use a coolant to reduce the temperature of the moisture-packed air until it reaches 'dew point' The dew point is the temperature the air needs to be cooled to in order to achieve a relative humidity (RH) of 100 per cent. Relative humidity is the amount of moisture in the air compared to what the air can 'hold' at that temperature. At 100 per cent relative humidity, the air can't 'hold' all the moisture, resulting in dew, condensation or rain. At 0 per cent relative humidity, air is devoid of water vapour. Advertisement

Masdar is powered by an impressive 22-hectare (54-acre) field of 87,777 solar panels, as well as additional panels on the roofs of its buildings.

It's these solar panels that power the generators' massive fans, which themselves suck moisture-packed air from the surrounding environment.

Pipes filled with this moisture-packed air are circulated with a liquid coolant, to cool the air down until it reaches what's known as the 'dew point' – when water vapour condenses into liquid water.

Once the liquid forms, it is collected and purified, allowing the public to fill their water bottles for free around dedicated stations.



The project is being run by US-based water technologies firm Aquovum, in partnership with Masdar and Khalifa University of Science and Technology in Abu Dhabi.

According to experts, the carbon-free technology will help relieve the UAE's reliance on desalinating seawater and expensive imports of bottled water in what's one of the hottest climates on Earth.

Middle East and Africa alone are some of the world's harshest climates where water is needed the most.

'Almost shockingly, being that the UAE is one of the water-stressed areas in the world, it has adequate temperature and humidity to provide an infinite supply of water through dehumidification,' Robert Wood, Aquovum's chief technological officer, told the Times.

'At times there are periods of immense fog in Abu Dhabi and Dubai, and through its coastal region and weather patterns the humidity ranges between 60-90 per cent.

'Unclean water is a terrible problem and the worst part is that in theory it's solvable, simply by capturing moisture in the air. This technology is going to be simple, sustainable and scalable.'

If the pilot goes well, the water generators will be installed at Khalifa University's Masdar Institute Solar Platform in Masdar City, which is still only partially finished.

Emiratis walk in Masdar City, on the outskirts of the rich Emirate of Abu Dhabi. The buildings have been designed to provide shelter from the sun and are placed fairly close together to maximise a cool flow of wind

Masdar City is in close proximity to Abu Dhabi International Airport and only a 40-minute drive to Dubai

Masdar City started construction in February 2008 but its full completion has been hit by setbacks since the global financial crisis.

Its set for completion at 2030 at the very earliest – at which point it will house around 40,000 people and another 10,000 commuters each day.

The futuristic mecca is designed to be a hub for cleantech companies, complemented by apartments, schools, shops, cafes and sustainable travel.

'Masdar City is already home to over 900 companies, dedicated to developing innovative technologies across the sectors of renewables, energy storage, water, artificial intelligence, health, space, and mobility,' Abdulla Balalaa, executive director for 'sustainable real estate' at Masdar City.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Unlike children and primates, dogs generally know when people are being deceitful, a new study suggests.

Researchers at the University of Vienna performed experiments on a variety of pure breed dogs involving food obscured by buckets.

According to the experts, the dogs could follow their own intuition when given misleading instructions by humans about where the food was.

In experiments, dogs could retrieve food from one of two opaque buckets after witnessing a misleading suggestion by a human informant (the 'communicator')

'We thought dogs would behave like children under age five and apes, but now we speculate that perhaps dogs can understand when someone is being deceitful,' study author Ludwig Huber at the University of Vienna told New Scientist.

'Maybe they think, "This person has the same knowledge as me, and is nevertheless giving me the wrong [information]".

'It's possible they could see that as intentionally misleading, which is lying.'

Dogs have more intelligence than they're sometimes given credit for, the new study suggests (stock image of a golden retriever)

For their study, the researchers used 260 dogs including border collies, terriers, schnauzers, retrievers and other pure breeds.

The dogs were presented with two opaque buckets, one of which contained dog food that the dogs could access by knocking off a paper lid with their snout or paw.

'PANDEMIC PUPPIES' ARE EXPERIENCING BEHAVIOUR ISSUES Puppies adopted by Americans working from home throughout the pandemic are suffering from stress and anxiety as their owners return to work, a study says. A team from Auburn University found these 'pandemic puppies' are fearful during encounters with other dogs and humans because they spent so much of their early lives cooped up inside. They were also found to sometimes panic when exposed to an unfamiliar environment, and are struggling to cope with being alone as their owners return to the office. Read more: 'Pandemic puppies' experiencing behaviour challenges Advertisement

The dogs were initially trained to trust a person they had never met, called the 'communicator', to help them find the food from the correct bucket.

The communicator would point to the food-filled bucket, look at the dog and then say 'Look, this is good, this is very good!' to nudge the dog towards the food.

After establishing this trust between the communicator and the dogs, the researchers added the all-important element of deception into the mix.

The dogs witnessed another stranger, known as 'the hider', move the dog food from one bucket (bucket A) to another (bucket B).

This was done both with and without the communicator in the room – so the communicator was either witness to the crafty switch or they weren't.

In both of these conditions, the communicator would recommend bucket A to the dog, which was now empty.

Across the two conditions, more dogs followed their own visual experience of where the food had been hidden rather than the communicator's suggestion.

About two-thirds of dogs ignored communicators who had witnessed the food switch and went on to recommend empty bucket A.

According to Huber, dogs did not rely on the communicator anymore, which contrasts with previous studies involving apes and children under five years.

In these previous studies, if a communicator had witnessed a switch but recommended an empty bowl of food, young children and non-human primates would follow their misleading advice.

Terriers were the only breed in this new study that behaved like human infants and apes tested in previous studies, the experts add.

'Dogs do not follow human misleading pointing gestures blindly (although sometimes they find them difficult to ignore,' they conclude.

'Instead, they can adjust their behaviour flexibly depending on the trustworthiness of the informant and can discriminate between helpful and uncooperative experimenters.'

The study has been published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Smoke from wildfires consuming Greece's second-largest island blotted out the sun on Monday as a blaze which has already destroyed 1,000 homes and half a million acres raged for a seventh consecutive day.

Such is the extent of the destruction the only way it can be captured in its entirety is from space - with EU weather satellites revealing how fires have scorched their way from one side of Evia island to the other.

The Evia fire is one of around a dozen currently burning in Greece, which is in the midst of its worst heatwave in 30 years, but is by far the most widespread and severe.

Hundreds of residents have been forced to flee hellish scenes as hillsides turned to walls of fire - bundled on to boats while smoke filled the air and water-carrying helicopters circled overhead.

Smoke blotted out the skies on the Greek island of Evia today as fires that have been burning out of control entered their seventh day, with locals forced to watch helplessly as their livelihoods went up in smoke

One elderly woman was reduced to tears as her home was engulfed in blazes which were sparked by the country's worst heatwave in 30 years which has dried up forests and turned them into tinder boxes

Satellite images have revealed the full extent of the damage, with scorch marks stretching the width of the island as flames raced coast-to-coast through tinder-dry woodland

Fires rage across woodland on the north of the island of Evia, Greece, in an image captured by EU weather satellites on Sunday but released on Monday

A satellite image shows how woodland was torched around one Greek village which firefighters managed to save, though elsewhere on Evia more than 1,000 homes have been destroyed

Huge swathes of countryside on the island of Evia has gone up in smoke as woodland that has been dried out by Greece's most-severe heatwave for 30 years fed flames that have burned for seven days

An elderly woman in the town of Gouves, Evia, collapses as she watches her home burn to the ground amid wildfires

Fires scorching the Greek island of Evia are burning for a seventh straight day today, with emergency workers battling to bring them under control (pictured near the town of Ellinika)

At least 1,000 homes and half a million acres have been destroyed in the blazes which have ripped through forest that was dried out by a weeks-long heatwave

Hundreds of people living on Greece's second-largest island have been forces to evacuate as their livelihoods went up in smoke, with crews overwhelmed by the scale of the disaster

A firefighter is forced to use tree branches to try and beat out flames due to a lack of water as emergency services struggle to bring the Evia blazes under control

Firefighters and volunteers try to extinguish a wildfire burning in the village of Galatsona, on the island of Evia

People watch the flames burning trees during a wildfire in Avgaria village on Evia island

On Evia alone, almost half a million acres of tinder-dry forest has been torched while at least 1,000 homes have been burned to the ground in the village of Mantoudi, Greek news site Protothema reported.

George Stamoulos, deputy mayor of the settlement, said fire crews had been abandoned by the government who ignored his pleas to send aircraft to help fight the flames. '[I was] a voice roaring in the desert,' he said.

It was a sentiment echoed by David Angelou, a local who had to be evacuated from the seaside town of Pefki by ferry as the flames closed in, saying: 'We were completely forsaken.'

'There were no fire brigades, there were no vehicles, nothing,' he added. 'You could feel the enormous heat, there was also a lot of smoke. You could see the sun, a red ball, and then, nothing else around.'

Firefighters said there are hopes that Evia's fire could be brought under control today as flames which have torn across the entire island finally reach the sea and run out of forest to burn.

Giannis Kontzias, mayor of the town of Istiaia, reported: 'The situation with the fires has started to normalize, since one by one the fronts went out in the sea.'

Fires burning on the Greek island of Evia have entered their seventh day, with smoke blotting out the sun as locals were forced to flee their homes as they burned to the ground (pictured, a woman evacuates with her dog)

Heavy smoke from the fires blanketed a market on the island of Evia today (pictured) while also blocking out the sun, turning the sky an eerie orange colour

Hundreds of locals have been evacuated by boat while water-carrying helicopters circle overhead, trying to douse the flames

Residents of Pefki village gather on the nearby beach with their pets as they try to flee the island of Evia, with flames closing in and threatening to destroy their livelihoods

An elderly woman, helped by paramedics, disembarks from a ferry after evacuating from the village of Pefki in Greece

A local resident helps firefighters as they try to extinguish flames raging on the island of Evia, with locals in some areas saying they have been abandoned to battle the blazes without help

Firefighters try to extinguish the flames as local residents hold a water hose during a wildfire at Ellinika village on Evia island

Firefighters and volunteers try to extinguish a wildfire burning in the village of Galatsona, on the island of Evia

But others fear that the crisis is far from over, with Mr Stamoulos warning of the risk of flooding and landslides even once the flames have finally been extinguished.

Landslides often follow in the footsteps of forest fires because plant roots that typically hold the soil together are burned away, leaving the ground unstable and liable to shift.

The risk of flash flooding also increases because the heat from fires bakes the ground in places, causing it to repel rather than absorb water.

The wildfires have stretched Greece's firefighting capabilities to the limit, and the government has appealed for help from abroad.

More than 20 countries in Europe and the Mideast have responded, sending planes, helicopters, vehicles and manpower.

Greece's Civil Protection chief, Nikos Hardalias, has stressed that firefighters have been doing everything they can.

Fires have been driven by a heatwave that saw temperatures in Greece soar to 45C (113F), the country's hottest summer in three decades which scientists warn is being driven by climate change.

A firefighting plane drops water on fires burning near Ellinika, on the island of Evia, on Monday

A firefighting helicopter flies over a wildfire burning in the village of Galatsona, on the island of Evia

Firefighters battle flames during a wildfire at the village of Istiaia in the island of Evia, Greece

A firefighter tries to extinguish the flames as a local holds a water hose during a wildfire at Ellinika village on Evia island

A firefighter battles flames during a wildfire at the village of Istiaia in the island of Evia, Greece

A local man shouts to firefighters as they battle flames during a wildfire at the village of Istiaia, Evia island

A destroyed electricity pole lays on the ground as a wildfire burns near the village of Ellinika, on the island of Evia

A huge swathe of countryside outside the town of Pefki is shown burned to a crisp after wildfires burned through

Similar temperatures have been recorded in neighbouring Turkey where fires have also taken hold, with crews still trying to extinguish blazes in five locations in the coastal province of Mugla, in the country's southwest.

'The situation is improving,' Agriculture and Forestry Minister Bekir Pakdemirli said late on Sunday. 'It is too soon to say the fires are under control, but we are reaching that point.'

Meanwhile western Europe has also seen some of its worst flooding in recent years this year, which scientists say is also the result of climate change.

More than 100 people died across Germany and Belgium after three months of rain fell in just a few hours last month, washing away entire towns and leaving thousands homeless.

Calls to finally tackle climate change after decades of inaction are now gathering pace, with the UN releasing a report today that warns the world is already experiencing the effects - which are set to get steadily worse.

Temperature rises of 1.5C, seen by many as the 'tipping point' beyond which damage to the planet become irreversible, are likely to occur a decade earlier than previously though, the report said.

It is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'. Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A stunning meteor shower called the Perseids will be visible with the naked eye when it peaks on Thursday next week.

Known as the 'fiery tears of Saint Lawrence', the celestial event takes place when the Earth ploughs through galactic debris left by the passing of the Swift-Tuttle Comet.

The shooting stars will be visible both north and south of the equator, although those in mid-northern latitudes will be treated to the best views.

For those in areas with low light pollution, smog and clear skies, the Perseids will be visible to the naked eye, with no specialist equipment needed.

It is predicted the peak of the Perseid meteor shower will be on the night of August 12 into the early hours of August 13 when the sky is at its darkest.

The meteor shower is often dubbed the best of the year because of how bright and active it is, with up to 40 meteors per hour expected this year.

'If you’re in the Northern Hemisphere, and far away from light pollution, you might spot more than 40 Perseids an hour,' NASA explains.

'If you’re in a city, you may only see a few every hour; skywatchers in the Southern Hemisphere will also see fewer Perseids, with none visible below about 30 degrees south latitude.'

The meteors are called Perseids because they seem to dart out of the constellation Perseus and can be seen with the human eye anywhere in the world

The Perseids (pictured), which peak during mid-August, are considered the best meteor shower of the year. The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle

WHERE DO METEORS COME FROM? Meteors come from leftover comet particles and bits from broken asteroids. When comets come around the sun, they leave a dusty trail behind them. Every year Earth passes through these debris trails, which allows the bits to collide with our atmosphere and disintegrate to create fiery and colorful streaks in the sky. Source: NASA Advertisement

The best way to catch a glimpse of the radiant show, which happens every year, is away from the lights of towns, cities, buildings, and trees and where there is a clear view of the horizon.

This year on the peak, the moon will be in a thin crescent phase, creating perfect viewing conditions without interference from moonlight.

This means the moon will be emanating very little light at all – at around 20 per cent illumination – creating perfect conditions in the sky for stargazing.

Conditions for next Thursday look hopeful, according to Dr Robert Massey, deputy executive director of the Royal Astronomical Society.

For stargazers in the Northern Hemisphere, experts recommend watching for the meteor shower after 10pm local time, but it will be at its best during the early hours of dawn.

'The light of the moon won't interfere with the shower, so you stand a much better chance of seeing more meteors,' said Dr Massey.

'If there is a full moon in the sky, then you might as well be in the city because it will light up the whole sky, but this year the moon really will help us see more Perseid meteors.'

The Perseids actually started in mid-July but won't reach their full illumination until the Earth passes through the bulk of the debris next week.

Peak meteor count for the Perseids in previous years has been up to 100 meteors per hour, according to NASA, but it's anticipating up to 40 next week.

'In 2021 the Perseid meteor shower is active between 16 July and 23 August, with the number of meteors increasing every night until it reaches a peak in mid-August, after which it will tail off,' Royal Museums Greenwich explains.

WHAT IS THE SWIFT-TUTTLE COMET? The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle. This annual meteor shower takes place each August, and peaks mid-month. It was Giovanni Schiaparelli who realised in 1865 that this comet was the source of the Perseids. Comet Swift-Tuttle was discovered in 1862 independently by both Lewis Swift and Horace Tuttle. Swift-Tuttle is a large comet – its nucleus is 16 miles (26 kilometers) across – and it last passed near Earth in 1992. Source: NASA Advertisement

When comets travel close to the sun, they heat up and disintegrate. If this happens in Earth's path around the sun, they can head towards our atmosphere at high speeds.

The superheated air around the meteors glows and leaves behind trails of light and explosions in the form of fireballs.

The Swift-Tuttle Comet, which causes the Perseids, spans 16-miles wide and is formed of ice and rock.

It ploughs through our Solar System once every 133 years, with the last pass in 1992.

The comet will come within one million miles of Earth on August 5, 2126 and August 24, 2261.

The name 'Perseids meteor shower' comes from the fact meteors appear to shoot out from the Perseus constellation – the 24th largest constellation in the sky.

The event is best for viewing in the Northern Hemisphere, as Dr Massey explains.

'The radiant for the Perseids – the point in the sky the meteors appear to come from – is in Perseus, and high in the Northern Hemisphere of the sky,' he said.

'It's 58 degrees north of the celestial equator, which means it would be overhead from 58 degrees north (the latitude of places like Ullapool in Scotland).

'This also means the radiant never rises for places south of 32 degrees south, so the southernmost parts of Australia, and much of Argentina and Chile.

'The upshot is that the Northern Hemisphere has the best potential view, as the radiant is higher in the sky and visible for longer, so in theory more meteors are visible.

'As you move further south the number declines, and south of 32 degrees south essentially none are seen.'

Perseids is often dubbed the best of the year because of how bright and active it is.

'The Perseids meteor shower is special because it's at a nice time of year, at least if you're in the Northern Hemisphere,' said Dr Massey.

A long exposure shows stars behind a tree during the annual Perseid meteor shower near the town of Mitzpe Ramon, Israel

'It tends to give us a few tens of meteors an hour – so a pretty decent rate if you've never seen something like this before – and it does that more or less year in year out.

The sparkling treat is set to continue over the Northern Hemisphere for a few days after the peak with reduced activity.

Observers have been advised to plan and check the forecast before in case the weather is unpleasant, so they can travel to a new location or go out on a different day.

The next major meteor shower will be the Draconids in October, although it tends to tends to be a less active shower than the Perseids.

The Draconid meteor shower comes from the debris of comet 21 P/ Giacobini-Zinner – a small comet with a diameter of 1.24 miles (2 kilometers).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scotland now has more than 1,000 wild beavers, according to a new report, which found their numbers and the number of territories have doubled since 2017.

Beavers living in Scotland today are descended from a handful of animals released from private collections in Perthshire, in an illegal rewilding project 20 years ago.

NatureScot carried out an extensive survey of beaver populations and territories in 2020, finding the population was about 1,000 living in 251 different territories.

The range of where these territories are has grown too, from Glen Isla to Dundee and Stirling, Forfar to Crianlarich – and is likely to expand into Loch Lomond in the future.

Robbie Kernahan, NatureScot director of sustainable growth, said with wildlife declining in Scotland, the increasing beaver population is great news.

The report also revealed that 87 beavers were culled over the past three years by trained specialists working to reduce the impact on agriculture.

Scotland now has more than 1,000 wild beavers, according to a new report, which found their numbers and the number of territories have doubled since 2017

The range of where these territories are has grown too, from Glen Isla to Dundee and Stirling, Forfar to Crianlarich – and likely to expand into Loch Lomond in the future

BEAVERS IN SCOTLAND: STARTED WITH AN ILLEGAL REWILDING PROJECT Beavers went extinct in the UK in the 16th Century due to over hunting. For 400 years they were absent from the islands, but an illegal rewilding project in the early 21st Century saw them return for the first time. It started with a handful of individuals being released from a private collection in Perthshire, Scotland. A later project in 2009 by the Scottish Wildlife Trust saw further individuals released across the Highlands. By 2020 there were 1,000 individuals in Scotland with a handful transported to England and Wales. The Scottish population were living in 251 territories across the country. Advertisement

Beavers play a vital role in creating and restoring wetlands where other species can thrive, reducing downstream flooding and improving water quality.

Eurasian beavers are a native species in the UK but they were hunted to extinction in the 16th Century.

A growing rewilding movement throughout the 20th Century resulted in proposals to reintroduce the species.

The reintroduction was supposed to happen through a gradual official rollout organised by the Scottish Wildlife Trust.

But over fears it might not happen, groups of campaigners illegally released the animals from private collections held in Perthshire around 2000.

There was a further introduction of more animals in 2009 through an official Scottish Wildlife Trust scheme.

The new survey by NatureScot found that most of the 1,000 in Scotland today came from the illegal release, rather than the later official rollout.

'Beavers are nature's supreme water engineers, but we know they may cause severe problems in some areas, particularly for crops on prime agricultural land and for important infrastructure like road drains or railway lines,' said Mr Kernahan.

As well as looking at the overall population and changes, the NatureScot report revealed 87 beavers had been shot by trained controllers since 2017.

NatureScot carried out an extensive survey of beaver populations and territories in 2020, finding the population was about 1,000 living in 251 different territories

Beavers living in Scotland today are descended from a handful of animals released from private collections in Perthshire, in an illegal rewilding project 20 years ago

This was part of a series of mitigation measures that also included dam removal, to protect farmland and other species living in the same area as the beavers.

Under species control licences reported to NatureScot in 2020, 31 beavers were trapped and moved to licensed, enclosed reintroduction projects in England; 56 beaver dams were removed; and 115 beavers were culled.

Figures indicated that between May and December 2019, 15 beavers were trapped and moved to Knapdale, Argyll, or trial reintroduction projects in England.

The survey was carried out last winter and is said to be the most comprehensive and authoritative survey of beaver numbers and their range ever conducted in Britain.

Experienced surveyors searched for signs of beavers on foot and by canoe, finding 13,204 confirmed signs such as burrows, dams, lodges, scent mounds, canal digging, and tree and crop feeding.

As well as looking at the overall population and changes, the NatureScot report revealed 87 beavers had been shot by trained controllers since 2017

Experienced surveyors searched for signs of beavers on foot and by canoe, finding 13,204 confirmed signs such as burrows, dams, lodges, scent mounds, canal digging, and tree and crop feeding

BEAVERS: 'FRIENDS' OR 'FOES'? There is some contention as to whether Beavers should have been released into the wild. This is why the illegal rewilding happened in Scotland, over concerns the government wouldn't back an official project. The points on either side of the argument include the following: FOR REINTRODUCTION The UK's wetland fauna and flora evolved alongside beavers. They reduce siltation, which can pollute waterways with silt and clay. Their dam-like habitats help to reduce downstream flooding after heavy rain. Beavers make ponds, which are needed by two-thirds of UK wildlife. The public is in favour of restoring the animals to the wild. AGAINST REINTRODUCTION UK rivers have changed dramatically since beavers went extinct. British waterways are in poor health, potentially putting beavers at risk. Beavers can spread a foreign tapeworm to both humans and dogs. They can damage both infrastructure and local forests. Dams can sometimes exacerbate, rather than prevent, flooding. Advertisement

NatureScot worked with Scotland's 'foremost beaver specialist', Dr Roisin Campbell-Palmer, and experts at the University of Exeter to conduct the survey.

'Beavers are recognised as ecosystem engineers with important biodiversity benefits, though some impacts can be challenging alongside certain land-use practices,' said Dr Campbell-Palmer.

'This survey will hopefully provide valuable information to land managers and policy makers seeking to maximise the benefits and minimise the conflicts associated with the return of beavers to our rivers.'

Scottish Greens environment spokesman Mark Ruskell said this is an endangered and protected species in Scotland and so population growth is encouraging.

'However, this population growth does not excuse the killing or exporting of more than a tenth of the population last year,' Mr Ruskell said.

'It's clear that much more can be done to manage and resolve cases where conflict arises, especially through relocating animals in Scotland to areas where they can thrive, creating eco-tourism opportunities and helping restore wetlands.'

The Scottish Wildlife Trust's conservation director, Sarah Robinson, said lethal control measures were concerning, adding they should be a 'true last resort'.

'We would like to see greater support for non-lethal measures including flow devices and water gates, alongside continued trials of new techniques.'

Trees for Life, a rewilding charity, accused NatureScot of suppressing the data about culling until the final population figures were released.

They have taken the agency to court over its policy on lethal control, saying it should be harder to get a licence to kill beavers.

The National Farmers Union Scotland says they believe the current approach is proportionate with culling as a last resort, with NatureScot saying they can cause severe problems in some areas.

As well as Scotland, there is also a population of beavers living on the River Otter, given permanent right to remain, in 2020 by Defra.

The full 2020-21 survey can be found on the NatureScot website.

Beavers are found throughout the UK. The animals live as far north as Bamff, Scotland and as south as Nankilly Water in Cornwall
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Electronic cigarettes have been branded 'harmful' by the head of the World Health Organisation (WHO) as he warned their use should be better regulated to protect children and teenagers.

The global health body has recommended that governments bring in measures to stop non-smokers from starting to use e-cigarettes, saying such products are often marketed to young people using an array of different flavours which can 'hook children on nicotine'.

Better regulation could help prevent 'renormalising smoking behaviour' and protect future generations, the WHO said.

Scroll down for video

Electronic cigarettes have been branded 'harmful' by the head of the World Health Organisation (WHO) as he warned their use should be better regulated to protect children and teenagers (stock image)

E-cigarette regulations in the UK In the UK, e-cigarettes are tightly regulated for safety and quality. You must be 18 or over to buy e-cigarettes or e-liquids in the UK. It is also illegal for vape adverts to include models who appear to be under the age of 25.

Advertisement

E-cigarettes and vape pens are devices that simulate the feeling of smoking, and are sometimes referred to as electronic nicotine delivery systems.

But the WHO warned that they could act as a 'gateway' to tobacco consumption, saying a global systematic review had recently found that children and adolescents using them are more than twice as likely to later use conventional cigarettes.

The sale of e-cigarette products to under-18s is banned in the UK but a recent report on vaping in England recommended that enforcement of age-of-sale regulations for vaping and smoking needs to be improved.

That report, commissioned by Public Health England (PHE) in February, found little change in levels of vaping in recent years, with the prevalence of young people aged 11-18 vaping at least once a month being 4.8 per cent in March 2020.

A fifth of the young people who tried vaping said they had done so before they smoked and 28.9 per cent said they had tried a vaping product and never tried smoking, according to PHE.

E-cigarettes and vape pens are devices that simulate the feeling of smoking, and are sometimes referred to as electronic nicotine delivery systems (stock image)

Vaping 'doesn't work as a quitting aid' Vaping doesn't work as an aid for quitting tobacco and actually has the opposite effect, suggests new research. Researchers said there was 'no evidence that e-cigarettes were helpful in the quit attempt' in a large-scale study in the US. Scientists from the University of California in San Diego carried out an analysis of data on 45,971 Americans included in the government-commissioned Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study. Participants in the study were interviewed in 2013 and 2014 and are interviewed every year. A quarter of smokers who tried to quit in the first years of their enrolment used e-cigarettes to help with their attempt. And at their follow-up interview one year later, 9.6 per cent had managed to stay away from tobacco over the previous 12 months. But even though some had stopped smoking, researchers say the number who quit was hardly different at all from smokers who didn't use e-cigs. One of the studies' authors, Dr John P. Pierce, said: 'Among this representative sample of US smokers trying to quit, we found no evidence that e-cigarettes were helpful in the quit attempt. This lack of effectiveness was also apparent in the sub-sample who used e-cigarettes on a daily basis for this quit attempt.' Advertisement

WHO director-general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: 'Nicotine is highly addictive.

'Electronic nicotine delivery systems are harmful, and must be better regulated.

'Where they are not banned, governments should adopt appropriate policies to protect their populations from the harms of electronic nicotine delivery systems, and to prevent their uptake by children, adolescents and other vulnerable groups.'

In the WHO report published on Tuesday, Dr Tedros said electronic devices were being 'promoted aggressively as 'safer' or 'smoke-free' alternatives to cigarettes' and that the tobacco and related industries are using 'the same old marketing tactics to promote new tools to hook children on nicotine and circumvent tobacco legislation'.

Dr Adriana Blanco Marquizo, head of secretariat of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) said more research is needed on any possible effects of e-cigarettes.

She said: 'Until independent research shows the real risk profile of these products, governments should be cautious. Science-based evidence, not marketing, should guide their actions.'

But Professor John Britton accused the WHO of not understanding the 'fundamental difference' between a deadly tobacco addiction and being addicted to nicotine.

The emeritus Professor of Epidemiology at University of Nottingham, said: 'This report demonstrates that, sadly, the WHO still doesn't understand the fundamental difference between addiction to tobacco smoking, which kills millions of people every year, and addiction to nicotine, which doesn't.

'The WHO is also evidently still content with the hypocrisy of adopting a position which recommends the use of medicinal nicotine products to treat addiction to smoking, but advocates prohibition of consumer nicotine products which do the same thing, but better.

The sale of e-cigarette products to under-18s is banned in the UK but a recent report on vaping in England recommended that enforcement of age-of-sale regulations for vaping and smoking needs to be improved (stock image)

'The WHO is right that non-smokers, especially children, should be discouraged from using any nicotine product. But for the more than one billion tobacco smokers in the world, electronic nicotine delivery systems are part of the solution, not the problem.'

Dr Derek Yach, president of the Foundation for a Smoke-Free World, described the WHO's approach to tobacco control as 'fundamentally flawed'.

He said: 'The exceptional growth of next generation devices offers the WHO a real opportunity to tackle combustible consumption once and for all.

'Over 100 million ex-smokers use reduced-risk products and the WHO should be taking advantage of massive investment in the sector by encouraging governments to provide an incentivised regulatory framework to enable greater expansion.'

The WHO said three-quarters of countries and 5.3 billion people are currently protected by at least one tobacco control measure, and 50 per cent of countries are protected by at least two measures.

It described the 'encouraging progress' seen around the world, with smoking prevalence among people aged over 15 years having fallen from 22.7 per cent to 17.5 per cent.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Microsoft is testing a new game streaming service called Project xCloud that is designed to work across PCs, consoles and mobile devices, the company has revealed.

Instead of requiring users to buy a console, it will run games on Microsoft's servers, streaming them to devices.

Public trials for Project xCloud would begin in 2019, Microsoft said.

Scroll down for video

Instead of requiring a console, the new service will run games on Microsoft's servers, allowing users to play on everything from a phone to a desktop PC

'Ultimately, Project xCloud is about providing gamers — whether they prefer console or PC — new choices in when and where they play, while giving mobile-only players access to worlds, characters and immersive stories they haven't been able to experience before,' Microsoft said.

The service will compete with Google's 'Project Stream', a game streaming service that is being tested by the Alphabet Inc unit in partnership with game publisher Ubisoft .

Microsoft's xCloud will also face competition from other popular streaming services including Nvidia's GeForce Now and Sony's PlayStation Now among others.

'Today, the games you play are very much dictated by the device you are using,' said Microsoft.

'Project xCloud’s state-of-the-art global game-streaming technology will offer you the freedom to play on the device you want without being locked to a particular device, empowering YOU, the gamers, to be at the center of your gaming experience.'

The firm plans to begin public tests next year, and is already testing the system internally.

'We are testing Project xCloud today. The test runs on devices (mobile phones, tablets) paired with an Xbox Wireless Controller through Bluetooth, and it is also playable using touch input,' Kareem Choudhry, corporate vice president, gaming cloud, said.

Project xCloud will have the capability to make game streaming possible on 4G networks, Microsoft says.

'Currently, the test experience is running at 10 megabits per second.

'Our goal is to deliver high-quality experiences at the lowest possible bitrate that work across the widest possible networks, taking into consideration the uniqueness of every device and network.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins have proven controversial in the past, but they may cut your risk of dying from Covid-19, a new study suggests.

Researchers in San Diego analysed anonymised medical records from a national American registry during the pandemic.

The sample consisted of people who either had or hadn't taken statins prior to contracting Covid-19 and being admitted to hospital.

Researchers found that the drug – which is taken as a pill and can be bought over the counter in some areas – slashes the risk of dying in hospital from Covid-19 by 41 per cent.

Statins are a class of drugs that lower levels of 'bad' low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, which can lead to lead to a hardening and narrowing of the arteries and therefore heart attacks and strokes.

Cutting LDL cholesterol by taking statins may have anti-inflammatory effects, because LDL itself strongly promotes inflammation, thereby possibly making patients more likely to survive the inflammatory symptoms of Covid.

Statins are a group of medicines that can help lower the level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood

The study has been led by Lori Daniels, professor and director of the Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit at UC San Diego Health.

WHAT IS ACE2? ACE2 is an enzyme attached to the cell membranes of cells located in the arteries and lungs. ACE2 also serves as the entry point into cells for some coronaviruses. SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes Covid-19, attaches to ACE2 in order to infect our healthy cells. It’s thought that the more of these receptors you have, the more entry points there are for the virus. Advertisement

Covid-fighting properties of statins could also be related to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), the researchers claim.

ACE2 – an enzyme attached to the cell membranes of cells located in the arteries and lungs – is already known to be the 'gateway' for coronavirus infection.

SARS-CoV-2 has a spike on the surface of its envelope called an S-protein which allows it to bind with the ACE2 receptor located on human cells.

Once the spike has opened the door for the virus to enter the cell, the genetic material of SARS-CoV-2, its RNA, binds to myriad proteins and begins replicating.

'When faced with this virus at the beginning of the pandemic, there was a lot of speculation surrounding certain medications that affect the body's ACE2 receptor, including statins, and whether they may influence Covid-19 risk,' said Professor Daniels.

'At the time, we thought that statins may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection through their known anti-inflammatory effects and binding capabilities, which could potentially stop progression of the virus.'

Illustration of SARS-CoV-2 virus binding to ACE2 receptors on a human cell, the initial stage of Covid infection

For their study, the experts used data from the American Heart Association's Covid-19 Cardiovascular Disease Registry.

This database contains de-identified health data on patients treated for Covid at more than 140 participating hospitals across the country.

As of July 2021, data from more than 49,000 patient records had been contributed into the platform.

The research team analysed anonymised medical records of 10,541 patients in the registry who were admitted for Covid over a nine-month period, January through September 2020, at 104 different US hospitals.

'From this data, we performed more advanced analyses as we attempted to control for coexisting medical conditions, socioeconomic status and hospital factors,' said Professor Daniels.

'In doing so, we confirmed our prior findings that statins are associated with a reduced risk of death from Covid-19 among patients hospitalised for Covid-19.'

Those who benefitted the most seemed to have good medical reasons to be taking statins, such as a history of cardiovascular disease or high blood pressure.

WHAT IS HYPERTENSION? Hypertension is otherwise known as high blood pressure. Blood pressure is a measure of the force that the heart uses to pump blood around the body, and it rises and falls in a cycle with each pulse. It is measured in units of millimetres of mercury (mmHg), and the reading is always given as two numbers – systolic pressure (the pressure when the heart pushes blood out) and diastolic pressure (the pressure when the heart rests between beats). The systolic reading represents the maximum blood pressure and the diastolic reading is the minimum blood pressure. A high systolic blood pressure in one arm alone indicates hypertension. Advertisement

According to the research team, the use of statins or an anti-hypertension medication was associated with a 32 per cent lower risk of death among Covid inpatients with a history of cardiovascular disease or hypertension.

This can also be attributed to the ACE2 receptor, which helps control blood pressure.

Patients with any statin use (alone or in combination with anti-hypertension medication) had a 41 per cent lower odds of death.

Compared to those taking neither class of medication, patients taking a statin alone had a 46 per cent lower odds of death, while those on both statin and anti-hypertension medication had a 40 per cent lower odds.

Statistical matching techniques were used to compare outcomes for patients who used statins or anti-hypertension medication with similar patients who did not.

'We matched each patient to one or more similar patients, using hospital site, month of admission, age, race, ethnicity, gender, and a list of pre-existing conditions, in order to make the two groups as comparable as possible' said co-author Professor Karen Messer.

But the study did not confirm that statins were definitely the cause of survival.

'As with any observational study, we cannot say for certain that the associations we describe between statin use and reduced severity of Covid-19 infection are definitely due to the statins themselves,' said Professor Daniels.

'However, we can now say with very strong evidence that they may play a role in substantially lowering a patient's risk of death from Covid-19.

'We hope that our research findings are an incentive for patients to continue with their medication.'

This new study builds on research published by UC San Diego Health last year that only included 170 anonymised medical records from patients specifically receiving care at UC San Diego Health.

Hypertension - high blood pressure - is one of the main risk factors of cardiovascular diseases

At the time, researchers found that statin use prior to hospital admission for Covid resulted in a more than 50 per cent reduction in risk of developing severe infection.

Statins are widely prescribed – the Centers for Disease Control estimates that 93 per cent of patients who use a cholesterol-lowering drug use them.

While statins are generally well tolerated, many people report aches and pains as a side effect, which may lead some to stop taking the drug.

They cause some minor side effects, such as diarrhoea, headaches and nausea, according to the NHS, but they can prevent serious health problems.

The new study, which has been published in the journal PLOS One, follows plenty of research into their various benefits.

Last year, experts at VA Boston Health Care System, a branch of hospitals in Massachusetts, found deaths from any cause were 25 per cent lower for those who took statins, from a sample of 300,000 veterans aged 75 years or more.

In 2019, another study found that up to 8,000 deaths could be avoided saved annually in the UK if everyone over the age of 75 received statins.

Men who are on statins have a 24 per cent lower risk of a deadly form of prostate cancer, a study in 2019 also revealed.

And in 2017, a 20-year review by British researchers found the pills slashed the risk of an early death by 28 per cent.

Despite this, there has long been controversy over whether statins should be taken routinely by elderly people.

'This topic has been controversial with several mixed results in the past, showing either no benefit or little benefit of statins in this age group,' said Dr Riyaz Patel, associate professor of cardiology at University College London.

'This in turn has led to uncertainty whether statins should be started or even stopped in older people.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Curry with plenty of fenugreek in it can help spice things up in the bedroom, a new study shows.

Fenugreek – a plant commonly used in Indian cuisine – improves libido by reducing issues like vaginal dryness in healthy women, researchers in India report.

The experts gave an organic fenugreek extract, called FenuSMART (FHE), to 24 menstruating women aged between 20 to 48.

Compared to those who didn't receive the extract, the women had increased libido, lower irritability and enhanced estradiol, the major female sex hormone.

Estradiol, an estrogen, 'modulates sexual desire in women' and is involved in the regulation of the menstrual reproductive cycle.

In the case of menopausal women, fenugreek can reduce various discomforts like vaginal dryness, sexual dysfunction, hot flushes, sweating, sleep disturbance, mood swings and depression.

Fenugreek contains bioactive compounds called saponins that are likely involved in the production of a number of sex hormones, including estrogens and androgens.

Fenugreek seeds are tiny, bitter, dicotyledonous seeds of the herb fenugreek. Toasted gently, they exhibit a strongly aromatic and pungent flavour

WHAT IS FENUGREEK? Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) is a plant commonly used in Indian cuisine Fenugreek seeds are tiny, bitter, dicotyledonous seeds of the plant fenugreek. Toasted gently, they exhibit a strongly aromatic and pungent flavour. The leaves of the plant are also used in Indian cuisine, in dishes including aloo methi. The herb contains phytoestrogens, which are plant chemicals similar to the female sex hormone estrogen. Advertisement

Fenugreek 'may be considered as a natural alternative for sexual issues in women', report the research team, led by experts at 'spiceutical' company Akay based in Cochin, India.

The leaves and seeds of the fenugreek plant are both used in Indian cookery, as a herb and a spice, respectively.

However, women should try to avoid fenugreek during a pregnancy, as it can start contractions prematurely, leading to miscarriage. This is why curry is a popular choice for pregnant women with a baby overdue.

'Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) seed is a popular kitchen spice and medicinal herb with wide applications in Indian folklore,' the study authors say.

'The present study showed that FHE helps to maintain normal hormonal balance and offered a significant reduction in sexual problems and irritability scores among the participants.'

Hormone analysis also indicated enhanced levels of testosterone, the primary sex hormone in males that is also found in women, produced by the ovaries.

In women, relatively small quantities of testosterone are released into the bloodstream by the ovaries and adrenal glands.

Testosterone and other androgens 'play an important role in healthy female sexual function, especially in stimulating sexual interest and maintaining desire', according to the authors.

'Testosterone initiates sexual activities and proliferates sexual desire and behaviour,' they say in the paper.

'In addition, testosterone is essential in modulating clitoral and vaginal physiology to facilitate genital lubrication, sensation, and engorgement.'

Curry with plenty of fenugreek in it can help spice things up in the bedroom, the new study suggests

The experts recruited 48 women in total for the study – 24 of whom were given 500mg of the extract a day, and 24 a placebo of the same amount, for a total of 42 days.

Those who took FHE had a 41.6 per cent improvement in sexual problems and a 40 per cent improvement in irritability.

This compared with only an 18.2 per cent improvement in sexual problems and a 20.2 per cent improvement in irritability for the placebo group.

Those who took FHE had a 41.6 per cent improvement in sexual problems and a 40 per cent improvement in irritability

What's more, FHE did not produce any side effects or adverse events, the team point out in their paper, published in Clinical Phytoscience.

If you're at your local Indian takeaway, you may want to ask the chefs to add an extra helping of fenugreek to your favourite dish.

Some of the delicacies already high in fenugreek include aloo methi, a sautéed potato (aloo) side dish, which uses the plant's leaves.

When ground into a powder, fenugreek seeds are used in spice blends such as garam masala.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA has been waiting six months for Perseverance to collect its inaugural Mars core samples, but the American space Agency will have to wait a little longer after the rover failed during its first attempt.

The percussive drill, coring bit and sample tube processing all worked ‘as intended, but data shows the sample tube was empty following extraction.

The rover carries 43 titanium sample tubes, and is exploring Jezero Crater, where it will be gathering samples of rock and regolith (broken rock and dust) for future analysis on Earth.

NASA scientists are currently analyzing the data with the hopes of finding the blunder and hopes to have a better understanding of what may occurred in the next few weeks.

Jennifer Trosper, project manager for Perseverance at JPL, said in a statement: ‘The initial thinking is that the empty tube is more likely a result of the rock target not reacting the way we expected during coring, and less likely a hardware issue with the Sampling and Caching System.

‘Over the next few days, the team will be spending more time analyzing the data we have, and also acquiring some additional diagnostic data to support understanding the root cause for the empty tube.’

Scroll down for video

The percussive drill, coring bit and sample tube processing all worked ‘as intended, but data shows the sample tube was empty following extraction. Pictured is the hole Perseverance made to collect core samples

Perseverance, nicknamed Perky, landed on Mars on February 18, following a 239-million-mile journey.

The rover’s mission is to explore the Jezero Crater, which was a giant lake some 3 billion years ago, in search of ancient signs of life.

It has spent most of its time preparing its mechanics and traveling to the crater from the drop off point – but now it is ready to start working.

Perseverance is designed with a Sampling and Caching System that uses a hollow coring bit and a percussive drill at the end of its 7-foot-long robotic arm to extract samples.

Pictured is an animation of Perseverance using its robotic arm to collect core samples from Mars

NASA scientists are currently analyzing the data with the hopes of finding the blunder and hopes to have a better understanding of what may occurred in the next few weeks

Telemetry from the rover indicates that during its first coring attempt, the drill and bit were engaged as planned, and post-coring the sample tube was processed as intended.

Jessica Samuels, the surface mission manager for Perseverance at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Southern California, said in a statement: ‘The sampling process is autonomous from beginning to end.

‘One of the steps that occurs after placing a probe into the collection tube is to measure the volume of the sample.’

The rover carries 43 titanium sample tubes, and is exploring Jezero Crater, where it will be gathering samples of rock and regolith (broken rock and dust) for future analysis on Earth

‘The probe did not encounter the expected resistance that would be there if a sample were inside the tube,’ she continued referring to the mishap that occurred during collection.

The Perseverance mission is assembling a response team to analyze the data. One early step will be to use the WATSON (Wide Angle Topographic Sensor for Operations and eNgineering) imager – located at the end of the robotic arm – to take close-up pictures of the borehole.

'Once the team has a better understanding of what happened, it will be able to ascertain when to schedule the next sample collection attempt,' according to NASA.

Perseverance is carrying seven instruments that analyze samples from the surface, including an advanced panoramic camera, a ground-penetrating radar and an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer for analysis of chemical elements.

Selected samples will be collected by drilling down to nearly three inches and then sealed in special sample tubes and stored on the rover.

The multi-billion dollar project to bring back a piece of Mars to Earth will involve three separate launches and would only be successful as soon as 2031. The mission will start when Perseverance, NASA's new exploration rover, launches this summer

Perseverance is not bringing the samples back to Earth – when the rover reaches a suitable location, the tubes will dropped on the surface of Mars to be collected by a future retrieval mission, which is currently being developed.

Currently, NASA and ESA plan to launch two more spacecraft that would leave Earth in 2026 and reach Mars in 2028.

The first will deploy a small rover, which will make its way to Perseverance, pick up the filled sampling tubes and transfer them to a ‘Mars ascent vehicle’ – a small rocket.

This rocket will blast off – in the process becoming the first object launched from the surface of Mars – and place the container into Martian orbit, meaning it will essentially be floating in space

At this point, the third and final spacecraft involved in the tricky operation will manoeuvre itself next to the sample container, pick it up and fly it back to Earth.

Providing its re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere is successful, it will plummet to the ground at a military training ground in Utah in 2031, meaning the Martian samples won't be studied for another 10 years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Water levels at Lake Powell have declined 50 feet over the past year, as the US southwest continues to deal with the ongoing 'megadrought,' prompting many to cancel recreational activities at the popular vacation spot.

According to the National Park Service, the elevation of the water was just over 3,553 feet as of August 4, down from nearly 3,600 feet in October 2020.

For comparison purposes, Lake Powell's water level was over 3,700 feet in 1983.

A white band of newly exposed rock is shown along the canyon walls at Lake Powell near Antelope Point Marina on Friday, July 30, 2021, near Page, Ariz. Water levels have declined 50 feet in the past year due to the ongoing megadrought in the US west

‹ Slide me › A Google Earth comparison of Lake Powell's water elevation from 2020 (left) to 2021 (right), detailing the 50 foot decline

‹ Slide me › A look at Lake Powell from NASA's Earth Observatory comparing April 20, 2012 (left) to May 2, 2019(right)

According to the National Park Service, the elevation of the water was just over 3,553 feet as of August 4, down from nearly 3,600 feet in October 2020. For comparison purposes, Lake Powell's water level was over 3,700 feet in 1983

A newly exposed, thick white band of rock is high above boater's heads at the lake, which is situated on the Utah-Arizona border, providing a stark contrast to the red dessert terrain.

It's also a glaring reminder that many who use the locale for houseboats have had to grapple with low water levels, amid the climate change-fueled drought that has gripped that portion of the country.

Scroll down for video

Water elevation was just over 3,553 feet as of August 4, down from nearly 3,600 feet in October 2020. For comparison purposes, Lake Powell's water level was over 3,700 feet in 1983

In addition to houseboats having to worry about the drastically lower water levels, some boat ramps have closed, pushing them off the lake.

In addition to houseboats having to worry about the drastically lower water levels, some boat ramps have closed, pushing them off the lake. As a result, some people have had to carry kayaks and paddleboards down a steep cliff to get to the surface

As a result, some people have had to carry kayaks and paddleboards down a steep cliff to get to the surface.

Tents have popped up on the shorelines that have not seen water for years, while jet-skis, kayakers and other recreational activities take place under sweltering temperatures.

Companies that rent houseboats have canceled their August bookings after the National Park Service closed multiple launch ramps in July due to low water levels.

'Since 2001, declining water levels due to climate change and 20 years of drought have reshaped Lake Powell’s shoreline,' NPS wrote on its website. 'Today we are experiencing low lake levels and their effects on boat ramp access points, on-lake facilities, and the landscape.'

A 'NO LAUNCHING HOUSEBOATS' sign is shown at the Wahweap launch ramp on Lake Powell Saturday, July 31, 2021, near Page, Arizona

A family's houseboat is pulled from the Wahweap launch ramp after a three-week vacation at Lake Powell

The Wahweap Main launch ramp explicitly forbids the launch of houseboats, though retrieving them is allowed, the NPS added.

Other motorized vessels are still allowed to use the ramp, with four-wheel drive vehicles recommended due to the low water launching conditions.

The NPS added, however, that all motorized watercraft will not be able to use the lake once water levels reach 3,551 feet, a level that is rapidly approaching.

In addition to its destination for recreation, Lake Powell is also the second-largest reservoir in the US, behind only Lake Mead in Nevada.

Both lakes are losing water faster than expected, a concern given that 40 million people rely on the Colorado River for water, as well as a $5-billion-a-year agricultural industry.

The water levels at the Hoover Dam hit their lowest levels ever in June, reaching a level of 1,071.61 feet, the lowest since record keeping started in the 1930s.

In addition to these two lakes, others in the US have also hit record lows, including the Great Salt Lake, which hit its lowest levels since records began in 1847 last month.

California's Lake Oroville could hit a historic low later this month, despite the state's reservoirs normally reaching levels of 50 percent capacity during this time of year.

Government officials had to begin releasing water from sources upstream last month to keep the lake's level from dropping so low it would have threatened hydropower supplied by the dam.

The megadrought going on throughout the US west, a phrase that was recently coined, has been linked to climate change and may be the worst to hit the area in some 1,200 years, researchers said in April 2020.

Fluctuating water levels have long been a staple of Lake Powell, but National Park Service officials say the usual forecasts weren´t able to predict just how bad 2021 would be.

Finger-pointing has started as boaters, local officials and the park service debate what to do now.

Finger pointing has started, with some blaming the park service. 'The park service has failed to plan,' 53-year-old area homeowner Bill Schneider said

'The park service has failed to plan,' 53-year-old area homeowner Bill Schneider, who bought a retirement home in Page, Arizona, said in an interview with the Associated Press.

'If it gets to the point where we're so low that you can't put boats in the water and you can´t come up with a solution to put boats in the water, why would you come to Lake Powell?'

Officials say there are solutions, as the severity of the drought becomes clearer.

William Shott, superintendent of the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, said officials are figuring out how to allow boats to get access to lower water levels at Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, where Lake Powell is located.

A houseboat rests in a cove at Lake Powell Friday, July 30, 2021, near Page, Arizona

They may be able to reservice an old ramp on Wahweap Bay, with a $3 million project could be finished by Labor Day weekend to support houseboats and smaller motorboats.

Another old, asphalt ramp will be opened to allow smaller boats access to the water while the one on Wahweap Bay is updated.

Page Mayor Bill Diak said the city could see exceptionally negative financial consequences if boats lose access to the lake.

He added local leaders were 'slow' to address dropping water levels and limited boat access but he is working closer with park officials and concessionaires on solutions.

'We could have been a little bit more proactive on planning ... but we´re moving in the right direction now working together,' Diak told the AP.

He stressed that the impact of climate change needs to be addressed, noting that the US West could be facing far more pressing issues than lake access if the drought continues for another 20 years.

One silver lining, Shott says, is the park service can build boat ramps that are usable even during record drought years. Over $8 million in other low-water projects also are underway.

'Even if we did have a crystal ball and we saw that these lake levels were going to get this low, we couldn´t have prevented it anyways,' Shott added. 'With that said, we're taking advantage of the low water now.'

Troy Sherman, co-owner of a business renting environmentally friendly anchors to houseboats, said the marina housing Beach Bags Anchors shut down shortly after his company launched in spring 2020 because of the coronavirus pandemic. It relaunched this year but had to cancel 95% of its bookings in July when ramps closed to houseboats.

'Until there´s really access to a ramp again to put houseboats in, my business is kind of in a holding pattern,' Sherman said. 'But we´ll totally persevere; it's what you have to do.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marine biologists have captured footage of a huge sixgill shark swimming off the coast of Ireland – marking the first time it's been filmed in shallow European waters.

The 13-foot-long 'prehistoric looking' sixgill shark (Hexanchus griseus) was discovered off County Clare on the west coast, at a relatively shallow depth of about 200 feet.

An apex predator, the sixgill shark typically inhabits dark waters off the continental shelf, at depths of up to 8,200 feet (2,500 metres).

It spends much of its time miles off-shore off the continental shelf and as a result has little interaction with humans – making this a rare sighting.

The shark gets its name from the fact that is has six gill slits, unlike most other sharks which have only five.

Researchers wouldn't disclose the exact location where it was filmed – only that it was seen off County Clare

SIXGILL SHARKS The sixgill shark, sometimes known as the cow shark, is a common species of deep water shark. They have razor-sharp teeth and resemble fossil sharks from the Triassic period. Called Hexanchus griseus in Latin, they are also one of the largest sharks that feed on prey other than plankton. They eat on other fish including sharks, skates and rays, bony fish, squid and crabs. They have also been known to scavenge on dead animals such as seals. The sharks live in deep water miles off-shore and as a result this species has little interaction with humans. There has only been one reported attack on humans in 500 years. Advertisement

The team of biologists, from Trinity College Dublin, Queen's University Belfast (QUB) and Belfast-based marine survey company Fjordstrong, filmed the specimen using modified 'Auto-Release Baited Underwater Video systems' (ABUVs) – patented fish-identifying video recorders.

The underwater footage shows the shark serenely swimming past the lens in front of a bait bag – a wire mesh full of chopped up and rancid mackerel.

'This was the first time sixgills have been filmed in shallow water in daylight in European waters, as far as we know,' Dr Patrick C. Collins, a lecturer in marine biology at QUB and member of the project, told MailOnline.

'They are normally regarded as a deep-water species.

'This highlights how Ireland is a biodiversity hotspot for all sharks, skates and rays.'

The experts used the bait bag to attract the shark, although it did not go for it and may have be lured by the lights, Dr Collins said.

'We observed a lot of smaller fish (wrasse, conger eels, ling and catsharks) feeding on the bait which may also have attracted the shark,' he said. 'It circled for a moment and then disappeared.'

Dr Collins said he is not able to disclose the exact location where it was filmed – only that it was seen off of caught off County Clare.

The team is only beginning to answer the mystery as to why sixgills are lurking off County Clare. They will expand their ocean exploration of this area over the next 18 months.

Pictured, the shark swims past the lens in front of a bait bag - a wire mesh full of chopped up rancid mackerel

'Sixgill sharks are an incredible species and this particular site off the Irish coastline is of particular interest as large, females have regularly been sighted in shallow waters,' said Haley Dolton, a biologist at Trinity College Dublin.

Sixgills in this location are mostly females, suggesting it is an important area for reproductive purposes, Dolton added.

'We are going to need a bigger boat to come back here next year and collect more data – we have only just scratched below the surface,' said Dr Collins.

Sixgill sharks can grow to 15 feet in length and weigh 1,000lbs.

They feed on other fish including sharks, skates and rays, bony fish, squid and crabs. They have also been known to scavenge on dead animals such as seals.

Pictured is Luke Aston, a local fisherman (left), and Patrick Collins, an ecologist at Queen's University Belfast, deploying the video camera and bait bag

They have razor-sharp teeth and resemble fossil sharks from the Triassic period.

According to the experts, Ireland has the richest diversity in Europe when it comes to elasmobranchii – a sub-class of giant fish.

Basking sharks are found regularly cruising by, and it is also one of the last refugia on earth for the critically endangered flapper skate – the largest skate in the world.

'It's like an aquatic Jurassic Park out there,' said Dr Nick Payne, an assistant professor in Trinity's School of Natural Sciences.

'Ireland is the gateway to the Atlantic and we are increasingly amazed at how important Irish waters seem to be for these huge shark and ray species. It means we in Ireland have a responsibility to look after them.

Haley Dolton, a biologist and PhD student at Trinity College Dublin, pictured with a giant fishing net

Sixgill sharks feed on other fish including sharks, skates and rays, bony fish, squid and crabs (stock image)

'Only by working together with commercial and sports fishers, conservation bodies and government agencies, citizen naturalists and the marine technology industry can we begin to realise and understand our great marine diversity – a heritage of all the people of Ireland.

'With this knowledge, we are better placed to manage the 90 per cent of our state that currently lie underwater so that future generations can gasp in awe at the giants in our midst.'

Earlier this year, a group of British fishermen caught 14 sixgill sharks in a 'secret location' in the north Atlantic dubbed Jurassic Park.

Because of their weight, each shark took an average of 40 minutes to reel in to the Welsh-registered fishing boat.

All of the sharks were returned to the sea safe and well afterwards, but not before the fishermen snapped photos holding them.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dippy the dinosaur – the famous 85-foot-long cast of a Diplodocus skeleton – is finally coming to Norwich Cathedral.

Dippy had been undergoing a nationwide tour of eight locations in the UK since 2018, prior to the coronavirus pandemic.

It was due to arrive in Norwich, its eighth and final stint on the 'tour' last year, before the virus hit.

Visitors to the 11th century cathedral will be able to admire the cast for free – with no need to book tickets in advance – from July 13 to and October 30 this year.

It's a plaster cast replica of the original fossilised bones belonging to Dippy, which are on display at Pittsburgh's Carnegie Museum of Natural History.

Scroll down for video

Norwich Cathedral is the eighth and final stop on Dippy's tour and was due to take place in Summer 2020 but was rescheduled due to the coronavirus pandemic

'After all this time preparing, it is incredibly exciting to finally have Dippy here,' said Jane Hedges, Dean of Norwich.

'It is absolutely fascinating to see the progress of this amazing creature being put together in the nave and we cannot wait to open the Dippy on Tour exhibition next week.

'We really hope that Dippy’s visit will bring great delight to people of all ages and that it will also spark constructive conversations about the relationship between faith and science.'

Dippy being built in Norwich Cathedral's nave. The visit to Norwich marks the first time the dinosaur has ever been displayed inside a cathedral.

Dippy being built in Norwich Cathedral's nave. The 'bones' of the replica are made of resin and plaster of Paris

The visit to Norwich marks the first time the dinosaur has ever been displayed inside a cathedral.

The cast arrived at the cathedral on Monday July 5, carefully packed up in 16 crates carried by a series of lorries.

Final preparations are underway for the assembly of the cast's 356 replica bones, which are made of resin and plaster of Paris.

Exhibition coordinator Noemi Moran is pictured here cleaning the head of Dippy the Diplodocus

Lead technician Andrew Wahl puts the finishing touches to Dippy the Diplodocus, the Natural History Museum's famous diplodocus cast

The work is being completed by a specialist team of four technicians and two conservators prior to its unveiling to the public next Tuesday.

The tour marks the first time the 'people's dinosaur' has been publicly displayed outside the Natural History Museum in London, where it had been on show since 1905.

The first stop of the tour in 2018 was Dorset County Museum's Victorian Hall gallery, before it visited Birmingham, Belfast, Glasgow, Newcastle upon Tyne, Cardiff and Rochdale.

Dippy the Diplodocus, the Natural History Museum's famous diplodocus skeleton, before going on display to the public at Norwich Cathedral, Norfolk, on July 8

The tour of the UK marks the first time the cast has been publicly displayed outside the Natural History Museum, London

Diplodocus was a long, herbivorous species first described as a new type of dinosaur in 1878 by Professor Othniel C Marsh at Yale University.

The species lived sometime between 156 and 145 million years ago and belongs to a group called sauropods, meaning 'lizard feet'.

When railroad workers unearthed the original fossilised bones in Wyoming, US, in 1898, newspapers billed the discovery as the 'most colossal animal ever on Earth'.

This UK cast is one of 10 replicas of the original in museums around the world, including Paris, Berlin, Vienna, and Moscow.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Samsung has launched one of its most expensive smartphones yet – the £1,700 Galaxy Z Fold3 – which folds vertically down the middle of the screen.

The new phone is one of two new additions to the Galaxy Z series – Samsung's line of foldable phones.

The firm calls Galaxy Z Fold3 'a true multitasking powerhouse' with a main screen measuring 7.6 inches when unfolded and an exterior cover screen measuring 6.2 inches.

It's also the first ever foldable device from Samsung to come with an S Pen stylus – commonly found with the company's Note range.

The Korean tech giant, which claims 'the future is foldable', has also launched the £1,000 Z Flip3, which flips open like a retro 90s phone thanks to a horizontal hinge through the middle of the screen.

Both devices are 5G compatible and have IPX8 water resistance. They're available for pre-order today (August 11) and go on sale August 27.

Samsung calls the Galaxy Z Fold3 (pictured) 'a true multitasking powerhouse' with a 7.6-inch Infinity Flex Display and IPX8 Water Resistance

Galaxy Z Fold3 has two screens - one smaller one on the outside that customers can use when it's folded, and the larger interior screen

TWO NEW FOLDABLE SAMSUNG PHONES Samsung Galaxy Z Fold3: · 256GB, £1,599 · 512GB, £1,699 Samsung Galaxy Z Flip3: · 128GB, £949 · 256GB, £999 Advertisement

Samsung had already released the original Galaxy Z Fold in 2019 and its follow-up the Galaxy Z Fold2, as well as the original Galaxy Z Flip, last year.

But these two new additions are the most durable phones in the Galaxy Z series so far, the company claims.

The Galaxy Z Fold3 will start at £1,599 – down from £1,799 for last year’s device – while the Z Flip3 starts at £949, down from the £1,229 price tag of the previous version.

However, if customers want more storage capacity, they'll be paying £1,699 for the Galaxy Z Fold3 and £999 for the Galaxy Z Flip3.

'We are proud pioneers of the foldable smartphone category and continue building on our legacy of innovation to shape the future of this industry,' said Conor Pierce, corporate vice president for UK and Ireland at Samsung Electronics.

'With the launch of the Samsung Galaxy Z Fold3 and Flip3, we are evolving our Galaxy Z Series portfolio with two devices built for the varying demands of today's fast-paced world.

'For the first time, our much-loved S Pen is coming to the Galaxy Z Series with the Galaxy Z Fold3, while the Galaxy Z Flip3 is equipped with more power than ever before.

Samsung has brought S Pen functionality to Galaxy Z Fold3. 'This is Samsung’s best S Pen experience yet', the firm says

The Galaxy Z Fold3's main screen is 7.6 inches in diameter. Its smaller cover screen, meanwhile, measures 6.2 inches

'Alongside new additions to our best-in-class ecosystem, the Galaxy Z Series provides our customers with the ultimate choice of foldable technology that will turn the industry on its head and set the precedence for the next era of smartphones.'

Galaxy Z Fold3 is built with a new design which is sleeker, thinner and lighter for even better portability than Samsung Galaxy Z Fold2, Samsung says.

One of the benefits of the Galaxy Z series is the adjustable hinge, which means users can keep the phone open and place it on a level surface for hands-free use – like watching films when eating a meal, for example.

The firm's 'sweeper' technology along the hinge now makes it even more difficult for dust to infiltrate the folding mechanism – which was one of the problems Samsung originally had with the first model back in 2019.

Galaxy Z Fold3 is the first ever foldable device from Samsung to come with an S Pen stylus - commonly found with the company's Note range

Both the Fold3 and Flip3 are also built with new Armour Aluminium – the strongest aluminium ever used on a smartphone – and the toughest Corning Gorilla Glass Victus to protect against scratches and accidental drops.

They also have a new protective film made of a stretchable polyethylene terephthalate (PET), resulting in a screen that's 80 per cent more durable than previous devices.

Galaxy Z Fold3 and Z Flip3 were also put through a strenuous folding test, verified by certification company Bureau Veritas, to withstand folding 200,000 times.

Pictured, the Galaxy Z Flip3. New 'stylish' ring grips and strap cases make it even easier to hold and fold the phone, according to the tech giant

Samsung says: 'For those who want style that comes with function, Z Flip3 [pictured] is the ideal device with its sleek, compact and pocketable design.'

The more compact choice, the Galaxy Z Flip3, has been built with a sleek and 'pocketable' design, as well as a larger cover screen (the secondary screen that's displayed when the phone is snapped shut).

The Flip3's main screen measures 6.7 inches, while the smaller cover screen on the outside is 1.9 inch – larger than the 1.1 inch on the original Z Flip.

It also has 'stylish' ring grips and strap cases sold separately that make it even easier to hold and fold the phone, according to the tech giant.

Galaxy Z Fold3 comes in four colours – 'phantom black, 'phantom green' and 'phantom silver'.

Galaxy Z Flip3, meanwhile, comes in cream, lavender, green and phantom black, as well as grey, white and light pink available exclusively from Samsung.com.

Samsung has also revealed new wireless earbuds, Galaxy Buds2, for £139, and new smartwatches, the Galaxy Watch4 and Galaxy Watch4 Classic. All of these devices also go on sale August 27.

Galaxy Buds2 are the lightest and smallest earbuds in the entire Galaxy Buds series, Samsung says

Left, Galaxy Watch4 and right, Galaxy Watch4 Classic with its more traditional 'watch-like' design

The next-generation curve-shaped earbuds come with dynamic two-way speakers and enhanced active noise cancellation for a 'rich, balanced sound', Samsung claims.

'Galaxy Buds2 not only make your voice clearer on calls but they also allow you to be completely immersed in your music, videos, and entertainment,' it says.

They're the lightest and smallest earbuds in the entire Galaxy Buds range and come in four colours – graphite, white, olive, and lavender.

The Galaxy Watch 4 models, meanwhile, come with new additions to Samsung’s health and fitness features, including a new body composition measurement tool to measure body fat and skeletal muscle.

Available in black, silver and pink gold, Galaxy Watch4 starts from £249, while Galaxy Watch4 Classic starts from £349.

GALAXY WATCH4 - 40mm (Bluetooth): £249 - 40mm (4G): £289 - 44mm (Bluetooth): £269 - 44mm (4G): £309 Samsung says: 'Our modern, minimalist option designed for versatile all-day use, available in black, silver and pink Gold (40mm) and black, silver and a sophisticated green (44mm).' Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

One month after North America set a record for the hottest June ever, July topped it, becoming the hottest month in recorded history, officials said on Friday - days after a dire climate change report from the UN.

The combined land and ocean-surface temperature was 1.67F (0.93C) above the 20th-century average of 60.4 (15.8C), the hottest since record keeping started 142 years ago, according to data released from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released on Friday.

The combined temperature was 0.02F above the previous record, which was initially set in July 2016, then tied in July 2019 and July 2020, the agency added.

Scroll down for video

July 2021 has become the hottest July ever and the hottest month in recorded history, NOAA said on Friday

NOAA also noted the land-surface temperature in the Northern Hemisphere was 2.77F above average last month, surpassing the record from 2012.

Breaking the data down further, NOAA said Asia had its hottest July on record, while Europe had its second-hottest - tied with July 2010 - behind July 2018.

North America, South America, Africa and Oceania all had July temperatures in their respective top-10 lists.

The combined land and ocean-surface temperature was 1.67F above the 20th-century average and the hottest since record keeping started 142 years ago. The combined temperature was 0.02F above the previous record, initially set in July 2016, then tied in July 2019 and July 2020

The land-surface temperature in the Northern Hemisphere was 2.77F above average last month, surpassing the record from 2012. Asia had its hottest July on record, Europe had its second-hottest and North America, South America, Africa and Oceania all experienced July temperatures in their respective top-10 lists

'In this case, first place is the worst place to be,' said NOAA Administrator Rick Spinrad in a statement.

'July is typically the world's warmest month of the year, but July 2021 outdid itself as the hottest July and month ever recorded. This new record adds to the disturbing and disruptive path that climate change has set for the globe.'

Sea ice in the Arctic Ocean was the fourth-smallest coverage area in 43 years of analysis, NOAA said on Friday

Antarctic sea ice coverage was above average, the largest since July 2015 and the eighth highest on record, NOAA said

The report also noted that sea ice in the Arctic Ocean was the fourth-smallest coverage area in 43 years of analysis, behind July 2012, July 2019 and July 2020, according to the National Snow and Ice Data Center.

Antarctic sea ice coverage was above average, the largest since July 2015 and the eighth highest on record.

NOAA highlighted the above-normal number of named storms in the tropics, with Elsa, the fifth named storm, having formed on July 1.

'With last month’s data, it remains very likely that 2021 will rank among the world’s 10-warmest years on record,' NOAA wrote in the statement.

July's searing temperatures were aided in part by an extreme heatwave in Canada that has stretched down to Washington and Oregon creating record temperatures while California is suffering from forest fires.

The 'once in 10,000 years' event is being caused by a heat dome, which means the warmth extends high into the atmosphere and impacts pressure and wind patterns.

The 'once in 10,000 years' event is being caused by a heat dome, which means the warmth extends high into the atmosphere and impacts pressure and wind patterns

A mountain of hot air is trapped by high-pressure conditions, further heating its and compressing it like a lid and wedging the high pressure between areas of low pressure, pushing cooler air away.

A significant portion of the western US is also dealing with a drought that has brought on a crisis to the diverse basin filled with flat vistas of sprawling alfalfa and potato fields, teeming wetlands and steep canyons of old-growth forests.

Earlier this year, analysis from NOAA forecast that the US would experience a hotter than normal summer, as climate change continues to disrupt weather patterns all over the planet.

NOAA's analysis of July's record temperatures come in light of the United Nation's damning report that said global warming is already causing extreme weather and the world will see a temperature increase of 2.7F by 2040, compared to a previous forecast between 2030 and 2052.

Additionally, heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense, according to the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment, released earlier this week.

It is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land,' the report warned.

The lengthy report added that it is virtually certain' heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions' and a rise in sea levels approaching 6 feet by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out.'

Humans have already heated the planet by roughly 2 degrees Fahrenheit (1.1C), since the 19th century, largely by burning coal, oil and gas for energy – with the US being one of the world's top producers.

Scientists largely agree that temperatures could rise anywhere between 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit (1.5 degrees Celsius) and 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit (3 degrees Celsius) by the end of the century, due to rising carbon emissions and greenhouse gases.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A new artificial intelligence (AI) platform monitors vital signs of employees when they look at their smartphone to see if they're sick.

Binah Teams, created by Israeli company Binah, comes in the form of an application for smartphones, as well as tablets, laptops and desktops.

Once installed, an employee, student or any other team member just has to look at their device's camera for the AI to determine vital signs like heart rate, oxygen saturation and respiratory rate in a couple of minutes.

The results could help a business remotely determine 'with medical grade accuracy' if a team member really is ill, although employees couldn't legally be forced to use it.

The company stresses that its application 'does not save images or input video streams used for measurement' to assuage privacy concerns.

Scroll down for video

HOW DOES IT WORK? Users can measure vital signs in a matter of seconds, at any time and from any location using their smartphone, laptop, or desktop. They just have to open the app and point the camera at the face for 45 seconds. Light from surrounding environment or device torch penetrates the skin and reflects off blood vessels to camera. Binah.ai connects to camera and receives captured video stream. Region of interest (ROI) is cropped by the AI from full image. Skin detection is performed on each ROI followed by extraction of RGB (red, green, blue) light. Each vital sign is calculated based on varying quantities of data. Results appear within 10 seconds to 1 min. Advertisement

Jake Moore, a cybersecurity specialist at ESET, told MailOnline that it could be used as 'simply another tool in HR', although employees could likely decline to use it considering data about whether they're ill or not gets fed back to bosses.

'There is already software available to monitor employees work and screen time but health monitoring by employers is the next level of intrusion that is potentially riddled with many false positives,' he said.

'Smartphones and artificial intelligence are an impressive mix but I’m not sure they are smart enough to take the role of a GP just yet.'

According to Binah, the app only needs a device's camera for the AI to detect small changes in colour that indicate sickness, which are too subtle for the human eye to notice.

'Basically we're following around the tiny colour changes that are happening to the skin and the tiny colour changes indicate the blood flow that is happening below the skin surface,' Binah co-founder and CEO David Maman told Times of Israel.

Users would open the application on their device and look into the camera for up to 45 seconds so the AI can get a video of their face for analysis.

Cameras can record video at a rate of 30 to 120 frames per second – and it's these individual frames that the AI analyses, not the video as a whole.

That means from just 45 seconds of footage, the AI is looking at an impressive 5,400 frames of the person's face.

It processes the differences between red, green and blue (RGB) light reflected by the skin in the frames, to reveal things like heart rate, oxygen saturation and respiration rate based on blood pulse.

The company stresses that its application 'does not save images or input video streams used for measurement' to assuage privacy concerns

'The pulse is actually the peak that is happening as part of the blood flow,' said Maman. 'You can actually see the peak in RGB colours that you extract from the person’s face.

'It’s such a tiny change that our eye cannot even track it, but the RGB signals that are extracted from the face are sensitive to those tiny changes.'

Users would open the application on their device and look into the camera for up to 45 seconds so the AI can get a video of their face for analysis

According to the firm, results are displayed on both the user's account and a team portal instantly, for the benefit of all team members, within 10 seconds to 1 minute after the 45-second scan is complete.

Users can perform a vital signs scan even when not connected to the internet, although they need to be connected for data to be stored and shared.

Just with any AI model, the technology required extensive training for detecting another vital sign – blood pressure, which is more difficult to measure.

The firm had to build a massive data set of video footage of hundreds of people connected to medical devices in hospitals.

Multiple visual 'indicators' of those with high pressure were used to help the model ascertain if a fresh face has high blood pressure, Maman said.

The app only works with up to date technology – on an Apple phone, only iPhone 8 or more recent, for example – and won't work under poor light conditions.

If an employee is actually quite sick, the technology cannot be used to make medical decisions, such as making an assessment that would lead to a prescription, because it has not yet been approved for medical use.

Binah is now working on adding other vital sign detection capabilities to its product, including body temperature and blood alcohol levels.

Binah Teams, created by Israeli company Binah, comes in the form of an application for smartphones, as well as tablets, laptops and desktops

According to the company, their product suits the thousands of employees who are now working remotely permanently due to the Covid pandemic, who can't be in the office for physical checks.

Combining multiple different checks in one solution is also more feasible than multiple test kits being sent in the post.

'People understand that the future is not to send you dozens of different devices that you will own and have available for yourself,' Maman said.

'It’s actually that any smartphone will be able to provide those kinds of services.

'There are places that don’t even have a sewer system but everyone has a smartphone.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The mysterious origins of Arthur's Stone — a Neolithic monument that inspired the 'stone table' in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe — have finally been discovered by archaeologists.

They said the imposing Stone Age tomb was once part of a much larger ceremonial landscape than previously thought.

It is linked to two 6,000-year-old 'halls of the dead' that were hailed as 'the discovery of a lifetime' when they were unearthed in Herefordshire in 2013.

This is the first time Arthur's Stone, which dates back to 3,700BC and is located on a hilltop outside the village of Dorstone, has been properly excavated.

Legend has it that King Arthur slew a giant who left the impression of his elbows on one of the stones as he fell.

Scroll down for video

The origins of Arthur's Stone (pictured) — a Neolithic monument that inspired the 'stone table' in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe — have finally been discovered by archaeologists

What is Arthur's Stone? Arthur's Stone is a Neolithic chambered tomb that is over 5,000 years old. Today only the large stones of the inner chamber remain, although these were once covered by a long mound. The chamber is formed of nine upright stones, with a massive capstone, estimated to weigh more than 25 tons. It was accessed through the side of the covering mound, via the right-angled passage. The tomb has never been excavated until now. Legend has it that King Arthur slew a giant who left the impression of his elbows on one of the stones as he fell. Source: English Heritage Advertisement

In C.S. Lewis's The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, the 'stone table' is the sacred place where Aslan, a talking lion, is killed by the White Witch.

Archaeologists always thought that Arthur's Stone's massive capstone, raised on a series of supporting stones and lesser chamber with a right-angled passage, had stood within a wedge-shaped stone cairn, similar to those found in the Cotswolds and south Wales.

But an excavation by the Universities of Manchester and Cardiff has now revealed it originally extended into a field immediately to the south of the tomb.

When the tomb was first built, archaeologists say it was probably covered in a mound of compressed turf, with a series of posts to hold it in place.

This long mound stretched into the nearby field, but rot caused it to collapse over time. The mound was then rebuilt with a slightly different orientation.

Professors Julian Thomas, from Manchester University, and Keith Ray, from Cardiff University, said the first mound likely faced Dorstone Hill, while the second pointed to an area between Skirrid Hill and Garway Hill to the south-east.

It is estimated to be at least 98ft (30m) long, while the entire ceremonial landscape extends over an area more than 1,093 yards (1km) across.

'Although Arthur's Stone is an iconic Megalithic monument of international importance, its origins had been unclear until now,' said Professor Thomas.

'Being able to shine a light on this astonishing 5,700-year-old tomb is exciting, and helps to tell the story of our origins.'

An excavation by the Universities of Manchester and Cardiff (pictured) has revealed that Arthur's Stone was once part of a much larger ceremonial landscape than previously thought

In C.S. Lewis's The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, the 'stone table' (pictured) is the sacred place where Aslan, a talking lion, is killed by the White Witch

In 2013, the hillside of Dorstone was also found to house three similar burial mounds, including two 'halls of the dead'.

'Each of these three turf mounds had been built on the footprint of a large timber building that had been deliberately burnt down,' said Professor Thomas.

'So Arthur's Stone has now been identified as being closely connected with these nearby "halls of the dead".

'Indeed, the block of upland between the Golden Valley and the Wye Valley is now becoming revealed as hosting an integrated Neolithic ceremonial landscape.'

The ancient 'halls of the dead' are thought to pre-date Stonehenge by almost 1,000 years.

An artist's impression of the Neolithic long hall. Two earth long barrows were uncovered that archaeologists believe date to about 3,800BC, almost 1,000 years before Stonehenge

Arthur's Stone, which dates back to 3,700BC, is on a hilltop outside the village of Dorstone

A flaked flint knife (pictured) was among the items discovered on Dorstone Hill back in 2013

Examples of flint weapons and tools, thought to have been buried in the barrows when first created or later left as offerings to the dead, were also discovered at the site eight years ago.

Among the finds were two stone axe-heads, a flint hand knife and an arrowhead, with some of the raw materials used in their construction pointing to origins hundreds of miles away from where they were found, according to the dig team.

The barrows themselves date to the early Neolithic period when the ancient Britons were starting to settle into small communities.

The findings from the recent excavations have yet to be published in a peer-reviewed journal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple offers you a simple trade-off with its new iPhone XR, the middlebrow cousin to the top-of-the-line iPhone XS.

On one hand, the XR lacks the high-resolution screen and dual-lens camera found on the XS.

On the other, you'd save at least $250 and still get most of the other cutting-edge features found on the more expensive model.

Scroll down for video

This Monday, Oct. 22, 2018, photo shows from left, the iPhone XS, iPhone XR, and the iPhone XS Max in New York. The XR falls between the top-of-the-line XS models in size, but is lower in price.

Based on several days of testing, it looks like Apple made the right cost-cutting trade-offs with the XR, which starts selling Friday for about $750.

The standard XS starts at about $1,000; its supersized cousin, the XS Max, goes for $100 more.

The XR falls between the XS and the Max in size.

WHAT THE REVIEWS SAY New York Times: The iPhone XR's 6.1-inch Super Retina LCD is one of the brighter and more colorful smartphone displays out there. It's just not OLED-great. The Verge: The display on the iPhone XR is… fine. It's fine! TechCrunch: Yes, the portrait mode works. No, it's not as good as the iPhone XS. Yes, I miss having a zoom lens. All of those things are true and easily the biggest reason I won’t be buying an iPhone XR. Wall Street Journal: The XR has the longest battery life of any iPhone I've tested in recent memory. On paper, the XS is a more premium product than the XR, but I don't know who I would recommend the XS to. CNBC: I think the iPhone XR is the iPhone that most people should buy. It gives you the best bang for your buck. Advertisement

Its screen is about 7 percent larger than the XS and 12 percent smaller than the Max.

But the XR is closer in width to larger Phones such as the Max and older Plus models, so anyone upgrading from an iPhone 7 or 8 will have to get used to a new grip.

As with the XS, the XR's display extends close to the phone's edges, translating to 45 percent more screen space than the iPhone 8 and 6 percent more than the 8 Plus.

The XR and the XS both use facial recognition to unlock the phone, and both have a notch at the top for sensors, similar to shades on a car's windshield. The notch will take getting used to.

The most affordable handset in Apple’s new line-up, the iPhone XR. The $749 'budget' device has an LCD display and comes in six colors

Speaker quality on the XR and the XS were comparable, and the mics on all new models offer stereo recording for the first time.

The phone displays, however, are different, and those disparities can make a difference. The screens on both XS models have better contrast and more vibrant colors than the standard LCD screen on the XR.

iPhone XR vs iPhone XS vs XS Max Screen Size: Display Type: Processor: Water Resistance: Battery Life: Fast Charge: Wireless Charge: 3D Touch Display: Dual Cameras: Optical Zoom: FaceID: Weight: Software: Price: Colours: iPhone XR 6.1-inch LCD A12 Bionic IP67 Up to 15 hours Yes Yes No No No Yes 194g (6.84 oz) iOS 12 $749 (£749) Yellow, White, Coral, Black, Blue, and Product Red iPhone XS 5.8-inch OLED A12 Bionic IP68 Up to 12 hours Yes Yes Yes Dual 12MP Lens Yes. 2x Yes 177g (6.24oz) iOS 12 $999 (£999) Gold, Space Grey, Silver iPhone XS Max 6.5-inch OLED A12 Bionic IP68 Up to 13 hours Yes Yes Yes Dual 12MP Lens Yes. 2x Yes 208g (7.34 oz) iOS 12 $1099 (£1099) Gold, Space Grey, Silver Advertisement

Autumn leaves in the cartoon 'The Secret Lives of Pets' stand out more, while greater hints of orange appeared in a space drama's rocket exhaust flames.

Whites are whiter, making the screen appear brighter even though it's not.

This Monday, Oct. 22, 2018, photo shows the iPhone XR, left, that has a single lens, and the iPhone XS Max that has two lenses, in New York. (AP Photo/Richard Drew)

The XR screen also falls short of full high definition, unlike the XS displays, although it can display video at 720p quality. Apple says that with LCD screens, higher resolution drains the battery faster, a trade-off that's minimal with the XS because its screen doesn't need a backlight.

That said, the differences are often hard to spot, even with the phones side by side. Where quality really matters, you'll probably want a bigger screen such as a tablet or a TV anyway.

Although the Max has the largest battery in an iPhone, the XR was typically on par with or exceeded the Max in battery performance when viewing video, at least at lower or medium brightness. In any case, either phone should give you enough battery life for routine use.

This Monday, Oct. 22, 2018, photo shows from left the iPhone 8, iPhone 8 Plus, and the iPhone XR in New York. The new XR phone has a larger display and loses the home button to make room for more screen. (AP Photo/Richard Drew)

Cameras improve with each generation, and the new iPhones are no different. For many shots, the new iPhones blend four exposures rather than two, allowing for better lighting balance and more detail.

In some shots taken in suboptimal conditions - against direct sunlight - the XR still showed trees in dimly lit areas, while last year's iPhone X produced pitch back. The new cameras also have better focus and low-light capabilities.

What's missing in the XR is a second rear lens for double the magnification. Instead, the XR uses software zoom, which reduces quality.

Philip W. Schiller, Senior Vice President, Worldwide Marketing of Apple, speaks about the new Apple iPhone XR at an Apple Inc product launch event at the Steve Jobs Theater in Cupertino

Of course, the standard iPhone 7 and 8 didn't have a second lens either, although their Plus models did, as did the iPhone X.

Both XS models also have two lenses. Despite lacking a second lens, the XR lets you blur backgrounds in some shots, a feature many phones are now getting. The XR does this with software, though it works only with people in the foreground, while the XS can do statues and monuments.

Two more points of comparison. The XS has slightly better water resistance - good to a depth of 2 meters (2.2 yards), compared with just 1 meter on the XR. But the XR offers a budget storage-upgrade option: $50 for 128 gigabytes (up from 64 gigabytes in the base model).

Both XS phones also start at 64 gigabytes, but their cheapest upgrade is $150 for 256 gigabytes.

The only knock is the XR's size. Though it's fine for people with adequate pockets or bags, not everyone wants a phone that's nearly as wide as the Max or the Plus. Perhaps Apple will one day design a smaller XR and revive a trend of offering both standard and larger versions for each major model.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Over the last month, a strange thing has happened.

As an overweight, unhealthy 42 year old man, I never thought I’d say this, but I’ve become addicted to spin classes.

And more amazingly, I’ve actually been attending them - even before heading to work in the morning.

Scroll down for video

The view from the saddle: Peloton, a New York based hi-tech spin class firm, lets you stream rides live from the firm’s New York HQ, but also access a vast library of on demand rides.

HOW PELETON WORKS Riders can either use the firm's $1,995 bike with a built in touchscreen and sensors, or an iPad or android app on their own bike. Classes are either live for from an on demand library. Classes are either gym based or outside ride recorded using cameras. Sensors record performance and show live on screen stats and leaderboards with others in the class. Advertisement

This incredible change is down to one thing - Peloton.

Rather than going to classes in Manhattan, surrounded by the kind of terrifying people who go to spin classes in Manhattan, Peloton lets you take classes whenever you want - at home.

It’s a spin bike with a built 22inch tablet screen built in.

It lets you stream rides live from the firm’s New York HQ, but also access a vast library of on demand rides.

More than this, is also tracks your every move, letting you see exactly how much you’re pedalling, what power you’re putting out, and how you’re doing in an online leaderboard which is either live or made up of other users who have taken the same on demand ride.

This isn’t a cheap bike, costing $1995, with a $39 monthly subscription, and I've been using it for the last month.

One of the most interesting things about Peloton is the breadth of classes available.

It’s astonishing, with everything from the standard dance music you’d expect to 'boomer rides' consisting of only Peter Gabriel tracks, to country and western, heavy metal and classical rides.

There are also a few scenic rides you can take at your own pace and show video of national parks, along with a series of general exercise classes you can watch dealing stretching and warmups.

In addition, there are also live DJ rides, which are at first a little odd, with a DJ booth set up next to the instructor.

However, these do really add to the atmosphere of rides, and became firm favourites with me.

There’s also a big range of instructors, of all age ranges, something that really does help Peloton appeal to everyone - and there are even rides hosted by professional cyclists (which are as absurdly tough as you'd expect).

Once you’ve started a class, you’ll see live stats in front of you on a dashboard, and the instructors will often tell you exactly what these should be.

Unlike a normal spin bike, Peloton’s has a digital resistance control - so there’s no more cheating by not turning it up when you’re told.

After each ride, you can see your stats - and how you've (hopefully) improved over time.

It’s a strange experience at first - but breathtaking how quickly you forget where you are, and become immersed in the ride.

It really is like being in the studio, and in many ways better than most spin studios, as you’re seeing so much data about your ride (and if you don’t want to, any or all of it can be hidden with a tap).

If you have friends with bikes, you can even see them live on screen, and compete with them during classes.

The key to Peloton is its sense of community - after a few weeks, I developed my favourite instructors and rides (for the record, the 45 minute live DJ rides with DJ John Michael Di Spirito and Nicole Meline became my go to).

One of the most interesting things about Peloton is the breadth of classes available. It’s astonishing, with everything from the standard dance music you’d expect to 'boomer rides' consisting of only Peter Gabriel tracks, to country and western, heavy metal and classical rides.

The bike really does turn fitness into a game - there are badges available for rides, with everything from a new high output to a fastest speed.

The bike also tracks and stores every ride you do, and this is an incredibly addictive tool - and I found after a month, my numbers were significantly improved.

Overall, the Peloton experience really is a perfect example of how technology can be used to change people’s lives.

Click below to watch a live ride in action

Founder John Foley told me he set the firm up after realising he didn't have time to go to the gym.

'My wife and I have 2 kids, we loved the gym, and missed going - it became harder and harder to make it there.'

'We built a platform to allow people to take that class at home.'

It is, however, expensive.

But with the average spin class, in Manhattan at least, costing around $35 a week, and gym memberships running to hundreds of dollars a month, it’s an investment that does pay for itself relatively quickly, at least if you use it regularly.

And I found I did - I'll be honest, I assumed after a few weeks the bike would be doing double duty as a clothes horse in my spare room.

In fact. I'm was getting up early to sneak in 30 minute classes before work, something I never thought I’d be doing.

The sheer convenience is the key, and the entire experience really has had an impact on my health in a way I didn’t expect.

It's an awful lot of money for a spin bike - but for many people, it really could change you life for the better.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Gulf Stream is at its weakest in a millennia, approaching a 'tipping point' where it could collapse and push temperatures in Europe down by 18F, a new study has warned.

Human caused climate change is responsible for changes bringing the current - also known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) - to the brink of collapse, according to the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Germany.

The Atlantic Ocean circulation system is responsible for the mild temperatures in the UK and Europe, moving heat from the tropics to the northern hemisphere.

Its underlying system has become destabilised, researchers discovered, which could eventually result in it switching to a 'weak mode' and lead to its collapse.

It is currently only approaching 'tipping point', but when it happens warm water won't be moved up through western Europe, causing freezing cold winters.

Study authors can't say when it will happen as there is still the chance to stop it, but it would require a dramatic reduction in carbon emissions.

'At the moment we most likely haven't already crossed the critical threshold,' study author Niklas Boers told MailOnline, adding 'every single gram of CO2 we don't emit into the atmosphere will reduce the probability that we'll cross the threshold'.

The Gulf Stream is at its weakest in a millennia, approaching a 'tipping point' where it could collapse and push temperatures in Europe down by 18F, study reveals

It is currently only approaching 'tipping point', but when it happens warm water won't be moved up through western Europe, causing freezing cold winters

WHY ARE OCEAN CURRENTS SO IMPORTANT? Ocean currents play a critical role in regulating the planet. They are the continuous, predictable, directional movement of sea water by gravity, wind, and water density. Water in the ocean moves in two directions - horizontally and vertically. Horizontal movements are referred to as currents, while vertical changes are called upwellings or downwellings. Slower circulation in the North Atlantic can yield profound change. This is on both the North American and European climate but also on African and Asian summer monsoon rainfall. This is through its effect on sea surface temperature, hydrological cycle, atmospheric circulation and variation in the intertropical convergence zone. If the Gulf Stream, moving warm water up from the tropics, collapses Europe would be plunged into a deep freeze. Advertisement

Disaster movie The Day After Tomorrow was based on the collapse of AMOC, the phenomenon that drives the gulf stream, carrying warm surface water from the equator and return it cold back tot he bottom of the Atlantic.

The AMOC is known to be at its weakest in more than 1,000 years based on an earlier study, and this new research explored whether it was due to an underlying stability.

A collapse was previously considered unlikely under current global warming levels, with the system slowly weakening over the last century.

Lead author Dr Niklas Boers, of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Germany, explored the underlying dynamical stability of the AMOC.

'The loss of dynamical stability would imply that the AMOC has approached its critical threshold beyond which an abrupt and potentially irreversible transition to the weak mode could occur,' he explained.

The analysis was based on 'fingerprints' the AMOC leaves in surface temperature and salinity patterns.

It showed a 'critical threshold' is being reached beyond which the system may collapse, although we haven't reached that point yet.

The finding was both alarming and surprising, as the scenario was expected to occur at global warming levels much higher than the current increases.

'The signs of destabilisation being visible already is something that I wouldn’t have expected and that I find scary,' said Dr Boers.

'It’s something you just can't [allow to] happen.'

'Most evidence suggests the recent AMOC weakening is caused directly by the warming of the northern Atlantic ocean,' he explained.

Mean early-warning indicators for the Atlantic ocean suggest that the Gulf Stream is still in its strong mode, but is at risk of switching to the weak mode then collapse

'But according to our understanding, this would be unlikely to lead to an abrupt state transition.

'Stability loss that could result in such a transition would be expected following the inflow of substantial amounts of freshwater into the North Atlantic in response to melting of the Greenland ice sheet, melting Arctic sea ice and an overall enhanced precipitation and river runoff.'

Fresh water from melting ice - especially in Greenland - has accelerated in the last few decades, with regional destabilisation of the Greenland Ice sheet already detected.

Dr Boers added: 'To understand this in-depth we need to find ways to improve the representation of the AMOC and polar ice sheets in comprehensive Earth system models and to better constrain their projections.

'I hope that the results presented here will help with that.'

Disaster movie The Day After Tomorrow was based on the collapse of AMOC, the phenomenon that drives the gulf stream, carrying warm surface water from the equator and return it cold back tot he bottom of the Atlantic

He said that while it is weakening, it hasn't reached the tipping point yet, and this study simply shows that the AMOC is still in its strong circulation mode.

David Thornalley, an expert in the AMOC from University College London, not involved in this study, said there is evidence the modern AMOC could suddenly switch to a new, weaker state.

'But we don’t know for certain if this can happen, and if it can, how close we might be to any such tipping point,' he said.

ATLANTIC MERIDIONAL OVERTURNING CIRCULATION (AMOC) The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is a large system of ocean currents. They carry warm water from tropics northwards into the North Atlantic. Like a conveyor belt, driven by differences in temperature and salt content – the water's density. As warm water flows northwards it cools and some evaporation occurs, which increases the amount of salt. Low temperature and a high salt make the water denser, and this dense water sinks deep into the ocean. The cold, dense water slowly spreads southwards, several kilometres below the surface. Eventually, it gets pulled back to the surface and warms in a process called 'upwelling' and the circulation is complete. This global process makes sure that the world's oceans are continually mixed, and that heat and energy are distributed around the earth. This, in turn, contributes to the climate we experience today. SOURCE: UK Met Office Advertisement

Adding: 'We still don’t know how close we might be to a future tipping point, and if indeed one exists.

'But this study provides evidence to suggest that there may be a loss in stability of the AMOC that is consistent with the idea of an approaching tipping point.'

'The weak circulation mode is much much weaker than the present day mode, even if that has slowed down,' Dr Boers told MailOnline.

The team discovered that the decline in strength over the last century is associated with a loss of stability, rather than just a linear change in its mean state.

'So we have been moving closer to the critical threshold, but we certainly haven't moved into the weak circulation mode already,' he said.

'The concern is that we have moved closer to the critical point where a collapse to the weak mode can occur,' adding it would have dramatic consequences in terms of cooling Europe by up to 18F and impact on tropical monsoon systems.

'I reveal significant signs of stability loss, but it's hard to estimate from that where exactly the critical threshold is,' he told MailOnline.

'This is because there are too many uncertainties in translating our CO2 emissions into global warming, translating that to the actual warming in the Arctic, then translating that to the freshwater inflow to the North Atlantic via Greenland Ice Sheet and Sea Ice melting.

'Then there are still uncertainties in the exact value of freshwater inflow at which the AMOC will tip over to the weak mode.

'What can be said for sure is that we haven't expected to see such clear signs of stability loss at this point already. Once we reach the critical point, the AMOC will likely collapse within a few decades.'

It isn't beyond hope though, as Dr Boers told MailOnline 'every single gram of CO2 that we don't emit to the atmosphere will reduce the probability that we'll eventually cross the threshold and thus trigger the AMOC collapse.'

'This is certain even if the numbers themselves are uncertain,' he added.

Professor Mark Maslin, from University College London, not involved in this study, said it raises serious questions about the stability of North Atlantic ocean circulation.

'Increased instability could make European weather more variable, leading to more extreme events. But we do not know if the ocean circulation will collapse or how close we are to that critical threshold.'

Researchers explored salinity fingerprints linked to changes in the Gulf Stream over the past 1,000 years to calculate the strength of the steam itself and risk of collapse

David Alexander, Professor of Risk and Disaster Reduction at University College London, not involved in the research, said Britain is unprepared for a major disaster.

'Britain does not have a proper civil protection system,' he told MailOnline, with no national emergency operations centre, inadequate training an an 'excessive reliance on military assistance,' he said.

He added that 'almost all the vital areas have been starved of resources, there are no representatives of disaster science on SAGE and volunteer organisations are not properly incorporated into the system.'

'There is a failure to learn from other countries' good practices and a strong desire to emulate the United States, which is possibly the worst example to follow.'

'Despite the presence of an enormous well of talent and expertise in Britain, almost all disasters over the last 35 years have been badly managed.'

Professor Thornalley from UCL said: the study couldn't prove AMOC might undergo a sudden collapse in the future, but does add real-world evidence it may be more unstable than models currently suggest.

'The link between the AMOC and these fingerprints is still being debated and there are other processes that might also affect some of these ocean properties,' he said.

'Therefore the study might be showing increasing instability in a feature of ocean circulation (which is a concern in itself), but it might not be AMOC.

'However, it is reasonable to me to use this collection of different indicators to infer that it is likely they are detecting changes in AMOC.'

He said scientists should be cautious about the quality of the observational data from the early part of the record, as direct ocean measurements were sparse.

This 'could mean the variability in the first part of the record is not accurately captured, which could alter the assessment of long term trends in variability and stability,' said Thornalley.

The study is part of the EU's TiPES project which is investigating tipping points in the Earth system and is published in the journal Nature Climate Change.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A single-celled yellow slime called 'Blob' is set to blast off to the International Space Station (ISS) where astronauts will study how it learns and adapts despite being brainless.

Blob is scheduled to launch on August 10 aboard Northrop Grumman's 16th NASA commercial resupply mission.

European Space Agency's (ESA) Thomas Pesquet will conduct several experiments with the slime mold with a focus on studying how microgravity and radiation affect it.

One of the studies will see how Blob behaves in a microgravity environment without food and the other with, which it will be given oat flakes.

Similar experiments will be conducted on Earth by primary, middle and high school students, which will be compared to a time-lapse video from space to observe differences in Blob's speed, shape and growth.

Scroll down for video

A single-celled yellow slime, called 'Blob,' is set to blast off to the International Space Station (ISS) where astronauts will study how it learns and adapts despite being brainless

The mold, or Physarum polcephalum, has become highly interesting to the scientific community due to its ability to think, make decisions, sleep, learn and even navigate a maze.

Evelyne Cortiade-Marché, head of the CNES' education department, said in a statement: 'Blob is a unique experience that stimulates student curiosity about themes such as the impact of the environment on organisms and the development of living organisms.'

A Blob kit will launch to the ISS, containing for slime mold cells, a syringe and other components for Pesquet to begin his research.

Once received, he will wake the molds with water and place them in cylinder dishes.

A Blob kit will launch to the ISS, containing for slime mold cells, a syringe and other components

According to Dr. Audrey Dussutour, a slime mold specialist and director of research at the French National Center for Scientific Research, the Blob's growth and behavior will be observed over seven days after which it will go into a dormant state and stay aboard the ISS.

'Our aim is to investigate the effect of microgravity on slime mold behavior, especially exploration behavior but also growth,' Dr Dussutour said during a press conference on Monday.

'But the real main objective of this project is to engage kids in interesting, exciting scientific experiments.'

A recent study of Blob was conducted by the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization in Göttingen, Germany in February, which found he bright yellow slime mold records where its last meal was by changing the shape of its tubular tendrils.

The mold, or Physarum polcephalum, has become highly interesting to the scientific community due to its ability to think, make decisions, sleep, learn and even navigate a maze

A recent study of Blob was conducted by the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization in Göttingen, Germany in February, which found he bright yellow slime mold records where its last meal was by changing the shape of its tubular tendrils

If it encounters food while weaving around an environment, the mold will keep its specific structure in that area to know where to return to feast.

Karen Alim, head of the institute's biological physics and morphogenesis group and her colleague Mirna Kramar observed P. polycephalum under a microscope.

Typically, P. polycephalum reabsorbs and restructures its tendrils as it moves along in a new environment.

But if it encountered a tasty morsel, it kept that structure in place.

'[We] observed a distinct imprint of a food source on the pattern of thicker and thinner tubes of the network long after feeding,' Alim, a biological physicist at the Technical University of Munich, said in a statement.

According to Kramar, lead author in a report in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 'previous encounters imprinted in the network architecture weigh into the decision about the future direction of migration.'

The pair believe that, after a meal, the mold releases a chemical that softens the tubes in its network, effectively reorienting the whole organism toward the food source.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the world's rarest chameleons is facing extinction as its natural habitat is being converted to farmland, requiring 'urgent' conservation efforts, study finds.

Chapman's pygmy chameleon had been feared extinct due to massive forest clearances in the Malawi Hills, but has been found 'clinging to survival' in patches of rainforest in Malawi by South African National Biodiversity Institute experts.

Also known as Rhampholeon chapmanorum, the creature grows to a length of just 5.5 centimetres (2.1 inches), and was first described by scientists in 1992.

Researchers say urgent conservation measures are required in order to save the 'critically endangered' species from extinction due to habitat destruction.

The study is based on the recently published findings of a survey conducted in 2016 by the South African National Biodiversity Institute and the Museums of Malawi.

The survey found small pockets of the reptile clinging on in surviving patches of forest in Malawi, with a total population down 80 per cent since the 1980s.

One of the world's rarest chameleons is facing extinction as its natural habitat is being converted to farmland, requiring 'urgent' conservation efforts, study finds

CHAPMAN'S PYGMY CHAMELEON: RHAMPHLEON CHAPMORUM The Chapman's pygmy chameleon is just 2.1 inches long and found in the Malawi Hills. They were first discovered in 1992 and their population has since dropped 80 per cent due to deforestation. They were once thought extinct but a 2016 survey revealed tiny isolated pockets remain in the Malawi Hills. It is one of the world’s rarest chameleons, if not the rarest. The tiny species is listed as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List. Advertisement

A genetic (DNA) analysis also suggests that the chameleons are trapped in their forest patches, unable to move between them to breed.

Conservationists say that without this interbreeding, genetic diversity will be lost over time posing another serious threat to the species' survival.

The study was led by Professor Krystal Tolley from the South African National Biodiversity Institute and the University of the Witwatersrand.

It was her assessment work in 2014 which led the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) to list Chapman's Pygmy Chameleon as 'Critically Endangered' on its Red List of Threatened Species.

Comparing satellite images of the Malawi Hills with those taken in the 1980s revealed 'dramatic' forest loss.

The area where the chameleon was first described in 1992 has since been completely cleared, with just small fragmented and isolated patches remaining.

Fearing the chameleon may have become extinct, Prof Tolley and her colleagues turned to crowdfunding website, RocketHub, to raise the cash needed to survey the remaining patches for any surviving populations.

Chameleon enthusiasts responded to the appeal, donating enough cash for the researchers to survey two of the remaining forest patches in the Malawi Hills.

They were also able to survey an area 60 miles away near Mikundi, where 37 of the chameleons had been released in 1998 to try to safeguard the species.

The chameleons were found in all three locations - and Prof Tolley described the team's jubilation on discovering that the species was still present.

She said: 'The first one we found was in the transition zone on the forest edge, where there are some trees but mostly maize and cassava plants.

'When we found it we got goosebumps and just started jumping around. We didn't know if we would get any more, but once we got into the forest there were plenty, although I don't know how long that will last.'

Samples taken from the chameleons were then analysed to see if their genetic diversity had also been reduced. While this was not evident, the researchers believe that may be because such effects take time to show.

They did see evidence that the flow of genes between the fragmented populations had been disrupted due to their isolation and inability to interbreed.

Prof Tolley explained that, in effect, each forest patch is now home to a small, isolated population, unable to breed with chameleons in neighbouring patches.

Chapman's pygmy chameleon had been feared extinct due to massive forest clearances in the Malawi Hills, but has been found 'clinging to survival' in patches of rainforest in Malawi by South African National Biodiversity Institute experts

MALAWI: A LANDLOCKED COUNTRY IN AFRICA The Republic of Malawi is a landlocked country in southeastern Africa bordered by Zambia, Tanznia and Mozambique. It spans 45,747 square miles and has a population of over 19.4 million. The name Malawi comes from the Maravi, an old name for the Chewa people who inhabit the area the country covers. The Great Rift Valley runs through the country and the nation has elephants, hippos, antelopes, big cats, monkey and rhinos. It also has birds of prey, parrots, falcons and unique reptiles such as Chapman's Pygmy Chameleon. Advertisement

She said that will reduce genetic diversity over time and increases the extinction risk for the species as a whole.

She added: 'The forest loss requires immediate attention before this species reaches a point from which it cannot return.

'Urgent conservation action is needed, including halting of forest destruction and recovery of habitat to promote connectivity.'

The research team suggest including the remaining forest as part of the nearby Matandwe Forest Reserve so it can be designated as a Key Biodiversity Area, and introducing strong measures to ensure its protection.

They also recommend more and thorough surveys of the chameleons to monitor their population and genetic diversity.

The team also suggest the involvement of local landowners in protecting the Mikundi forest and its population as some insurance against the loss of the chameleon's natural range in the Malawi Hills.

Overall, they say a 'comprehensive and properly funded action plan' needs to be drawn up and enacted to stop the species disappearing forever.

Prof Tolley said: 'They are little, gentle creatures. Other chameleon species can be hysterical, hissing and biting, but pygmy chameleons are gentle and just beautiful.

Lead author, Professor Krystal Tolley, searches for chameleons in the forests of southern Malawi

'Chapman's in particular are one of the smallest and don't have a prehensile tail like most chameleons, perhaps because they aren't particularly arboreal but walk about on the forest floor in the leaf litter, crawling up into low bushes at night to sleep.

'They blend right into the leaf litter and perfectly pattern match the dead leaves.

'They are mostly brown but they can change to quite beautiful blues and greens with little dots all over them and that's probably a way of communicating with each other.

'They also vibrate and we could feel it when we held them. We don't really know why but it's also probably some form of communication. The fact they do it while held in our hands could mean it's a way to try and scare predators.'

She added: 'I get sad when I think what's happening to them - what we are doing to their habitat. They are really just helpless victims.'

The findings have been published in the journal Oryx.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Facebook is rolling out encryption for voice or video calls made through its Messenger app, ratcheting up privacy for users.

The Mark Zuckerberg-led company announced Friday that it is also adding controls for its disappearing messages and a select few users may also be able to test other features related to encryption.

The move comes as the sanctity of data on smartphones becomes an increasingly sensitive topic.

Encrypted text chats on Messenger has been offered since 2016, but the new rollout adds the extra layer of security to calling.

The move is due to a major surge in calls through Messenger - Facebook says there are than 150 million daily, which prompted the company to add the option of scrambling exchanges from one end to the other to prevent snooping.

Facebook is adding encryption for Messenger voice and video calls amid controversy over how much access law enforcement should have to data and messages in criminal investigations

'The content of your messages and calls in an end-to-end encrypted conversation is protected from the moment it leaves your device to the moment it reaches the receiver's device,' Messenger director of product management Ruth Kricheli said in a blog post.

'This means that nobody else, including Facebook, can see or listen to what´s sent or said.'

The rollout also allows users to choose the amount of time before text messages in a chat will disappear, from as little as five seconds to as long as 24 hours.

Instagram is also getting an encryption update in the 'coming weeks,' which will add the extra security to group chats, along with voice and video calls.

The move is due to a major surge in calls through Messenger - Facebook says there are than 150 million daily, which prompted the company to add the option of scrambling exchanges from one end to the other to prevent snooping

End-to-end encryption is already widely used by apps, including Facebook-owned WhatsApp and is becoming an industry standard.

'People expect their messaging apps to be secure and private,' Kricheli said.

Facebook disclosed that it is testing encrypting group chats and calls on Messenger, as well as direct messages at its image-centric Instagram social network.

'We´ll also kick off a limited test with adults in certain countries that lets them opt-in to end-to-end encrypted messages and calls for one-on-one conversations on Instagram,' Kricheli said.

Apple's recent announcement that it would scan encrypted messages for evidence of child sexual abuse has revived debate on online encryption and privacy, raising fears the same technology could be used for government surveillance.

The move represents a major shift for Apple, which has until recently resisted efforts to weaken its encryption that prevents third parties from seeing private messages.

Apple argued in a technical paper that the technology developed by cryptographic experts 'is secure, and is expressly designed to preserve user privacy.'

Nonetheless, encryption and private specialists warned the tool could be exploited for other purposes, potentially opening a door to mass surveillance.

The Apple move comes following years of standoffs involving technology firms and law enforcement.

FBI officials have warned that so-called 'end to end encryption,' where only the user and recipient can read messages, can protect criminals, terrorists and pornographers even when authorities have a legal warrant for an investigation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Israeli beauty-tech firm Pollogen has launched a sleek new device that can give you a ‘super-facial’ in less than 10 minutes, without having to go to the salon.

The egg-shaped Geneo Personal is a handheld oxygenation system that taps into a process known as the Bohr Effect to give you clearer, fresher skin at home.

Instead of simply ‘rubbing air bubbles on your face,’ Geneo Personal stimulates oxygen from beneath the skin’s surface, according to the firm.

Pollogen unveiled the product in an Indiegogo campaign this month for a discounted $109 ahead of its official release next year, when it will retail at $249.

Israeli beauty-tech firm Pollogen has launched a sleek new device that can give you a ‘super-facial’ in less than 10 minutes, without having to go to the salon

The palm-sized Geneo Personal device is designed to deliver a high-quality, once-per-week facial treatment in just six minutes.

It releases carbon dioxide bubbles across your face as you exfoliate, lowering the PH levels at the surface of your skin.

This, in turn, draws oxygen up from beneath ‘to react and enrich the surface from within,’ the firm explains.

The carbon dioxide ‘stimulates a release of oxygen from your blood cells up to your skin’s surface,’ according to Pollogen.

‘This physiological response is what makes your facial skin really level up.’

Geneo Personal releases carbon dioxide bubbles across your face as you exfoliate, lowering the PH levels at the surface of your skin. This, in turn, draws oxygen up from beneath, according to the firm

Pollogen unveiled the product in an Indiegogo campaign this month for a discounted $109 ahead of its official release next year, when it will retail at $229. It's available in three pastel colors

The campaign has already raised more than $110,000 on Indiegogo, touting the ability to rejuvenate your face in a matter of minutes.

Geneo Personal is currently priced at $109 for early-birds, and comes in three pastel colors: powder pink, mint green, and white.

The device itself measures just under 5-inches long and weighs less than a pound. When it’s not in use, it fits into a discreet charging stand.

And, according to the firm, it will give you an Instagram-ready appearance – no filter necessary.

HANDS-ON WITH THE GENEO PERSONAL OXYGENATION DEVICE Dailymail.com tested out the Geneo Personal device in powder pink What strikes me first about Pollogen's latest device is its minimalist design. It fits perfectly in the palm of your hand, and the charging dock takes up little room on a dresser or counter-top. The device itself is straightforward to use, and to the joy of those who prefer instant gratification, the results are immediately apparent. I used Geneo Personal for about three weeks and was impressed by the effects on my skin. Unlike many other exfoliating devices which can leave your skin feeling raw, Geneo Personal provides a gentle treatment that cleans your face without making it feel as though it's been rubbed by sandpaper. The moment I was officially sold, however, came after a long weekend of camping. This device made for the most refreshing post-camping scrub I've ever had, leaving my face feeling fresh and dewy. The price-tag is undeniably hefty - especially for those who don't catch the Early Bird - but it's certainly a steal in the long-term if you consider the alternative of going out to get expensive facials at the salon. Advertisement

‘It’s a 3-in-1 facial experience, because it Oxygenates, Exfoliates, and Nourishes your skin in just 6 minutes,’ said Sharon Ravic, CEO of Pollogen.

‘We put our face through a lot every day, exposing it to the sun’s harsh rays and air pollutants. It’s time to unlock the skin’s natural potential by raising the oxygen levels in our skin cells.

‘Throw out the brush heads and bring on the bubbles.’

Geneo Personal is expected to begin shipping February 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A giant panda on loan to France from China gave birth to two female twin cubs early Monday, which, according to the French zoo, 'are very lively, pink and plump.'

The twins, weighing 5.3 and 4.6 ounces respectively, were born shortly after 1 am local time at the Beauval Zoo in south Paris.

Their mother, Huan Huan, and father, Yuan Zi, were sent to France in 2012 and are on a 10-year loan from China - a move that aims at highlighting good ties between the countries.

Scroll down for video

The twins are their second and third panda cubs born in France, after Yuan Meng was born in 2017.

'Huan Huan is taking care of them very well. She took them in her mouth to lick them and clean them. We can hear little cries,' the zoo said in a statement.

A giant panda on loan to France from China gave birth to two female twin cubs early Monday, which, according to the French zoo 'are very lively, pink and plump.' The mother, Huan Huan, is putting them in her mouth to lick them and clean them

The twins, weighing 5.3 and 4.6 ounces, were born shortly after 1am local time at the Beauval Zoo in south Paris

The zoo said the sex of the cubs were determined by the Chinese experts in charge of taking care of them but will need to be definitively confirmed since external genitalia does not appear until they are several months old.

The cubs will not be named before 100 days. They will spend a few years in France before being sent to China, the zoo said.

Other nations in Europe also have giant pandas, including Austria, Britain, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and Finland.

There are about 1,800 pandas living in the wild in China and about 500 in captivity worldwide.

The zoo said the sex of the cubs were determined by the Chinese experts in charge of taking care of them but will need to be definitively confirmed since external genitalia does not appear until they are several months old

For decades, China gifted friendly nations with its unofficial national mascot in what was known as 'panda diplomacy.' More recently, the country has loaned pandas to zoos on commercial terms.

Panda reproduction, in captivity or in the wild, is notoriously difficult as experts say few pandas get in the mood or even know what to do when they do.

Further complicating matters, the window for conception is small since female pandas are in heat only once a year for about 24-48 hours.

Huan Huan and her partner Yuan Zi -the star attractions at Beauval - thrilled zoo officials in March when they managed to make 'contact', as they put it, eight times in a weekend.

The cubs will not be named before 100 days. They will spend a few years in France before being sent to China, the zoo said

Huan Huan and her partner Yuan Zi -the star attractions at Beauval - thrilled zoo officials in March when they managed to make 'contact', as they put it, eight times in a weekend

Veterinarians also carried out an artificial insemination, just to be sure. Pictured is one of the cubs hanging out of its mother's mouth

Veterinarians also carried out an artificial insemination, just to be sure.

'We just lived a moment of rare intensity. These births are always very exceptional but they also bring some surprises,' said Delphine Delord, director of the Beauval Zoo.

Huan Huan's first cub, Yuan Meng, now weighs more than 220 pounds and is to be sent this year to China, where there are an estimated 1,800 giant pandas living in the wild and another 500 in captivity.

Huan Huan's newborns will not be named for 100 days, with Peng Liyuan - the wife of Chinese President Xi Jinping - set to chose what they will be called, the zoo said.

Last December, Taiwan welcomed its own panda cub named Yuan Boa, which means 'round baby' in Chinese.

Pictured is one of the cubs being cared for by zoo staff

Last December, Taiwan welcomed its own panda cub named Yuan Boa, which means 'round baby' in Chinese. The cub was unveiled to some 150 guests and reporters for the first time since her birth on June 28 to Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan

The cub was unveiled to some 150 guests and reporters for the first time since her birth on June 28 to Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan.

The parents were gifted to the Taiwan zoo by China to mark then warming relations between to two rivalling countries.

Yuan Bao was seen clambering over a wooden fame and playing in sawdust as the audience watched from outside the cage.

This cub was much older than the recent twins when it was first shown to the public,

In December, Yuan Boa weighed over 30 pounds, which was a major increase of its 6.5-ounce birth weight.

China views Taiwan as part of its territory and has vowed to one day bring the self-ruled democratic island back into the fold, by force if necessary.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fortnite is bringing in the new year with a bang as users discover a series of 14 firework displays scattered around the map.

It it believed there are three regions around the Fortnite world where the explosive items can be found.

Gamers can spot and set off the red and white stripped fireworks which are stuck in the ground at a jaunty angle.

Fortnite has been a 2018 phenomenon and won 'Game of the year' in November, beating out competition from PUBG and Red Dead Redemption.

Scroll down for video

Gamers will find the red and white stripped fireworks stuck in the ground at a jaunty angle. The fireworks are located in coastal regions and it is reported they fizzle and pop up high in the air (pictured)

One set of fireworks is believed to at the northerly spot called The Block, which is known as the houses.

This region was previously known as Risky Reels.

A second location can be found to the north east of the Wailing Woods. More are also available at the opposite side of the map in the Desert biome.

The fireworks are located in coastal regions and they fizzle and pop up high in the air before exploding.

This is not as dramatic as many of Fortnite's other notable events, such as the demise of Kevin the cube in which each player received their own cut scene with slowed down time, levitation and a mysterious butterfly.

The New Year event marks the end of one of the most successful for a single game in history.

Fortnite is now available across all major platforms, including: Sony PS4, Windows PC, Xbox One, iOS, Android and Nintendo Switch.

In the 90 days after launching on iOS, the developer behind the hugely-successful title pocketed £72 million ($100 million).

It it believed there are three regions with the explosive displays around the Fortnite world in each of the four regions. One set of fireworks is believed to be to the north of a region known as The Block. The others are in Wailing Woods and the Desert biome (pictured)

The New Year event marks the end of one of the most successful for a single game in history. Fortnite is now available across all major platforms, including: Sony PS4, Windows PC, Xbox One, iOS, Android and Nintendo Switch

The survival shooter quickly climbed the ranks of the top 10 free iOS apps following its launch on the platform, beating the likes of Snapchat, Facebook and WhatsApp.

Fortnite was also the most downloaded app on iPad in the weeks after its release.

The game costs nothing to download and play, but does offer a plethora of in-app purchases. These include skins, dance moves and accessories.

The most expensive in-app item is £99.99 ($130).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Red Dead Redemption II has already taken the video game charts by storm and earned rave reviews from critics.

But what about fans of the blockbuster video game looking for that extra edge while playing? Fortunately for gamers, Forbes has assembled a large and running list of cheat codes for the new game and their uses.

While cheat codes have largely fallen by the wayside in recent years, Rockstar Games is still part of that unapologetic old guard of video game developers who’ve stuck with them even as they’ve gone out of style – and Red Dead Redemption II is no exception to their rule.

The cheat codes for Red Dead Redemption II allow players to obtain new modes of transportation, attain additional weapons, alter their stats and Honor level and more

Here’s a look at all of the known Red Dead Redemption II cheat codes and their uses. The cheat codes usable without a newspaper are signified with an asterisk next to them.

*Keep your dreams simple - Spawns a one-horse Wagon

*I shall be better - Set Deadeye level to 3, allowing for manual painting of targets

*I seek and I find - Set Deadeye level to 5, showing all weak spots

Abundance is the dullest desire - Infinite Ammo

Greed Is American Virtue - Pump-Action Shotgun, Bolt Action Rifle, Mauser Pistol, and Semi-Automatic Pistol all added to inventory

*Death is silence – Adds all stealth weapons to inventory

*A simple life, a beautiful death - Basic weapons all added to inventory

*A fool on command – Causes player to become drunk

Vanity. All is Vanity - Awards all outfits

Keep your dreams light - Spawns a Buggy

Virtue unearned is not virtue - Sets your Honor high with a bunch of unearned virtue

*Run! Run! Run! - Spawns a Racehorse

You are a beast built for war - Spawns a War Horse

*Better than my dog - Infinite horse whistle distance

You seek more than the world offers - Fill and fortify all status meters

*You want punishment - Increases Wanted Level

*You Want Freedom - Decreases Wanted Level

The Lucky be strong evermore - Grants infinite stamina

*Balance. All Is Balance - Sets Honor to neutral

Would you be happier as a clown? - Spawns a Circus Wagon

*You Flourish Before You Die - Fills all status meters

You long for sight but see nothing - Reveals map

Red Dead Redemption 2 release date

The video game was released on Friday, October 26 and is now available to play worldwide.

How to play Red Dead Redemption 2

Red Dead Redemption II can currently be played on both PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.

What is Red Dead Redemption 2?

Red Dead Redemption II is an action-adventure game featuring an Old West theme.

Developed and published by Rockstar Games, the video game is the third entrant into the popular Red Dead video game franchise, following 2004’s Red Dead Revolver and 2010’s Red Dead Redemption and its expansion pack Undead Nightmare.

Serving as a prequel to Red Dead Redemption, the game is set in 1899 and revolves around its main character Arthur Morgan, a fictional outlaw in the Old West.

Released on October 26, 2018, Red Dead Redemption II has praise from critics for its vast open world environment, engaging storyline, excellent writing and striking graphics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Airbnbs may attract more crime to neighbourhoods, a new study has warned, after finding that areas with lots of listings have increased reports of violence.

Researchers said tourists themselves do not appear to be responsible for the spike in disorder because it happens gradually over a number of years.

Instead they blame the erosion of local social dynamics that prevent crime caused by a number of properties in a neighbourhood being converted to short-term rentals.

Scroll down for video

Disorder: Airbnbs may attract more crime to neighbourhoods, a new study has warned, after finding that areas with lots of listings have increased reports of violence

The study by Northeastern University in Massachusetts analysed data on different types of crime in Boston from 2011 to 2017 in an attempt to better understand the relationship between Airbnb listings and disorder.

Researchers looked at two mechanisms by which short-term rentals might increase crime, including both the tourists staying at Airbnbs and how listings might disrupt local social dynamics that mitigate or prevent crime.

They found that the greater the number of listings in a neighborhood the higher the rates of violence. However, it did not equate to more social disorder or private conflict.

The link also did not appear immediately after the listings became available to tourists but instead grew over several years, the researchers said.

'We show that it's not the number of Airbnb tourists who stay in a neighborhood that causes increase in criminal activities,' said Babak Heydari, one of the study's authors.

'It's the creation of transient properties spread throughout a neighbourhood that undermines social organisation and social capital and over time and can cause disorder and criminal activities as a result.'

Researchers hope the findings will help urban planners make better-informed decisions about the impact of Airbnb listings on neighbourhoods.

They said future research could explore whether similar results are seen in other cities, including those of difference sizes or demographics.

Escape the city: Airbnb has seen rising demand for rural accommodations and longer stays

Heydari added: 'This paper is one of the first papers that measures the causal social impact of sharing platforms at neighbourhood level for short-term rental platforms [and] quantifies the causal effect of short-term rentals on criminal activities and disorders in neighborhoods.

'More importantly, [this paper] identifies the mechanism behind such effects.

'Identifying causal mechanism is for more effective governance of these platforms, either through government regulations or via designing self-regulating mechanism by platforms themselves.'

A spokesperson for Airbnb said: 'Airbnb supports rigorous research and analysis to help create shared learnings about the impact of short-term rentals on neighbourhoods and communities.

'Unfortunately, this paper does not meet such a standard. Rather, it uses an unrepresentative sample within one city to make broad nationwide conclusions; applies a faulty methodology including a flawed regression analysis; and relies on inaccurate data.

'The result is a paper with inaccurate conclusions not supported by the evidence.'

The company has seen a surge in bookings in recent months as the easing of Covid restrictions and fast vaccine roll-outs in some parts of the world have helped resuscitate demand for travel and accommodation.

Airbnb said it saw a 'sharp' increase in bookings in the UK immediately after Boris Johnson announced plans to exit lockdown in February.

Meanwhile, searches for accommodation by over 60s in the US rose by 60 per cent between February and March, as inoculated baby boomers sought freedom after months of staying at home.

The research has been published in the journal PLOS One.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Many of us are guilty of looking at our phones in the company of loved ones – an act known as 'phubbing'.

Now, a study reveals that so-called 'phubbers' who use their phone while ignoring their friends are more likely to have certain mental health issues.

Researchers found depressed people 'phub' their friends more frequently – either in a social situation such as in a pub or a cafe – than those without depression.

Socially anxious people who might prefer online social interactions to face-to-face communication, also exhibit more phubbing behaviours, the authors say.

Devices can lead to a form of social rudeness called phone snubbing, or phubbing - the act of ignoring one's companions to pay attention to a phone (stock image)

WHAT IS PHUBBING? Phubbing is a term created by the combination of the words 'phone' and 'snubbing'. It refers to a person interacting with their phone rather than interacting with a human being - whether it is your partner or in other social situations. Two people may also phub at the same time - known as double phubbing. Phubbing a friend is known as friend phubbing or Fphubbing. Advertisement

Although previous studies have examined phubbing in many different relationships – like between a girlfriend and boyfriend or parents and children – little is known about friend phubbing, they claim.

The study has been led by Juhyung Sun, currently a doctoral candidate at the University of Oklahoma, who was struck by the amount of phubbing going on in day-to-day interactions.

'I observed that so many people use their phones while they are sitting with their friends at the cafe, any dining time, regardless of the relationship type,' she said.

'People are really sensitive to their notifications. With each buzz or sound, we consciously or unconsciously look at our phones.'

For the study, the researchers recruited 472 undergraduate students with an average age of 19.

Participants were asked to indicate duration and usage patterns of daily smartphone use (ranging from less than 10 minutes to more than five hours) and what they used their phone for the most (such as text messaging, calling, gaming or taking photos).

Friend phubbing was determined using a modified version of the Generic Scale of Phubbing developed in 2018.

Meanwhile, the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D scale) developed by Radloff (1977) was designed to measure levels of depression.

It includes 20 items, such as 'During the past week I felt depressed' on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (rarely or none of the time) to 4 (most or all of the time).

Snubbing one's friends (Fphubbing) can have serious repercussions on relationships, the authors say

Social anxiety, agreeableness, neuroticism and friendship satisfaction were also assessed using multiple scaled questionnaires.

Results showed that those with higher levels of depression, social anxiety and neuroticism were significantly related to greater friend phubbing

In addition, greater friend phubbing levels led to lower levels of friendship satisfaction.

Meanwhile, agreeableness – one of the big five personality traits – was negatively related to friend phubbing.

Agreeableness is a personality trait that can be described as cooperative, polite, kind and friendly, and so it came as no surprise that it was linked with low phubbing levels.

'In face-to-face conversations, people with high levels of agreeableness consider phubbing behavior rude and impolite to their conversational partners,' Sun said.

The researchers also said phubbing is more likely in the presence of three or more people.

'It's ironic that while so many people believe that phubbing behaviour is rude, they still do it,' Sun said.

'A majority of people phub others, and in a group, it may seem OK, because it's just me, the speaker doesn't notice I'm using the phone. The number of a people in a group can be one reason.'

If you think you may be a phubber, disabling or turning over a phone can indicate a show of respect for a situation and focus on a person, according to Sun.

'That, too, is a signal – I am listening to what you are saying, this meeting is important and I am focusing on you,' she added.

The study has been published in the journal Behaviour & Information Technology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A seemingly delicate white flower first described in 1879 is actually a 'secret killer' that uses its sticky stem to catch and digest unsuspecting insects, a new study reveals.

The pretty white flowers and stem of the false asphodel (scientific name Triantha occidentalis), a common species found on the west coast of North America, were studied in more detail by University of British Columbia and University of Wisconsin-Madison researchers.

Insects land on the stem of the plant and get stuck in its sticky hairs, before having their nutrients sucked up by the flower once they die.

The team says the false asphodel is the first new carnivorous plant to be identified by botanists in 20 years.

It is notable for the unusual way it traps prey with sticky hairs on its flowering stem, the team explained, adding its 'dark side' had gone unnoticed for nearly 150 years.

Flower of Triantha occidentalis in a bog at Cypress Provincial Park, British Columbia, Canada. A seemingly delicate white flower first described in 1879 is actually a 'secret killer' that uses its sticky stem to catch and digest unsuspecting insects, study reveals

Western false asphode (Triantha occidentalis): New insect eating plant The western false asphode, known as Triantha occidentalis is a newly described insect eating plant. It was first described in 1879 but was thought to be a simple delicate flower. The new study found it sucks nutrients from insects that are trapped by sticky stem after they die. The stem has sticky hairs that catch midges and tiny insects, but not butterflies and bees that pollinate. It grows in nutrient-poor, boggy but bright areas of the west coast of North America - from California to Alaska. Advertisement

The plant grows in nutrient-poor, boggy but bright areas on the west coast of North America, from California to Alaska.

For the study, the researchers investigated specimens growing on Cypress mountain in North Vancouver, British Columbia.

'Carnivorous plants have fascinated people since the Victorian era because they turn the usual order of things on its head: this is a plant eating animals,' said co-author Dr Sean Graham, from the University of British Columbia.

'We're thrilled to have identified one growing right here in our own backyard on the west coast.'

The research builds on previous work from the same team that found Triantha lacked a particular gene that is often missing in other carnivorous plants.

To investigate if the plant was indeed partial to snacking on insects, Dr Qianshi Lin attached fruit flies labelled with nitrogen-15 isotopes to its flowering stem.

The labels acted like tracking devices, allowing Dr Lin to trace changes in nitrogen uptake by the plant.

He then compared the results with those from similar experiments on other species that grow in the same area.

The stem has not very stick hairs to ensure it doesn't trap larger pollinators, trapping insects like midges and small flies

This included a recognised carnivorous plant called a sundew, as well as several non-carnivorous plants as controls.

Isotopic analysis showed significant uptake of nitrogen by Triantha, which obtained more than half its nitrogen from prey - comparable to sundews in the same habitat.

'What's particularly unique about this carnivorous plant is that it traps insects near its insect-pollinated flowers,' said Lin, lead author of this new study.

'On the surface, this seems like a conflict between carnivory and pollination because you don't want to kill the insects that are helping you reproduce.'

The study also found that the sticky hairs on the Triantha flower stalk produce phosphatase, a digestive enzyme used by many carnivorous plants to obtain phosphorous from prey.

Isotopic analysis showed significant uptake of nitrogen by Triantha, which obtained more than half its nitrogen from prey - comparable to sundews in the same habitat

This is the 12th known independent evolution of carnivory in the plant kingdom, and the first time the trait has been discovered in the Alismatales order, a group of largely aquatic flowering plants.

It is also just the fourth established instance of carnivory in the monocots, one of the major groups of flowering plants.

Some other Triantha species, including Triantha glutinosa in Wisconsin, also have sticky hairs that trap insects, while others don't.

In the future, the researchers plan to study more species to see how widespread carnivory might be among the Triantha genus.

Plants of Triantha occidentalis (foreground) with sticky-trap inflorescences, growing among other carnivorous plants (sundews) in a bog at Cypress Provincial Park, British Columbia, Canada

The proximity of Triantha to major urban centres in western Canada and the Pacific coast in the US suggests that other carnivorous plants – and many other ecological surprises – remain to be discovered, even in well-studied ecosystems.

The researchers warn the plant doesn't do well outside of its natural environment and advise admiring its quirks from a distance.

'We believe that Triantha is able to balance carnivory with pollination because its glandular hairs are not very sticky and can only trap midges and other small insects, so that the much larger and stronger bees and butterflies that act as its pollinators are not captured,' said co-author Dr Tom Givnish.

The findings have been published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A perfectly preserved cave lion cub found frozen in Siberia has been confirmed as a female that died 28,000 years ago, by a new study into the creatures remains.

It was one of the best preserved ice age animals ever found and has been named Sparta by the team from the Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.

The cave lion cub, less than two months old when she died, was found covered in golden fur and even had teeth, skin, soft tissue and whiskers still intact.

The lion had been preserved in permafrost and was one of two extinct big cat cubs discovered in the same area by mammoth tusk hunters by the Semyuelyakh River.

It was originally thought the pair were siblings as they were found just 49ft apart, but the new study revealed Sparta lived 15,000 years later than the other cub.

Boris, the older of the two creatures, is 43,448 years old, according to radio carbon dating, and was also between one and two months old when it died.

A perfectly preserved cave lion cub found frozen in Siberia has been confirmed as a female that died 28,000 years ago, by a new study into the creatures remains

The tomographic images of Sparta’s body from the left side: (a) skin; (b) skull and spine

SIBERIAN CAVE LIONS The European or Eurasian cave lion is an extinct species, known from fossils and prehistoric art. It's most closely related to the modern lion and ranged from Europe to Alaska over the Bering land bridge until the late Pleistocene, around 10,000 years ago. An adult European cave lion is thought to have measured 3.9ft (1.2metres) tall and 6.9ft (2.1metres) in length without its tail, based on a skeleton found in Germany. This means it was a similar size to a modern lion. It's thought the lions probably hunted larger herbivorous animals of their time, including horses, deer, reindeer, bison and even injured old or young mammoths. No-one knows why the lions became extinct, but one suggestion is the population of cave bears and deer - one source of prey - caused them to die out. Advertisement

Scans of the pair, by Russian and Japanese researchers, revealed no evidence they were killed by a predator.

However, the scans did reveal skull damage, dislocation of ribs and other issues with their skeletons, the team said.

'Given their preservation they must have been buried very quickly, researcher Love Dalen told CNN.

'So maybe they died in a mudslide, or fell into a crack in the permafrost,' he added.

'Permafrost forms large cracks due to seasonal thawing and freezing.'

They were discovered in eastern Siberia, Russia between 2017 and 2018.

Cave lions in Europe are now extinct but once roamed throughout Europe and to Alaska until the land bridge closed 10,000 years ago.

As an adult it would have measured up to 3ft 9 inches tall and been as much as 6ft 9 inches long without a tail.

We know about them through both fossil records and cave art.

The two discovered in Siberia were so well preserved, researchers could even study the coat colouring.

Sparta had a slightly more dull, greyish coat than Boris, the team explained.

'The general tone of the colour of the fur coat of Sparta is greyish to light brown, whereas, in Boris, the fur is generally lighter, greyish yellowish,' they wrote.

'It is, therefore, possible that light colouration prevailed with age in cave lions and was adaptive for northern snow-covered landscapes.'

Of the pair Sparta, the younger of the cubs, is 'probably the best preserved Ice Age animal ever found,' explained Dalen in an interview with CNN.

It said it is more or less undamaged apart from slightly ruffled fur, but Boris is more damaged, although still in good condition considering its age.

They likely fell in a mudslide and landed in a crack in the permafrost, the team predict. The pair lived at a time when Siberia was populated with mammoths, tundra wolves, bears, woolly rhinoceroses, bison and cave lions.

They were a similar size to modern African lions and while their coat was similar, they had a long thick undercoat that may have helped in the cold climate.

There have been a number of cave lion cubs discovered in the permafrost, revealing more about the history of the region

A 2D image of Boris’ inside structure. Green arrows show the testicle-like organs

There has been a flurry of discoveries in the region of extinct animal fossils, including woolly rhino, cave bear and a perfectly preserved canine puppy.

They would have once roamed the Russian steppe and their remains are usually found by hunters who blast tunnels using high-pressure water hoses in the permafrost in search of mammoth tusks.

The hunting of these tusks is a lucrative endeavour, although controversial as they are prized by ivory carvers who can't get elephant tusks.

As these hunters have developed advanced techniques for searching in the permafrost, scientists have started building a working relationship with them to unearth more astonishing finds.

A 3D image of Sparta is sectioned to show the inside structure. Green arrow shows the location of the uterus-like organ

Image a here is Sparta, b is the male Boris. Photos of lion cubs’ heads from the side: (c) Sparta; (d) Boris; (e) Sparta mummy as seen from above; (f) dark brown ‘brush’ of Sparta’s tail

Study co-author, Valery Plotnikov told the Natural History Museum he started working with them in 2017 in very cold, dangerous conditions.

He spent an entire month with the tusk hunters, losing 22lb in weight, but forged relationships that led to major scientific discoveries including the cave lions cubs, a wolf head and mammoths.

There flurry of finds in the last decade has also been put down to a warming climate, with climate change causing warmer summers in the Arctic weakening the permafrost.

Dalen told CNN that the main reason for more discoveries is increased demand for mammoth ivory, but climate change and melting made the season longer.

The researchers said evidence of cave lions was first seen through cave paintings made by ancient humans, before the first fossils were discovered

They used CT scans and genetic tests to determine that the younger cub was a girl and the older cub, Boris was a boy.

The next step is to completely sequence the DNA of Sparta to reveal the evolutionary history of this creature and cave lions generally.

Doing so could tell us the population size and genetic features of these long extinct creatures once endemic to Europe.

The findings of the study have been published in the journal Quaternary.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The European Space Agency Solar Orbiter probe has sent back footage of Venus two days after passing less than 5,000 miles from the surface of the hellish world.

Both the Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo probes operated by ESA made a flyby of Venus this week, in a bid to use its gravity for a speed boost to their final destination.

Solar Orbiter is on its way to the sun, and while passing Venus turned its Heliospheric Imager (SoloHI) telescope to capture a gleaming view of the planet.

The video and images show Venus approaching from the left while the sun is off camera to the upper right, with the nightside of the planet part hidden from view.

Like the ESA BepiColombo images published yesterday, they are in black and white with minimal detail as the cameras weren't designed for use on Venus.

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes.

Both the Solar Orbiter (artist impression) and BepiColombo probes operated by ESA made a flyby of Venus this week, in a bid to use its gravity for a speed boost to their final destination.

The European Space Agency Solar Orbiter probe has sent back footage and images of Venus two days after passing less than 5,000 miles from the surface of the hellish world

VENUS: THE BASICS Venus, the second planet from the sun, is a rocky planet about the same size and mass of the Earth. However, its atmosphere is radically different to ours - being 96 per cent carbon dioxide and having a surface temperature of 867°F (464°C) and pressure 92 times that of on the Earth. The inhospitable planet is swaddled in clouds of sulphuric acid that make the surface impossible to glimpse via the visible light spectrum. In the past, Venus likely had oceans similar to Earth's - but these would have vaporised as it underwent a runaway greenhouse effect. The surface of Venus is a dry desertscape, which is periodically changed by volcanic activity. The planet has no moons and orbits the Sun every 224.7 Earth days. Advertisement

The planet's nightside, the part hidden from the sun, appears as a dark semicircle surrounded by a bright crescent of light, which is glare from the Venus sunlit side.

'Ideally, we would have been able to resolve some features on the nightside of the planet, but there was just too much signal from the dayside.' said Phillip Hess, astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC

'Only a sliver of the dayside appears in the images, but it reflects enough sunlight to cause the bright crescent and the diffracted rays that come from the surface.'

Two bright stars are also visible in the background early in the sequence, before being eclipsed by the planet.

The rightmost is Omicron Tauri, and above and to the left of it is Xi Tauri, which is actually a quadruple star system. Both are part of the Taurus constellation.

This was Solar Orbiter's second Venus flyby, with an Earth flyby in November 2021 and six more Venus flybys planned from 2022 to 2030.

The spacecraft uses Venus' gravity to draw it closer to the Sun and tilt its orbit, swinging it up and out so as to 'look down' on the Sun.

From this vantage point, Solar Orbiter will eventually capture the first images of the sun's north and south poles.

Solar Orbiter is on its way to study the polar regions of the sun in a bid to better understand its 11-year cycle, as well as capture the polar regions.

It made its approach to Venus at 05:42 BST, ESA said, coming within 4,967 of the planet. That was just 33 hours before the BepiColombo fly-by of Venus.

ESA said it wasn't possible to take high-resolution imagery of Venus with the science cameras onboard either mission, so what is shared would be low-resolution.

Solar Orbiter must remain facing the sun, and the main camera onboard BepiColombo is shielded by the transfer module that will deliver the two planetary orbiters to Mercury, according to ESA officials.

Despite reaching Venus second, the pictures from BepiColombo came back first, s the Solar Oribiter had to wait until it had moved further from the planet to take its images and then send them back to the Earth.

Solar Orbiter has been acquiring data near-constantly since launch in February 2020 with its four instruments that measure the environment around the spacecraft itself.

The planet's nightside, the part hidden from the sun, appears as a dark semicircle surrounded by a bright crescent of light, which is glare from the Venus sunlit side

Both the Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo are using the gravitational pull of Venus to help them drop a little bit of orbital energy to reach their destinations at the centre of the solar system

HOW WILL BEPICOLOMBO GET TO MERCURY? BepiColombo's two orbiters, Japan's Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter and the ESA's Mercury Planetary Orbiter, will be carried together. The carrier will use electric propulsion and gravity-assists at Earth, Venus and Mercury in its 7.2 year journey. Once at Mercury, they will separate and move into their own orbits to make complementary measurements of Mercury's interior, surface, exosphere and magnetosphere. The information will tell us more about the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star, providing a better understanding of the overall evolution of our own Solar System. BepiColombo features three components that will separate: Mercury Transfer Module (MTM) for propulsion, built by the European Space Agency (ESA) Mercury Planetary Orbiter (MPO) built by ESA Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter (MMO) or MIO built by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Advertisement

Both Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo's Mercury Planetary Orbiter and Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter collected data on the magnetic and plasma environment of Venus from different locations around the planet.

JAXA's Akatsuki spacecraft is already in orbit around Venus, creating a unique constellation of datapoints on the mysterious hot world.

It will take many months to collate the coordinated flyby measurements and analyse them in a meaningful way, so information won't be available straight away, ESA explained.

The data collected during the flybys will also provide useful inputs to ESA's future Venus orbiter, EnVision, which will launch to the planet in the 2030s.

Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo both have one more flyby of Venus this year.

BepiColombo will see Mercury for the first time overnight on October 1, making its first of six flybys of Mercury – with this one from just just over 100 miles.

The two planetary orbiters will be delivered into Mercury orbit in late 2025, tasked with studying all aspects of this mysterious inner planet.

This includes its core to surface processes, magnetic field, and exosphere, to better understand the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star.

On November 27, Solar Orbiter will make a final flyby of Earth, coming just under 300 miles from the surface, kicking off the start of its main mission.

It will continue to make regular flybys of Venus to progressively increase its orbit inclination to best observe the sun's uncharted polar regions.

Solar scientists say understanding and imaging the polar regions of our star is key to understanding its 11 year activity cycle.

Both NASA and the European Space Agency are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin.

BepiColombo, a collaboration between the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), snapped a black and white image of Earth's twin when it was 977 miles away

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pianists who have been fitted with a third robotic thumb are able to adjust their playing style to suit their new 11 digits in just an hour, according to researchers.

To determine how well human motor control capabilities cope with augmented limbs, a team from Imperial College London strapped a robot thumb to a pianist.

The 'third thumb' is strapped to a user's hand next to the little finger and controlled by electrical signals generated when the pianist moves their foot.

To test how useful this extra limb is, the team, led by Aldo Faisal, recruited six experienced pianists and six people who didn't play the piano.

They found that the volunteer pianists were able to learn to play the piano with 11 digits rather than 10 within an hour of being shown how to use the extra thumb regardless of their experience with the piano itself.

Dr Faisal says the findings mean that we aren't limited to using an extra robotic digit for tasks we are already familiar with, and can use it even in unfamiliar tasks.

Pianists that have been fitted with a third robotic thumb are able to adjust their playing style to suit their new 11 digits in just an hour, according to researchers

The 'third thumb' is strapped to a user's hand next to the little finger and controlled by electrical signals generated when the pianist moves their foot

SUPERNUMERARY ROBOTS: PROVIDING HUMANS WITH EXTRA LIMBS Supernumerary robots are those that add extra limbs to humans, through fingers, arms or legs. They can be controlled independently of natural limbs, either by another limb, or through a brain interface. A combination of advances in neuroscience and robotics have made them possible. They include extra thumbs for playing piano, through to extra hands. Advertisement

Work started on the artificial thumb in 2015 by the Imperial College London team and testing has now begun to see how well people control it.

'From ancient myths, such as the many-armed goddess Shiva to modern comic book characters, augmentation with supernumerary limbs has captured our common imagination, the authors wrote.

'In real life, Human Augmentation is emerging as the result of the confluence of robotics and neurotechnology.'

The issue Faisal and colleagues wanted to investigate was what level of control people would have over the extra appendage.

Piano was one of the ideal test platforms for the thumb, according to the team, as it requires a number of fine motor skills.

'It's important to show this technology works with fine motor skills because it shows that you're actually controlling the movement and not just sort of jerking it around,' Faisal told New Scientist.

The first part of the experiment saw the team strap the thumb to an experienced piano player in an unconstrained pilot experiment.

They used the device to freely play the piano using 11 fingers, controlled via foot movements, and within one hour of wearing it they were doing so effectively.

To test how useful this extra limb is, the team, led by Aldo Faisal, recruited six experienced pianists and six people who didn't play the piano

They found that the volunteer pianists were able to learn to play the piano with 11 digits rather than 10 within an hour of being shown how to use the extra thumb regardless of their experience with the piano itself

Researchers then updated the interface for use with six experienced piano players and six inexperienced players.

Researchers monitored motor coordination while playing the piano with and without the extra thumb, finding that performing the task with robotic augmentation requires additional levels of complexity, but not so much it can't be overcome.

They found that regardless of experience playing the piano, volunteers were able to manipulate the keys using the extra thumb in an hour.

Their ability to use it depended on their dexterity level and timing skills rather than any existing skills with the piano, the team found.

Work started on the artificial thumb in 2015 by the Imperial College London team and testing has now begun to see how well people control it with their foot

Dr Faisal says the findings mean that we aren't limited to using an extra robotic digit for tasks we are already familiar with, and can use it even in unfamiliar tasks

The same team is now developing a new prototype that would give humans a third hand, rather than just a third thumb.

'Supernumerary robots are a cutting-edge technology which has already demonstrated its great capability in assisting people with physical limitations,' Virginia Ruiz Garate at the University of the West of England told New Scientist.

'This robot shows how this human augmentation can reach even further, making its way into cultural and broader domains of daily life.'

The findings are published in the preprint server bioRxiv.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple’s iPad Pro has long been the benchmark for tablets, blurring the lines of what constitutes a computer.

The new version is, quite simply, the best tablet out there - and for a lot of people, probably the best computer out there.

The redesign makes the already great iPad Pro faster and easier to use than almost every other device out there, be it a laptop, desktop or phone.

Scroll down for video

Apple's new iPad is blazingly fast, gorgeous to look at, and quite simply the best tablet out there - and for a lot of people, probably the best computer out there.

IPAD PRO SPECS Comes in 11-inch (starting at $799) and 12.9-inch (starting at $999) versions Liquid Retina display Face ID A12X Bionic chip USB-C connector 1 Terabye of storage 8-core CPU and 7-core GPU 5.9mm thin 25 percent lighter than previous models Advertisement

It’s a deceptively brilliant piece of design - albeit one with a high price tag.

Apple has long said its ambition is for technology to disappear, and the new iPad really is the clearest indication yet of how that might work.

The stunning screen is the star, now going edge to edge, making picking up the tablet like picking up a sheet of glass.

The all screen display is bright, colourful, and rich, and for the first time covers almost all the front of the display, with just thin bezels.

Not having a home button does take a few moments to get used to, but for anyone coming from the latest iPhone, it’s already second nature.

There's still a slight bezel, just wide enough for Apple to hide the camera sensors it needs for FaceID to work. And work it does work brilliantly, most of the time.

The newly designed pencil is also now far more useful as you can magnetically store and charge it on the side of the iPad, with a satisfying click

Apple's redesigned Pencil is definitely more attractive to the average user

I found it far more reliable than even the iPhone, and given people tend to use their iPad at weird angles (this really is the perfect machine for watching Netflix in bed on), this is a good thing.

The only slight gripe is that, as a left hander, when the iPad is in its keyboard case, quite often my arm would obstruct the camera, throwing up a ‘camera is covered’ message.

However, the iPad quickly tries again, and nearly always worked perfectly on the second attempt.

One other interesting point about the new design is that, for most of the time, it's hard to tell what way up you’re holding the iPad.

However, the only time I found this a problem was occasionally using the iPad in bed to read, and finding the camera at the bottom was covered.

One interesting point about the new screen and edge to edge design is that it makes the larger size, with a 12.9inch screen, far more manageable - I struggled with the older version to travel with it as it was just a little too big.

The new version however, feels smaller - although to be honest, I do still prefer the smaller one, but then I tend to use my iPad for browsing, watching video and reading, rather than anything more high powered.

Apple has even improved its keyboard case, adding in protection for the back of the iPad, and two positions for the screen - although it does add a little bit more bulk.

For anyone using an iPad for work, however, the larger screen is a godsend, and makes everything from drawing to emails a dream, particularly with the ability to split the screen.

Apple’s general thinning down of the design does mean the new iPad feels very different, and more like the sheet of glass Apple is aiming for.

It's easier to carry without a case, and feels safe and secure - more so than the previously, curved edge version, I found.

The new iPad pros are 5.9mm thin, making them 25% less volume than the previous version.

The newly designed pencil is also now far more useful as you can magnetically store and charge it on the side of the iPad, with a satisfying click. It’s definitely going to make the Pencil more attractive to the average user - although do bear it mind it’ll probably fall off it you put it into your bag still attached.

There are also changes to power, with USB-C now being used to recharge. This isn’t a problem if you’ve already got a recent Macbook, and I was able to use by existing laptop charger (although obviously there’s a charger in the box anyway).

USB-C also allows you to plug the iPad into a monitor easily, and this opens up whole new ways of using it - for instance, video and photo editing can be done on a bigger screen, using the iPad screen as a control panel.

However, one omission is the headphone socket - which is a shame, but also seemed pretty inevitable given the same move with the iPhone.

One interesting point about the new screen and edge to edge design is that it makes the larger size, with a 12.9inch screen, far more manageable - I struggled with the older version to travel with it as it was just a little too big.

For professional apps, it once again blurs the line between tablet and ‘real’ computer.

The processing speed of the new Pros is astonishing. Apple boasts they are now faster than most desktop and laptop PCs on the market, and it really shows.

Some of the demos Apple showed off were just jaw dropping, and you get the impression the sheer power of the new A12X powered the device will revolutionise creative apps.

This can already be seen in the full version of Photoshop Adobe has demoed, along with some of the games coming the the new device.

The processing speed of the new Pros is astonishing. Apple boasts they are now faster than most desktop and laptop PCs on the market, and it really shows.

The one thing holding back the iPad is software - in the short term, at least, is softare. There’s a huge amount of potential here, and one gets the feeling developers will take a while to take advantage of the processing power.

iOS itself also feels a little stale, particularly the app layout, which leaves huge amounts of unused space - but if the rumours are to believed, iOS 13 could address this.

Apple has even improved its keyboard case, adding in protection for the back of the iPad, and two positions for the screen - although it does add a little bit more bulk.

Crucially, the new Pro is enough of a boost in speed and design for existing users to want to upgrade, and it does feel like a big step forward for the iPad.

It is, it must be said, also one of the most expensive tablets out there, and rather like Apple's XS, feels like a luxury, no expenses spared device

Overall, the new iPads really do blur the line between devices - and for the majority of users, there really is no reason to buy a traditional laptop over the iPad anymor
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's not a delivery you'd want to receive, but scientists have successfully sent freeze-dried mouse sperm on a postcard in a breakthrough that could make it easier to transport semen.

The method allows sperm to be posted easily, inexpensively, and without the risk of glass cases breaking, the experts said.

The postcard was sent from the University of Tokyo to the University of Yamanashi, over a distance of approximately 125 miles (200 km).

Amazingly, the sperm remained viable and was used to produce mice, indicating it is not damaged in the freeze-drying process.

The researchers, from the University of Yamanashi, are part of the same research lab that discovered freeze-dried mouse sperm remains viable after being on the International Space Station for almost six years.

Scroll down for video

Scientists have sent freeze-dried mouse sperm on a postcard in a breakthrough that could make it easier to transport semen. The mouse shown was produced by sperm on the postcard

The method allows sperm to be transported easily, inexpensively, and without the risk of glass cases breaking, the experts said

HOW DOES RADIATION AFFECT SPERM IN SPACE? To test whether radiation irreparably damages sperm, a study dispatched samples of freeze-dried mouse sperm to be stored on the International Space Station for almost six years. The sperm samples were preserved in small capsules sealed at a temperature of -22°F (-30°C). Scientists have long thought that exposure to space radiation from solar winds and cosmic rays could damage the DNA of sperm cells and lead to mutations being passed down to offspring. However, a study by researchers at the University of Yamanashi in Japan found that long-term space travel did not damage the DNA of the space-preserved samples, compared with the control samples. Not only did radiation not affect the sperm's DNA or its ability to produce healthy 'space pups', scientists estimate it could actually be preserved in space for more than 200 years without damage. Advertisement

'We think the sperm never expected that the day would come when they would be in the mailbox,' said the study's lead author Daiyu Ito, of the University of Yamanashi in Japan.

'When I developed this method for preserving mouse sperm by freeze-drying it on a sheet, I thought that it should be able to be mailed on a postcard, and so when offspring were actually born after being mailed, I was very impressed.'

The new transport method came about following issues with the previous study that looked at the effects of space radiation on baby mice.

The team needed large volumes of mouse sperm for their research, but because cushions had to be used to prevent breakage during the rocket launch, they could only carry a small amount.

The sperm was preserved in a small glass bottle but researchers found that it broke too easily, rendering the semen inside unusable.

It led Ito and his team to investigate other ways to transfer the sperm, beginning with plastic sheets. However, these were toxic for the semen, so instead scientists found that weighing paper proved easiest to handle and had the highest offspring rate.

With the new method of preservation, thousands of mouse sperm could be stored in a single book, dubbed the 'sperm book' by the scientists. The book was stored in a freezer at -22°F (-30°C) until further use for experiments.

Ito and his team wanted to see if the sperm would still be viable after being mailed hundreds of miles and, to their delight, it was.

The scientists were able to send samples from the 'sperm book' as postcards by attaching the plastic sheet to the postcard with no protection.

One scientist even sent another a 'Happy New Year' card with mouse sperm attached as a gift.

Although all spermatozoa died after freeze-drying, the DNA remained intact, meaning researchers were able to produce healthy offspring by injecting spermatozoa into oocytes. This technique has also been used with the sperm of other species, such as rats, hamsters, rabbits, horses and sheep.

The researchers believe the mailing method, once perfected, will have a strong impact in their field worldwide. Their next goal is to be able to store sperm for at least one month at room temperature.

In the future, they also hope to develop a method that will allow the freeze-dried sperm to come back to life and fertilise on its own when rehydrated.

With the new method of preservation, mouse sperm could be stored in a single book, dubbed the 'sperm book' (pictured) by the scientists. The book was stored in a freezer at -22F (-30°C)

One scientist even sent another a 'Happy New Year' card with mouse sperm attached as a gift

'We think the sperm never expected that the day would come when they would be in the mailbox,' said the study's lead author Daiyu Ito, of the University of Yamanashi in Japan

'It is now recognised that genetic resources are an asset to humanity's future,' said fellow author Teruhiko Wakayama, also of the University of Yamanashi.

'Even though many genetic traits are not needed for survival, depending on the environmental context, it is necessary to preserve them.

'The plastic sheet preservation method in this study will be the most suitable method for the safe preservation of a large amount of valuable genetic resources because of the resistance to breakage and less space required for storage.'

The study has been published in the journal iScience.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Pessoa, aka Hashtag Ryan, is one of the world’s best FIFA players. He’s signed to esports team Hashtag United, and he’s also an official Red Bull athlete.

I’ve played a game of FIFA against him before. ‘Pretty solid’ and ‘actually decent’ were the phrases he used to describe my play, as he banged three past my keeper in quick succession. I’m pretty sure he was going easy on me too.

Pessoa was at London’s Red Bull Gaming Sphere last week to host a FIFA 19 workshop where he’d be answering questions and providing his best tips and tricks for the new game. Luckily I didn’t have to embarrass myself by playing him once again.

Hashtag Ryan appeared on Up Your Game to give his tips and tricks for the new FIFA game

He went over everything from custom tactics, to attacking, defending, as well as set pieces

Instead, I caught up with him before he went live on the stream. There are plenty of new changes to FIFA this year, although they might not be immediately obvious. I asked him to give me the rundown on the most important new features of FIFA 19.

Timed Finishing

‘The first thing is to practice timed finishing,’ he tells me. ‘It adds an element to shooting that was never in the game before.’

In FIFA 19, if you press the shot button to start powering up, and then press the button again the split second before your player strikes the ball, you’ll get a bonus to accuracy and power. At the start, you’ll literally have to be watching either the bar, or your player’s leg as it moves towards the ball. But Pessoa says you’ll eventually get the knack down.

‘The first thing I did was go on amateur difficulty and just practice and practice.’ The game has only been out for a couple of weeks, but he’s already got hundreds of games under his belt.

Attacking tips

Old attacking tricks work too. The finesse shot is still very good (hold in RB/R1), and in the build up, you can use the same tactic from last year. When you’re on the ball, you can make one of your nearby players go on a run (L1/LB). If you quickly press the button to bring them back from the run (R1/RB), a huge gap opens up, left by the defender that went with him. It’s pretty easy to make space and progress up the pitch this way.

FIFA 19 has been out for a couple of weeks, and millions are trying to figure out how to improve

Controlling the goalkeeper

The next new addition is the ability to manually control your goalkeeper using the right stick.

‘If they cut inside they’re probably going to shoot across the face of goal, so practice when to move your goalkeeper.’ However, Pessoa also notes that good players will know you’ll be moving your keeper in situations like these, and shoot the other way. Much like on the real pitch, scoring a goal is often about mind games and being unpredictable.

Set pieces

Next up, set pieces. In FIFA 19 so far, this is where games can be won.

‘I’ve scored more from corners than penalties, getting a corner is basically a penalty,’ says Pessoa.

It turns out if you can get free at the near post, corners are almost impossible to defend. Headers are viable, but surprisingly, Pessoa usually goes for a bicycle kick by holding in the left trigger and pressing the shoot button. During the stream he showed clips of this in action, and it works a surprisingly high percentage of the time.

New features this year include timed finishing and the ability to manually move your keeper

Defending

As for defending, you’re better off letting the game do it for you. ‘If you control your centre backs, you’re in for trouble,’ says Pessoa. Instead, you should control your defensive midfielders and try to cut out passing lanes manually. If you’ve got a fast attacking midfielder, you can even bring them back for more support. You can leave the rest up to the AI.

The question of who to put in your Ultimate Team is always on the minds of FIFA players. We’re right at the start of the new game, so no one’s team is top tier just yet. However, Pessoa’s is already well on the way, with the likes of Icons Rio Ferdinand and Frank Rijkaard in defense and Kylian Mbappe on the wing.

He secured 30 wins out of 30 games in the first Weekend League of FIFA 19, and tells me next on his shopping list are the Patrick Vieira and Ruud Gullit Icon cards.

This year, he wants to win it all. He tells me he had a disappointing year in terms of results with FIFA 18, but it hasn’t killed his passion. In fact, he’s hungrier now more than ever. ‘Right now the fuel to succeed for me on FIFA is unparalleled, I’d be shocked if somebody has the same fire I have.’

With the announcement of the ePremier League and more FIFA tournaments popping up all the time, there’s never been a better time to try and succeed in FIFA esports. Ryan Pessoa will be competing at the top, and if you put the time in, maybe you could be too.

The full live stream containing all of his tips can be found on the Red Bull Esports Twitch channel.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Having money in the bank by middle age can add years to your life, a study revealed, finding that every £36,000 saved cut the death risk by five per cent over 24 years.

This even applied in the case of siblings, with those saving £100,000 more than a brother or sister having a 13 per cent greater chance of outliving their relative.

Over 5,400 people in the US were tracked for 25 years, and data on their wealth and life was analysed by researchers from Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois.

Information on participants, with an average age of 46, was collected from 1994 to 1996, and followed up in 2018 when 1,000, about a fifth, had died.

Corresponding author Dr Eric Finegood said the findings suggest that one of the keys to a long life may lie in your net worth and its related health benefits such as being able to afford better care, food and more time to rest.

He said government policies to reduce income inequality would have 'significant health benefits' on the general population.

This even applied in the case of siblings, with those saving £100,000 more than a brother or sister had a 13 per cent greater chance of outliving their relative. Stock image

The study in JAMA Health Forum used survival models to work out the connection between net worth and longevity.

Factors of genetics and wealth were teased apart by dividing the men and women into subsets of siblings and twins.

In the full sample, having more money reduced mortality risk, and a similar trend was identified among the segment of siblings within the group.

A person with more financial assets tended to live longer than a brother, sister or twin with fewer assets, they discovered.

Dr Finegood said: 'These findings should be interpreted through a broader societal lens,' adding that the US is first in economic inequality of high income nations.

'Over the past 30 years, the gap has widened through policies and practices that have diverted a substantial and increasing share of wealth from lower and middle income groups to the affluent.'

'Such redistribution may have implications for longevity patterns in the coming decades,' he explained, adding that policies to reduce the wealth gap, if properly implemented, could generate 'substantial returns to public health.'

The results remained after taking into account previous illnesses like heart disease or cancer and could impact the ability to accrue wealth due to healthcare costs.

Dr Finegood and colleagues re-analysed the data using only individuals without cancer or heart disease. The outcome was the same.

Over 5,400 people in the US were tracked for 25 years, and data on their wealth and life was analysed by researchers from Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois. Stock image

Senior author Professor Greg Miller, also from Northwestern, added: 'Far too many American families are living pay cheque to pay cheque with little to no financial savings to draw on in times of need.

'At the same time, wealth inequality has skyrocketed. Our results suggest that building wealth is important for health at the individual level, even after accounting for where one starts out in life.

'So, from a public health perspective, policies that support and protect individuals' ability to achieve financial security are needed,' said Miller.

The findings have been published in the journal JAMA Health Forum.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alien abduction stories and encounters with UFOs could be the result of nothing more than 'lucid dreaming,' a new study theorizes.

One-hundred fourteen of 152 adults who were analyzed by Russian-based Phase Research Center (PRC) say they had an alien and UFO encounter (AUE) after one or more attempts to have lucid dreams (LDs).

Of those 114 people, 61 percent say they 'encountered alien-like creatures, while 28 percent say they encountered UFOs.'

'Regarding the successful cases, 20% were close to reality in terms of the absence of paradoxical dreamlike events,' the authors wrote in the study.

'AUEs can be emulated willfully and can be perceived as being very close to reality. In theory, random people might spontaneously encounter AUEs during REM sleep and confuse the events with reality.'

Four-percent of respondents said the aliens were 'invisible,' while 19 percent said they 'looked like ordinary people.'

One-hundred fourteen of 152 adults who participated in a study say they had an alien and UFO encounter (AUE) after one or more attempts to have lucid dreams

61% say they 'encountered alien-like creatures, while 28 percent say they encountered UFOs'

Thirty-nine percent of respondents said visual contact with 'aliens' was experienced, while 26% of those who had LDs managed to 'talk' with aliens, but did not have a physical encounter with them.

Twelve percent spoke with aliens and had a physical interaction with them.

Ten percent said they were inside a UFO at some point and three percent flew on a UFO.

The dreamers were instructed by the researchers to 'find or summon aliens or UFOs' according to the study and memorize the events, regardless if an interaction occurred.

Some of the respondents had exceptionally detail dreams, including one female telling researchers on February 18, 2019 that she dreamed of 'little men with smooth skin of blue color, human height, with non-standard large heads and huge, bulging eyes of black color.'

Another participant, a male said he wanted to hear aliens and 'almost immediately, I began to hear their unnatural grunts.'

'Two azure-colored organisms stood on two sides of the lens. Each one had one huge oval eye, arranged vertically. They had no limbs; they were only pulsating bodies that levitated 5 cm above the floor. Both aliens gazed at me as they kept making sounds, which I heard even outside the door. After 8-10 seconds, a lot of thin tentacles reached me from the body of one of them.'

Approximately 55 percent of adults have had one lucid dream in their lifetimes, while 23 percent of people have them once a month

Lucid dreams is fairly prevalent throughout society, which may help explain why so many people believe they have been abducted by UFOs.

Approximately 55 percent of adults have had one lucid dream in their lifetimes, while 23 percent of people have them once a month, according to an October 2020 analysis from the Sleep Foundation.

Twenty-four percent of the group say they 'experienced fear or [sleep paralysis].'

In an interview with LiveScience, PRC head researcher and founder Michael Raduga said these people may be a microcosm of people who believe they were actually abducted by extraterrestrials.

The 'abductions are real' for these people, Raduga told the news outlet, 'They just don't know how to explain it.'

The study has been published in in the International Journal of Dream Research.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A photo of a person's inner eyelid taken with a standard smartphone camera can be used to screen for anaemia, a new study claims.

Researchers in Rhode Island developed an artificial intelligence (AI) powered model to analyse photos of the inside of people's lower eyelids, known as the palpebral conjunctiva, which appears paler with anemia.

The technology could power an app that determines if someone has anaemia through smartphone photos, instead of blood tests, the experts claim.

Anaemia, commonly caused by a shortage of iron in your body, is a deficiency in the number or quality of red blood cells in your body.

Red blood cells contain hemoglobin, which carries oxygen – and without enough hemoglobin and oxygen, the skin can turn a pale colour.

Scroll down for video

A photo of a person's inner eyelid taken with a standard smartphone camera can be used to screen for anaemia, researchers in Rhode Island report. Pictured is a photo of an palpebral conjunctiva used in the study

The condition affects an estimated 5.6 per cent of Americans and more than 25 per cent of the global population.

This new study, led by Dr Selim Suner of Brown University and Rhode Island Hospital in the US, could provide a more accessible method of diagnosis.

'Anaemia, defined as a low hemoglobin concentration, has a large impact on the health of the world’s population,' Dr Suner and colleagues say in their paper.

Images shows the hands of someone with severe anaemia (bottom) due to blood loss comparing to the skin of a normal healthy individual (top)

'We describe the use of a ubiquitous device, the smartphone, to predict hemoglobin concentration and screen for anaemia.'

The experts say having anaemia is a significant risk factor for mortality, especially in vulnerable populations such as children, the elderly and the chronically ill.

However, there is an 'unmet need' for inexpensive, accessible and non-invasive point-of-care tools to screen for and diagnose the condition.

Previous studies have shown that the palpebral conjunctiva appears paler with anaemia and is a more accurate indicator of the condition than a person's palms or nail beds.

ANAEMIA AND IRON DEFFICIENCY Symptoms of anaemia include shortness of breath, cold hands or feet, chest pain and pale skin Anaemia is a deficiency in the number or quality of red blood cells in your body. Red blood cells carry oxygen around your body using a particular protein called haemoglobin. Anaemia means that either the level of red blood cells or the level of haemoglobin is lower than normal. The most common cause of anaemia is iron deficiency. Iron is a vital component of haemoglobin, a molecule in red blood cells that carries oxygen around the body, providing fuel for energy metabolism. Red blood cells are produced in the bone marrow. The bone marrow needs enough dietary iron and some vitamins to make haemoglobin. If you don’t have enough iron in your diet, your body will draw on the small reserves of iron stored in your liver. Once this reservoir is depleted, the red blood cells will not be able to carry oxygen around the body effectively. When a person has anaemia, their heart has to work harder to pump the quantity of blood needed to get enough oxygen around their body. During heavy exercise, the cells may not be able to carry enough oxygen to meet the body’s needs and the person can become exhausted and feel unwell. Symptoms of anaemia include shortness of breath, cold hands or feet, chest pain and pale skin. The inside of a person's lower eyelid - called the palpebral conjunctiva - also appears paler with anemia. Anaemia isn’t a disease in itself, but a result of a malfunction somewhere in the body. This blood condition is common, particularly in females. Some estimates suggest that around one in five menstruating women and half of all pregnant women are anaemic. Source: Government of Victoria Advertisement

With this knowledge in hand, researchers obtained smartphone images of the palpebral conjunctiva from 142 patients with a wide range of hemoglobin levels.

They zoomed into a small region of the conjunctiva in each photo and developed a new algorithm to boost color resolution – the ability of each pixel to represent a wide variety of colour tones.

They then developed a prediction model linking conjunctiva color, compared to the surrounding skin and whites of the eyes, to hemoglobin levels.

Then, the researchers tested the new algorithms on photos collected from another 202 new anaemia patients.

Anemia is a condition in which you lack enough healthy red blood cells to carry adequate oxygen to your body's tissues (stock image of red blood cells)

When analysing the new set of photographs, the model was 72 per cent accurate at detecting anaemia, the team found.

Accuracy for transfusion thresholds was higher, at 94.4 per cent accurate for a low transfusion threshold and 86 per cent accurate for a higher threshold.

'Transfusion threshold refers to the level of anaemia which requires a blood tranfusion,' Dr Suner said.

'Typically this is at a level of hemoglobin at 7.0g/dL [grams per decilitre].'

Skin tone did not change results, although image quality had some effect.

The results suggest that a smartphone app could be used to screen for anaemia in a telehealth or remote setting where blood tests aren't available.

'Images of the lower eyelid's vascular surface obtained by a smartphone camera can be utilized to estimate blood hemoglobin concentration and predict anaemia which is a serious health condition afflicting billions of people world-wide with a disproportionate effect in developing countries,' the authors say.

'Utilisation of non-invasive techniques to detect anaemia opens the door to widespread screening, early diagnosis and treatment, particularly in low resource settings where access to healthcare is sparce.'

The study has been published in the open-access journal PLOS One.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People who start losing their teeth are more likely to develop dementia, a new study has warned.

Researchers from New York University found that tooth loss is a risk factor for both dementia and cognitive impairment – and with each tooth lost, the risk grows.

Conversely, good oral health, including dentures, may protect against cognitive decline, according to the team.

While the reason for the link remains unclear, the researchers suggest a number of factors could be at play.

For example, missing teeth can lead to difficulty chewing, which may contribute to nutritional deficiencies, while there may also be a link between gum disease and cognitive decline.

Dr Bei Wu, who led the study, said: ‘Given the staggering number of people diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and dementia each year, and the opportunity to improve oral health across the lifespan, it's important to gain a deeper understanding of the connection between poor oral health and cognitive decline.'

Scroll down for video

Researchers from New York University found that tooth loss is a risk factor for both dementia and cognitive impairment – and with each tooth lost, the risk grows (stock image)

Why is tooth loss linked to dementia? While the reason for the link remains unclear, the researchers have a range of possibly theories. Missing teeth can lead to problems chewing, which may contribute to nutritional deficiencies or promote changes in the brain. Meanwhile, previous studies have pointed to a connection between gum disease – the leading cause of tooth loss – and cognitive decline. The researchers also point out that tooth loss may reflect life-long socioeconomic disadvantages that are also risk factors for cognitive decline. Advertisement

Dementia is a syndrome associated with an ongoing decline of brain functioning, which affects roughly one in 14 people over the age of 65, and one in six people over 80.

The syndrome is caused by damage to brain cells that interferes with the ability of the cells to communicate with each other.

Alzheimer’s Association explained: ‘These changes trigger a decline in thinking skills, also known as cognitive abilities, severe enough to impair daily life and independent function. They also affect behaviour, feelings and relationships.’

In the study, the team set out to understand whether oral health was linked to dementia.

They conducted a meta-analysis of 14 studies including a total of 34,074 adults, and 4,689 cases of people with diminished cognitive function.

Their analysis revealed that adults with more tooth loss had a 1.48 times higher risk of developing cognitive impairment, and 1.28 times higher risk of being diagnosed with dementia.

However, adults missing teeth were more likely to have cognitive impairment if they did not have dentures, compared to those who did.

This suggests that good oral health may help to slow cognitive decline.

Adults missing teeth were more likely to have cognitive impairment if they did not have dentures, compared to those who did

Delving deeper into the findings, the researchers found that each additional missing tooth was association with a 1.4 per cent increased risk of cognitive impairment, and 1.1 per cent increased risk of dementia.

Xiang Qi, who worked on the study, said: ‘This “dose-response” relationship between the number of missing teeth and risk of diminished cognitive function substantially strengthens the evidence linking tooth loss to cognitive impairment, and provides some evidence that tooth loss may predict cognitive decline.

While the reason for the link remains unclear, the researchers have a range of possibly theories.

Missing teeth can lead to problems chewing, which may contribute to nutritional deficiencies or promote changes in the brain.

Meanwhile, previous studies have pointed to a connection between gum disease – the leading cause of tooth loss – and cognitive decline.

The researchers also point out that tooth loss may reflect life-long socioeconomic disadvantages that are also risk factors for cognitive decline.

Dr Wu added: ‘Our findings underscore the importance of maintaining good oral health and its role in helping to preserve cognitive function.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wrinkles at the base of snakes' fangs that originally existed to hold their teeth in place evolved to spurt venom to kill prey, a study shows.

Experts in Australia studied several venomous snake species, including the coastal taipan (Oxyuranus scutellatus), which is often regarded as the most dangerous snake in Australia.

The researchers found the snake species all separately evolved the grooves or 'wrinkles' in their teeth in what they describe as a form of 'dental origami'.

Most snakes do not inject venom into their victims bodies using hollow fangs, contrary to common misconceptions.

In fact, there's a groove along the outside of their fangs that venom flows along to enter the wound of the victim.

The study authors think early venomous snakes did not have long venom fangs, but instead had small teeth just like their non-venomous relatives.

Therefore, their method of delivering venom was not very effective compared to their modern fang-bearing relatives.

Pictured, the coastal taipan (Oxyuranus scutellatus), which has the second-highest venom yield of any snake after the king cobra

The research has been led by experts at Flinders University in Adelaide and the South Australian Museum.

VENOMOUS SNAKE SPECIES - Saw-scaled viper (Echis carinatus) - King cobra (Ophiophagus hannah) - Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica) - Coastal taipan (Oxyuranus scutellatus) - Blue-banded sea snake (Hydrophis cyanocinctus)- - Tiger snake (Notechis scutatus) Advertisement

'It's always been a mystery why fangs have evolved so many times in snakes, but rarely in other reptiles,' said study author Dr Alessandro Palci at Flinders University.

'Our study answers this, showing how easy it is for normal snake teeth to turn into hypodermic needles.'

Snakes emit their venom from 'venom fangs' – modified teeth that are grooved and larger than other nearby teeth.

They can be located at the back or at the front of the mouth, where they can be fixed or hinged, meaning they can fold backwards.

For their study, the researchers used high-tech modelling, fossils and hours of microscope observations of snake species.

Species included the crab-eating water snake (Fordonia leucobalia), the coastal taipan (Oxyuranus scutellatus), the Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica) and the blue-banded sea snake (Hydrophis cyanocinctus).

The coastal taipan, which Australian Museum describes as the country's most dangerous snake, will 'ferociously defend itself' if surprised or cornered.

'Invariably the snake will strike, often without any warning, inflicting multiple snapping bites with extreme accuracy and efficiency,' it says.

The fang of a Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica) attached to maxilla bone. Gaboon viper has the longest fangs of any venomous snake - up to 2 inches (5 cm) in length - and the second-highest venom yield of any snake after the king cobra

The Gaboon viper, meanwhile, which has two hornlike projections on its snout, has the longest fangs of any venomous snake – up to 2 inches (5 cm) in length – and the second-highest venom yield of any snake after the king cobra.

The study revealed that snakes possess tiny inward folds, or wrinkles, at the base of their venom fangs that may help them attach more firmly to the jaw, by increasing the surface area of attachment.

'Snake teeth aren't like those in humans,' study author Dr Aaron LeBlanc at Kings College London told MailOnline.

'Our teeth are like railroad spikes driven into the ground – we have deeply rooted teeth that sit in sockets.

'Snake teeth are more like traffic cones sitting on the road, so they have very little surface area holding the teeth to the jaws.

A gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica), an extremely venomous snake that has fangs up to 2 inches in length

'We think that snakes enhanced that attachment of the teeth to the jaws by increasing the surface area at the bottoms of their cone-shaped teeth.

'They did this by folding the bottoms of the teeth into more complex shapes, allowing the underlying attachment tissues to hold on to more of the tooth.

'In the earliest stages of the evolution of venom fangs, these folds had nothing to with delivering venom- they just helped attach teeth to the jaws.'

In venomous snakes, these wrinkles have evolved to become deeper and extend all the way to the tooth tip – in effect, forming what's known as a venom groove and a long, pointy fang.

'We think that at a certain point in the evolution of venomous snakes grooves may have appeared by chance on several teeth (as they sometimes still do in modern snakes),' Dr Palci told MailOnline.

'And the teeth closest to the venom gland (which was already present as a modified salivary gland) eventually became selected for larger size because more effective at injecting venom. That's how large fangs like those of cobras and vipers appeared.'

The observations show that venom grooves are the expression of an ancestral feature present in most snake teeth called plicidentine – otherwise known as the infolding of dentine around the pulp cavity at the base of a tooth.

Plicidentine has been reported in several groups of vertebrates, but its widespread occurrence in snakes was previously unknown.

Types of venom fangs in snakes - rear fangs (crab-eating water snake), fixed front fangs (taipan), and hinged front fangs (Gaboon viper). Fangs are highlighted in red

Skull of a taipan and sections through its left fang showing the relationship between venom groove and infoldings at the base of the tooth

'Our work also highlights the opportunism and efficiency of evolution,' said co-author Matthew Flinders Professor Michael Lee at Flinders University.

'Wrinkles which helped attach teeth to the jaw were repurposed to help inject venom.'

Interestingly, the experts also included the non-venomous boa constrictor in their analysis, which coils around its prey and compresses it to death.

'We wanted to see what the teeth of a more primitive, non-venomous snake look like, to confirm that the folding pattern is almost universal in snake teeth,' said Dr Palci.

The team found that virtually all snakes, whether they are venomous or not, have folds around their teeth that no one noticed before.

'In venomous snakes, it looks like one of these folds was re-purposed into a larger groove to suit a new function – delivering venom,' said Dr LeBlanc.

'This surprisingly simple transformation is what allowed several lineages of snakes to evolve venom-injecting teeth.'

Of almost 4,000 species of snakes alive today, about 600 of them are considered 'medically significant' to humans.

This means that if you get bitten you are likely to require a visit to the nearest hospital for treatment to prevent death.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) has a venomous snake database to enable users to easily identify the most important venomous snakes in their country

Despite progresses in anti-venom, even today, snakebite remains a huge health concern around the world.

There are 3,709 snake species currently recognised and around 35 per cent of them use venom to kill their prey.

The number of wider reptile species capable of producing toxins in their saliva may be up as high as 2,000 and out of these, 250 are listed by the WHO as being medically important.

Every year, somewhere between 4.5 million and 5.4 million people are bitten by snakes worldwide and the estimated death toll ranges from 81,000 to 138,000, with another 400,000 victims suffering major disabilities such as amputations.

Snakebites have been claimed the world's biggest and grossly underestimated hidden health crisis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The European Space Agency's (ESA) BepiColombo spacecraft has made its close approach to Venus, coming just 340 miles from the surface of Earth's twin planet.

BepiColombo, launched in partnership with the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), arrived for its gravity assist on the way to Mercury just 33 hours after fellow ESA probe, the Solar Orbiter, made its close approach to Venus.

They were both using the gravitational pull of Venus to help them drop a little bit of orbital energy to reach their destinations at the centre of the solar system.

The Mercury-bound BepiColombo spacecraft swung by Venus, flying 340 miles from the surface of the planet, at 15:52 BST on Tuesday, August 10.

It is on a seven year mission to study the structure and atmosphere of the innermost planet in the solar system and learn more about how it interacts with our star.

JAXA tweeted: '[It] will not begin orbiting Mercury until the end of 2025, the spacecraft will make the first swing-by of Mercury this October. Stay tuned!'

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes.

They are both using the gravitational pull of Venus to help them drop a little bit of orbital energy to reach their destinations at the centre of the solar system

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes

VENUS: THE BASICS Venus, the second planet from the sun, is a rocky planet about the same size and mass of the Earth. However, its atmosphere is radically different to ours - being 96 per cent carbon dioxide and having a surface temperature of 867°F (464°C) and pressure 92 times that of on the Earth. The inhospitable planet is swaddled in clouds of sulphuric acid that make the surface impossible to glimpse via the visible light spectrum. In the past, Venus likely had oceans similar to Earth's - but these would have vaporised as it underwent a runaway greenhouse effect. The surface of Venus is a dry desertscape, which is periodically changed by volcanic activity. The planet has no moons and orbits the Sun every 224.7 Earth days. Advertisement

Photos and readings of Venus during the very close approach will be available in the coming days, according to ESA.

It was being tracked by Malargüe station in Argentina during its flyby.

'From 187,672,259.248 km away, signals from the spacecraft take over 10 minutes to get to the station,' said ESA.

As it passed into the dayside of the planet, ESA tweeted: 'BepiColombo is feeling the heat as it swoops past the Venus dayside.

'Sunlight reflected from Venus is heating the spacecraft by up to 50 degrees!

'And the reaction wheels used to keep Bepi pointing straight are feeling the pull of the planet’s mighty gravity.'

Solar Orbiter is on its way to study the polar regions of the sun in a bid to better understand its 11-year cycle, and made its approach at 05:42 BST, ESA said, coming within 4,967 of the planet.

That was just 33 hours before the BepiColombo fly-by of Venus.

Solar Orbiter is a partnership between ESA and NASA to study the polar regions of our host star.

This isn't the first time the sun-observing satellite has visited Venus.

It is scheduled to make repeated gravity assist flybys of the planet throughout its mission in its bid to get close to the star at the heart of the solar system.

During the Venus flybys it is changing its orbital inclination.

While doing this, it is acting to boost itself out of the ecliptic plane, to get the best – and first – views of the sun's poles.

BepiColombo is a partnership between ESA and the Japanese space agency JAXA and is on its way to the mysterious innermost planet of the solar system.

To get there it has required flybys of Earth, Venus and even Mercury itself to get close enough and build up momentum.

These flybys, coupled with the spacecraft's solar electric propulsion system is what is required to steer into Mercury orbit against the gravitational pull of the sun.

It is not possible to take high-resolution imagery of Venus with the science cameras onboard either mission, so there won't be new pictures of Earth's 'evil twin'.

Solar Orbiter must remain facing the sun, and the main camera onboard BepiColombo is shielded by the transfer module that will deliver the two planetary orbiters to Mercury, according to ESA officials.

BepiColombo, a partnership between ESA and the Japanese space agency JAXA, flew by Venus at 15:48 BST on August 10, coming just 340 miles from the surface of the planet

HOW WILL BEPICOLOMBO GET TO MERCURY? BepiColombo's two orbiters, Japan's Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter and the ESA's Mercury Planetary Orbiter, will be carried together. The carrier will use electric propulsion and gravity-assists at Earth, Venus and Mercury in its 7.2 year journey. Once at Mercury, they will separate and move into their own orbits to make complementary measurements of Mercury's interior, surface, exosphere and magnetosphere. The information will tell us more about the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star, providing a better understanding of the overall evolution of our own Solar System. BepiColombo features three components that will separate: Mercury Transfer Module (MTM) for propulsion, built by the European Space Agency (ESA) Mercury Planetary Orbiter (MPO) built by ESA Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter (MMO) or MIO built by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Advertisement

However, two of BepiColombo's three monitoring cameras took photos around the time of close approach and in the days after as the planet fades.

The cameras provide black-and-white snapshots in 1024 x 1024 pixel resolution, and are positioned on the Mercury Transfer Module such that they also capture the spacecraft's solar arrays and antennas.

During the approach, Venus filled the entire field of view, but as the spacecraft changes its orientation the planet will be seen passing behind the panels.

The images will be downloaded in batches, one by one, with the first image expected to be available this evening, and the majority tomorrow.

Even though both spacecraft flew within a few thousand miles of Venus and just a day apart, they were separated by over 350,000 miles of open space.

Solar Orbiter has been acquiring data near-constantly since launch in February 2020 with its four instruments that measure the environment around the spacecraft itself.

Both Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo's Mercury Planetary Orbiter and Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter collected data on the magnetic and plasma environment of Venus from different locations around the planet.

JAXA's Akatsuki spacecraft is already in orbit around Venus, creating a unique constellation of datapoints on the mysterious hot world.

It will take many months to collate the coordinated flyby measurements and analyse them in a meaningful way, so information won't be available straight away, ESA explained.

The data collected during the flybys will also provide useful inputs to ESA's future Venus orbiter, EnVision, which will launch to the planet in the 2030s.

Solar Orbiter, a partnership between ESA and NASA, flew by Venus on August 9, coming about 5,000 miles from the planet at 05:42 BST that morning

Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo both have one more flyby of Venus this year.

BepiColombo will see Mercury for the first time overnight on October 1, making its first of six flybys of Mercury – with this one from just just over 100 miles.

The two planetary orbiters will be delivered into Mercury orbit in late 2025, tasked with studying all aspects of this mysterious inner planet.

This includes its core to surface processes, magnetic field, and exosphere, to better understand the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star.

On November 27, Solar Orbiter will make a final flyby of Earth, coming just under 300 miles from the surface, kicking off the start of its main mission.

Even though both spacecraft were flying within a few thousand miles of Venus and just a day apart, they were separated by over 350,000 miles of open space

Both NASA and the European Space Agency are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin

It will continue to make regular flybys of Venus to progressively increase its orbit inclination to best observe the sun's uncharted polar regions.

Solar scientists say understanding and imaging the polar regions of our star is key to understanding its 11 year activity cycle.

Both NASA and the European Space Agency are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The iPhone XS Max is the biggest phone Apple has ever made - and the most expensive.

With a 6.5inch OLED screen, there is no getting away from the fact its screen is huge - along with the $1099 price tag.

However, with the XS Max, Apple has done the seemingly impossible - made a big screen phone that feels like, well, a normal sized phone.

Scroll down for video

Apple's new iPhone XS and XS Max go on sale on Friday - and the biggest handset Apple has ever made if also its best. with the XS Max, Apple has done the seemingly impossible - made a big screen phone that feels like a normal sized phone

IPHONE XS MAX SPECS Display: 6.5-inch OLED screen Cost: From $1,099 (£1,099) Ships: September 21 Battery life: 1.5 hours longer than the iPhone X Cameras: Dual 12MP rear-facing, dual 7MP front-facing Powered by: A12 Bionic chip Memory: 64GB, 256GB or 512GB Colours: Gold, silver and space grey Waterproof rating: Up to 2 meters (6.5ft) deep for several minutes Improved augmented reality tools Advertisement

Picking up the handset is a real ‘oh’ moment - by making almost the entire front of the phone screen, Apple has crammed that giant screen into a handset the same size as the previous ‘Plus’ model.

By stretching the OLED screen to the edge of the device, it means that for owners of any of the previous plus models, the XS Max is like going home - and for everyone else, the phone feels way smaller than you expect.

The curved edges and glass back, while something of a fingerprint magnet, particularly in the new gold colour we've been using, make this a phone that feels great to pick up and use.

There is, sadly, still a notch, but as owners of the X know, it's relatively easy to live with, and you’ll soon forget it's there, even on the giant 6.5inch screen.

While the screen is the first thing you'll notice, in fact, everything about the Max, and its smaller brother, the XS, has been improved from last year's Phone X.

They both boast a faster and improved dual camera system, and the first 7-nanometer chip in a smartphone, the dramatically named Bionic A12, which has a ‘next-generation Neural Engine’.

This new A12 bionic processor in the iPhone does the image signal processing every time you snap a photo, and the iPhone combines those functions of the processor with the neural engine for a frankly astonishing whopping 1 trillion operations per photo.

Apple says the new camera uses multiple technologies — like faster sensors, an enhanced ISP, and advanced algorithms — to create a 'smart HDR' setting, which brings more highlight and shadow detail to your photos. As you can see, it seems to work, producing great shots.

The camera sensor itself has also got an overhaul, with deeper and larger pixels for improved color fidelity and better low-light photos.

Combined, this allows Apple to do some pretty smart stuff, such as Smart HDR, which takes multiple pictures, analyzes all the photos, selects the best portions of each, and then combines them to create an optimal version of what you’re trying to capture.

The camera is incredibly impressive, and Apple talks about it using the incredible power of the firm's chips to carry out 'computational photography'.

THE IPHONE XR: A SUPERB PHONE IN A SMALLER SIZE While much of this review focuses on the Max version of the XS, there is of course also the smaller 5.8inch screen version. Apart from the screen size, its almost identical, and is perfect for those who don't want the eyeball blowing 6.5inch screen of the Max. It's the same stunning screen, processor and camera updates, just in a smaller package, and while it may be tough for owners of the X to justify an upgrade, those who held off as the X was so new and different from previous phones can rest assured that while the X was a great phone, the XS really has had every flaw removed. Advertisement

What this means is that anyone with no photography skill whatsoever, such as myself, can create stunning shots easily using new features such as an update to the popular portrait mode.

Known as bokeh, this lets you change the depth of field after you've shot your picture, with incredible results.

It's highly intuitive to use with a slider, and great fun - and a perfect example of just how Apple can improve photography.

There’s also faster Face ID, wider stereo sound, that new gold finish, and for the first time, dual SIM capabilities (although they won’t be available until later this year).

The camera on the XS has received a big boost, and its stunning - particularly in low light conditions. Pictured, a sunset in San Francisco.

From a hugely updated processor, to an updated camera and terrifying loud speakers, everything about the XS feels faster, snappier and better thought out than in any previous iPhone.

Part of this is also, of course, down to software, and Apple’s decision with iOS 12 to focus on performance and reliability over flashy new features has paid dividends.

This is the most solid, reliable version of iOS I’ve ever used, and for owners of older handsets, downloading it really is a no brainer - you’ll see everything from battery life to the general speed of your phone, even in older models, increase.

The camera on the XS has recieved a big boost, and its stunning - particularly in low light conditions.

However, it’s on the XS where iOS is really blazingly fast.

Whereas even on the iPhone X, tasks like FaceID, complex games and even portrait mode in photos could feel a little sluggish, on the Xs they are blazingly fast.

iPhone XR vs iPhone XS vs XS Max Screen Size: Display Type: Processor: Water Resistance: Battery Life: Fast Charge: Wireless Charge: 3D Touch Display: Dual Cameras: Optical Zoom: FaceID: Weight: Software: Price: Colours: iPhone XR 6.1-inch LCD A12 Bionic IP67 Up to 15 hours Yes Yes No No No Yes 194g (6.84 oz) iOS 12 $749 (£749) Yellow, White, Coral, Black, Blue, and Product Red iPhone XS 5.8-inch OLED A12 Bionic IP68 Up to 12 hours Yes Yes Yes Dual 12MP Lens Yes. 2x Yes 177g (6.24oz) iOS 12 $999 (£999) Gold, Space Grey, Silver iPhone XS Max 6.5-inch OLED A12 Bionic IP68 Up to 13 hours Yes Yes Yes Dual 12MP Lens Yes. 2x Yes 208g (7.34 oz) iOS 12 $1099 (£1099) Gold, Space Grey, Silver Advertisement

FaceID feels dramatically faster, and although I've only been using the phone for a few days, I can say it has been improved significantly - even first thing in the morning, where previously I’d struggle, seems more reliable (apparently I’m not a morning person even when it comes to facial recognition).

Apple also revealed the iPhone will support dual SIM cards for the first time.

It will use Apple’s eSIM, a built in electronic sim card that works alongside the primary sim card, and Apple said it will be available later this year.

The Max really is the biggest iPhone Apple has ever made

But it’s hard to get away from the screen.

The curved design means that in the flesh, it’s incredibly easy to pick up and handle - and absolutely stunning to look at.

That screen is sharp and incredibly bright, and the phone (and even the still present notch) are almost invisible, making this the closest thing yet to Apple’s ‘all screen’ vision.

While many users liked the smaller size of the iPhone X when it was released last year, the Max does the seemingly impossibly - making a big screen phone that really doesn’t feel like a big screen phone.

Picking up the handset is a real ‘oh’ moment - by making almost the entire front of the phone screen, Apple has crammed that giant screen into a handset the same size as the previous ‘Plus’ model, by stretching the LED screen to the edge of the device.

It’s big enough that you feel you could actually do far more, with emails and documents given a whole new lease of life (and infringing on the iPad a little, I would imagine).

So should you upgrade? Well, if you held off buying the X, and are a plus user, then absolutely.

The iPhone XS Max is probably the handset users of the Plus iPhones have been waiting for - and the extra screen real estate really does make this a phone that manages to balance a big screen with the usability and great feel iPhones are known for.

The smaller iPhone XS is a more complicated story, especially if you bought the X last year.

The updates to the camera, processor and other hardware are great - but by upgrading to iOS 12 you’ll see a performance boost to your existing handset that may well make it worth holding off - unless, like many people who bought the X, you absolutely have to have the latest and greatest.

For those on a budget, there’s also the complication of the cheaper, LCD screen iPhone Xr coming out

Overall, this is absolutely the best iPhone Apple has even made - but for $1099 you’d expect that.

For many, the Max is the iPhone they've been waiting for, and expect it to be a massive hit - and leave its smaller brother in the dust.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Samsung reveals gigantic 12 foot wide TV called 'The Wall' will go on sale next year (but still won't say how much it will cost)

Samsung introduces the 146" TV called 'The Wall' at CES 2018.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eating a largely vegan diet made up of plant-based foods can slash the risk of heart disease by up to 52 per cent, new research suggests.

A variety of fruit and vegetables, whole grains, low-fat dairy products, skinless fish and chicken, nuts and legumes are all key to staving off health problems later in life.

Conversely, researchers advise that young adults limit saturated fat, salt, red meat, sweets and sugary drinks to prevent heart attacks in middle-age.

While they didn't look at the reason behind the link, previous research suggests plant-based diets can lower your blood pressure, improve cholesterol and help you lose weight - all risk factors for heart disease.

Scroll down for video

Eating a largely vegan diet made up of plant-based foods can slash the risk of heart disease by up to 52 per cent, new research suggests (stock image)

VEGETARIAN DIETS CAN LOWER YOUR CHOLESTEROL Plant-based diets really do lower cholesterol, according to a review of nearly 50 studies. Vegetarians generally eat more greens, fruits and nuts which means they have a lower intake of saturated fat, researchers found. These foods are naturally rich in components such as soluble fibre, soy protein, and plant sterols (a cholesterol found in plants), all of which lower cholesterol. The research, led by Dr Yoko Yokoyama, from Keio University in Fujisawa, found vegetarians had 29.2 milligrams less of total cholesterol per decilitre (one tenth of a litre) than meat-eaters. Advertisement

The long-term study, led by scientists at the University of Minnesota School of Public Health in Minneapolis, looked at the diet of some 5,000 people over a 30-year period and whether they developed heart disease.

They were not told what to eat. Instead, the quality of their diet was assessed at the start of the study and then after seven years and 20 years based on the A Priori Diet Quality Score (APDQS).

The APDQS was made up of 46 food groups split into beneficial foods (such as fruits, vegetables, beans, nuts and whole grains); adverse foods (such as fried potatoes, high-fat red meat, salty snacks, pastries and soft drinks); and neutral foods (such as potatoes, refined grains, lean meats and shellfish).

This was done based on their links to heart disease.

People who got higher scores ate a variety of beneficial foods that largely made up a plant-based diet, while those who scored lower ate more adverse foods.

During 32 years of follow-up, researchers found that 289 people involved in the study developed heart disease (including heart attack, stroke, heart failure, heart-related chest pain or clogged arteries).

They also discovered that those who scored in the top 20 per cent on the long-term diet quality score (meaning they ate the most nutritionally rich plant foods and fewer adversely rated animal products) were 52 per cent less likely to develop heart disease.

Meanwhile, between year seven and 20 of the study when the ages of participants ranged from 25 to 50, those who improved their diet quality the most were 61 per cent less likely to develop heart disease, compared to those whose diet quality declined the most during that time.

Researchers advise that young adults limit saturated fat, salt, red meat, sweets and sugary drinks to prevent heart attacks in middle-age (stock image)

There were few vegetarians among the participants, so the study was not able to assess the possible benefits of a strict vegetarian diet, which excludes meat and fish.

'A nutritionally rich, plant-centred diet is beneficial for cardiovascular health,' lead author Yuni Choi said.

'A plant-centred diet is not necessarily vegetarian. People can choose among plant foods that are as close to natural as possible, not highly processed.

'We think that individuals can include animal products in moderation from time to time, such as non-fried poultry, non-fried fish, eggs and low-fat dairy.'

Fellow author David E. Jacobs said: 'As opposed to existing diet quality scores that are usually based on small numbers of food groups, APDQS is explicit in capturing the overall quality of diet using 46 individual food groups, describing the whole diet that the general population commonly consumes.

'Our scoring is very comprehensive, and it has many similarities with diets like the Dietary Guidelines for Americans Healthy Eating Index (from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Food and Nutrition Service), the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet and the Mediterranean diet.'

Meanwhile, a separate study published last month found that eating red and processed meat such as bacon, sausages and ham can significantly increase the risk of developing heart disease.

Analysing data from 13 different studies involving 1.4 million people allowed the team from the University of Oxford to examine the impact of meat on health.

They found that for every 50g per day of processed meat, such as bacon, ham and sausages eaten, the risk of coronary heart disease goes up by 18 per cent.

For unprocessed meat such as pork, lamb and beef, the risk increased by nine per cent over no red meat. There was no risk increase with poultry.

The team say their study didn't investigate the cause, but suggest it could be down to higher concentrations of saturated fat in red meat and salt in processed meat.

The latest study has been published in the Journal of the American Heart Association.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you're struggling to love your body, a new study suggests you'll be happy with it eventually.

Researchers assessed the body satisfaction of around 15,000 men and women in New Zealand over the course of six years.

They found body satisfaction increased across the lifespan for both men and women, but women specifically started to love their body around the age of 60 and men between the ages of 59 and 64.

It's possible that a newfound appreciation for how we look around the 60-mark coincides with our health becoming more important than our looks – for both men and women.

The researchers warn that for women, pregnancy and postpartum periods typically lead to physiological changes that can negatively affect body image.

These are 'inconsistent with rigid beauty ideals', they say, such as weight gain, body shape changes, hair thinning and skin blemishes.

Despite this, it may be possible that body dissatisfaction is less severe than it was several generations ago, according to the researchers.

Body satisfaction increases across the lifespan for men and women, a new study from experts in Australia and the University of Auckland in New Zealand reveals. But women specifically started to love their body around the age of 60

BODY SATISFACTION IS BEST AROUND AGE 60 Women Heightened body satisfaction: 60 years old Lowest body satisfaction: 24–29 and 34–39 years Men Heightened body satisfaction: 59-64 years old Lowest body satisfaction: 44-49 years old

Advertisement

The study was conducted by scientists at Griffith University and the University of Queensland in Australia and University of Auckland in New Zealand.

'Results of this study show a relatively flat pattern for women with a slight increase in women’s body satisfaction across the lifespan, especially in later years of life – from roughly 60 years of age,' they say.

'This finding sits in contrast to our predictions and a body of research suggesting that body dissatisfaction is relatively stable across the female lifespan.'

The team claim 'body-related perceptual shifts' may gradually occur across the female lifespan as women get older.

This buffers against the impact of 'damaging thin and youthful ideals' in Western cultures that may make women want to lose weight.

For the study, researchers examined patterns of change and cohort effects in body image across the male and female adult lifespan.

The longitudinal study assessed body satisfaction in 15,264 participants – 62.9 per cent of whom were women – aged between 18 to 94 years of age from various waves of the New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study.

It's possible that a newfound appreciation for how we look around the 60-mark coincides with our health becoming more important than our looks - for both men and women

EIGHT YEAR OLDS HAVE BODY IMAGE ISSUES Children as young as eight have body image issues, a 2018 study. Youngsters become self-conscious of their appearances when their hormone levels rise in preparation for puberty, according to the authors. They analysed sex hormone levels in 516 boys and 621 girls aged between eight and nine years old. The youngsters were shown eight illustrated silhouettes of children that ranged from very thin to very obese. They were asked to choose the silhouette they felt they most looked like, known as the self rating, and then the image they wished to look like; the ideal rating. Lead author Dr Elizabeth Hughes, from the University of Melbourne, said: 'What we have learnt is that pre-pubescent children, as young as eight and nine, are vulnerable to poor body image and the dissatisfaction does appear to be linked to hormone levels associated with the onset of puberty. Advertisement

The participants' body satisfaction was assessed over the course of six years, from 2010 to 2015.

Body satisfaction was measured with the response to a single statement – 'I am satisfied with the appearance, size and shape of my body' – scored on a scale from 1 (very inaccurate) to 7 (very accurate).

Body satisfaction increased across the lifespan for men and women, while men were shown to consistently have greater body satisfaction than women, the study found.

Contrary to existing research, the findings also found recent improvements in body image for women of a certain cohort.

Young and middle-aged women were shown to grow happier with their bodies during the study’s assessment period.

Women who entered the survey at 19, 29, 39, 44, and 49 years of age each showed significant improvement in their body image over the five years of assessment.

'These patterns were so marked, that in many cases women were entering age stages with higher body satisfaction than that reported by their preceding cohort who entered the study five years prior,' the authors say.

'These results depict a positive story that sits in contrast to much of the past literature, in which body image appeared to be getting increasingly worse across time and generations.'

For women aged 54 years and below, all but two cohorts (24 to 29 and 34 to 39 years) displayed an upward trajectory in their body satisfaction.

Declines in body satisfaction for these two cohorts may be due to potential declines during biological periods of vulnerability, such as post-partum and menopausal periods.

In men, meanwhile, the 39 to 44 cohort had higher levels of body satisfaction than the 44 to 49 cohort, which showed a marked decline.

'Overall, the results of the current paper demonstrate an improvement in body satisfaction across the lifespan for both men and women.

'While men consistently demonstrated greater body satisfaction than their female counterparts, cohort effects suggest increasing body positivity (or at least less appearance related negativity) for women.'

The study has been published in the journal Body Image.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Big shot city bankers and aggressive market traders can't attribute their success to having higher levels of testosterone, a new study suggests.

Researchers at the University of Bristol claim it's a myth that testosterone levels drive success in life, contradicting previous assumptions.

In a genetic analysis, the experts found little evidence that testosterone influences success for men or even women, who produce small amounts of testosterone in the ovaries.

Despite the social myths surrounding testosterone, it could be much less important to life success than previously thought, they say.

In fact, high testosterone could be a result of success, rather than the other way around, which could explain previous studies that linked high levels of the hormone with a successful life.

Higher testosterone in men has previously been linked to various kinds of social success - but the new study claims the hormone itself isn't the driver (stock image)

WHAT IS TESTOSTERONE? Testosterone is the male sex hormone and is mostly made in the testicles, but also in adrenal glands, which are near the kidneys. It causes the voice to deepen, body hair to grow and the genitals to become larger during puberty. As well as affecting sex drive and sperm production, it also plays a role in developing strong bones and muscles, and how the body distributes fat. Women also create small amounts of the hormone in the ovaries and adrenal glands, and it affects their fertility and bones and muscles. Advertisement

'There's a widespread belief that a person's testosterone can affect where they end up in life,' said study author Dr Amanda Hughes at University of Bristol Medical School.

'Our results suggest that, despite a lot of mythology surrounding testosterone, its social implications may have been over-stated.'

Testosterone is the male sex hormone and is mostly made in the testicles, but also in adrenal glands, which are near the kidneys.

It's already known that in men, testosterone is linked with socioeconomic position, such as income or educational qualifications.

Previous studies have found that men with more testosterone are in more successful positions than their peers.

'A study of male executives found that testosterone was higher for those who had more subordinates,' said Dr Hughes.

'A study of male financial traders found that higher testosterone correlated with greater daily profits.

'Other studies have reported that testosterone is higher for more highly educated men, and among self-employed men, suggesting a link with entrepreneurship.'

Such research has supported the widespread idea that testosterone can influence success by affecting behaviour – for example, it could make a banker or trader more aggressive.

But success may come before testosterone levels rise, not after, according to Dr Hughes.

'Rather than testosterone influencing a person’s socioeconomic position, it could be that having a more advantaged socioeconomic position raises your testosterone,' she says in a piece for the Conversation.

3D illustration of a testosterone molecule. Testosterone is the male sex hormone and is mostly made in the testicles, but also in adrenal glands, which are near the kidneys

MEN WITH HIGH TESTOSTERONE 'ARE MORE SELFISH' Having high levels of testosterone can make men less generous and more likely to exhibit selfish behaviours, a study found. Psychologists from China and Switzerland measured the brain activity of men while they completed a task involving deciding between generous and selfish options. Men who had been given additional testosterone three hours before completing the task tended to select the more selfish options, they found. Testosterone also dampened activity in a region of the brain known to be involved in consideration of other people's welfare. Read more: Men with high testosterone are less generous Advertisement

But there may be other explanations. Higher testosterone in men is linked to good health – and good health may help people succeed in their careers.

'A link in men between testosterone and socioeconomic position could therefore simply reflect an impact of health on both,' Dr Hughes said.

'Alternatively, socioeconomic circumstances could affect testosterone levels.

'A person's perception of their own success could influence testosterone. In studies of sports matches, testosterone has been found to rise in the winner compared to the loser.'

For their study, Dr Hughes and her team applied an approach called Mendelian randomisation in a sample of 306,248 UK adults from UK Biobank.

Mendelian randomisation is an epidemiological technique that uses differences in genetics to distinguish a simple correlation from causation (one factor directly causing another).

The team explored testosterone's influence on socioeconomic position, including income, employment status, neighbourhood-level deprivation and educational qualifications.

They also looked at testosterone's influence on health, including self-rated health and body mass index (BMI) measurements, and on risk-taking behaviour.

First, the team identified genetic variants linked to higher testosterone levels and then investigated how these variants were related to the outcomes.

A person's genetic code is determined before birth, and generally does not change during their lifetime (there are rare exceptions, such as changes that occur with cancer).

This makes it very unlikely that genetic variants are affected by socioeconomic circumstances, health or other environmental factors during a person's lifetime.

Consequently, any link between a particular outcome (like a high-paying job) with genetic variants linked to testosterone would strongly suggest an influence of testosterone on that outcome.

Similar to previous studies, the research found men with higher testosterone had higher household income, lived in less deprived areas and were more likely to have a university degree and a skilled job.

Interestingly, in women, higher testosterone was linked to lower socioeconomic position, including lower household income, living in a more deprived area and lower chance of having a university degree.

Consistent with previous evidence, higher testosterone was linked with better health for men and poorer health for women, and greater risk-taking behaviour for men.

But there was little evidence that the testosterone-related genetic variants were linked with any outcome for men or women.

The team concluded that there is little evidence that testosterone meaningfully affected socioeconomic position, health or risk-taking in men or women.

Results for women were less precise than results for men, so the influence of testosterone in women could be studied in more detail in the future using larger samples.

The findings have been published in Science Advances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An astonishing video shows a domestic cat scaring away a fierce wild brown bear in Siberia.

The pet, called Vasya, was on a fishing trip with its female owner, and the predator approached as a group of anglers were drinking around a campfire.

The cat arched its back, and eyeballed the beast, refusing to budge even when the bear threateningly thrust its paws towards her before standing tall on its hind legs.

This is the moment Vasya the hero cat stands up to a large brown bear which was approaching a Siberian fishing camp where the pet's owner was drinking with friends around a fire

The fishermen filmed Vasya who refused to back down even though the bear got onto its hind legs in a threatening gesture

After being confronted by the pet cat the bear retreated back into the woods

The animals were just inches apart with the cat showing no weakness despite the imminent danger.

In the footage, the group shout at the cat : 'Don't do it Vasya… Calm down, Vasya.'

They expected the cat to run for its life. One voice says: 'Look at it, standing in a fighting position…it's a true Armageddon.'

The owner is heard shouting to the bear: 'My cat, don't touch it… Vasya, come here right now.'

The voice says: 'I hope the bear won't eat it. The cat is truly fearless.'

The brave black cat was implacable in the face of the bear, which is then seen retreating from the camp in the video filmed by angler Sergey Tarasov in the camp beside the Angara River near Ust-Ilimsk in Irkutsk region.

Local media reported: 'The black cat wins the battle of wills as it stands between its owners and the predator.'

According to the Siberian Times, the cat's owner, who has not been identified, said during the encounter: 'Look at it, it just keeps standing up, and it doesn’t even move! I didn’t know I had such a fearless cat!'

A friend replied: ‘Yes, and you scold it (at home) for tearing wallpaper!’

After the bear runs from the camp, one of the fishermen adds: 'Well done Vasily Vasilyevich! This is it, you are on the front page! The biggest piece of meat is yours!’

One of those in the camp said the cat is now in line for the biggest piece of meat due to his bravery in facing down the bear

When the video was first shared online in Russia some people questioned why the anglers were so relaxed when a bear wandered into their camp.

A friend, Vladimir Vlasov, answered that it was not just down to the alcohol they had consumed.

He said: 'Do you think they were supposed to stand up or run? Then the bear would have definitely chased them.

'My friends were by the fire, and were ready to use it (against the bear). Bears will not usually go towards fires, plus the smell of smoke scares them.

'I'd say well done to my friends for behaving calmly. They didn't twitch, nor wave their hands.'

Vlaslov added: 'The cat stood between the owners and the bear - well done!

'No matter how small the cat is, its threatening posture and sound scare away large animals.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chinese-owned video sharing app TikTok has announced changes to its privacy settings aimed at protecting its younger users.

The NSPCC has welcomed the changes, which will come into effect in the coming months, by saying they should help prevent sex offenders from attempting to groom teenagers on the platform.

Arguably the biggest change is that it's limiting the direct messaging abilities of accounts belonging to users who are aged 16 and 17.

It means the ability to direct message others on the site will be turned off by default for 16 and 17-year olds, so they'll have to actively switch to a different sharing option.

TikTok is a Chinese social media app where users can live stream, create short videos and music videos and Gifs with a host of functions (file photo)

The second change is that it will now ask all users under 16 to choose who they would like to see a post before they publish their first video.

After making their first TikTok video, under 16s will now be asked to proactively decide whether they want to make their videos visible to their followers, only friends, or just themselves before they are allowed to post.

The third update comes in the form of a new notification-disabling tool for youngsters in the evenings to 'help them focus on the time they have set aside for their work, study, relaxation and sleep', TikTok said.

The compulsory feature disables notifications on the accounts of 13 to 15-year-olds from 9pm each night. For those aged 16 and 17, notifications are disabled from 10pm.

The fourth and final change lets teenage users aged 16 and 17 decide if other users can download their videos.

TikTok said all the new changes are being rolled out 'over the coming months' and have been created to enhance protections for younger users of the platform.

The video sharing app, which allows users to make short lip-syncing clips to share with their followers, is particularly popular with children.

TikTok's rules allow anyone aged 13 or over to open an account, but online safety campaigners have previously urged platforms to do more to protect younger users from the harms that can be found on social media.

TikTok is adding a pop-up that appears when teenagers under the age of 16 are ready to publish their first video

A spokesperson for children's charity the NSPCC applauded TikTok's changes, adding that other tech firms should follow suit with similar measures.

'These increased privacy measures will give children more control over who can contact them and view their content, reducing opportunities for offenders to groom them,' Andy Burrows, head of child safety online policy at the NSPCC, told MailOnline.

'TikTok continues to show industry leadership when it comes to protecting children and we urge those tech firms who have been slow to catch up to be similarly proactive.

'However, the raft of safety announcements we have seen in recent weeks have been driven by the Age Appropriate Design Code coming into force next month and shows the positive impact regulation has on children’s safety.'

Meanwhile, Iain Corby, executive director of the Age Verification Providers Association, pointed out that underage users can start accounts by lying about their age – although TikTok uses detection technologies to try and prevent this.

'There is an underlying assumption that Tik-Tok knows the real ages of its users,' Corby told MailOnline.

'Yet we know millions of children have accounts below their minimum age, so until they adopt rigorous independent age checks, certified to international standards, these policies are welcome but potentially ineffective as a kid can just lie.'

TIKTOK'S NEW PRIVACY UPDATES FOR TEENS 1. Direct messaging When someone aged 16 or 17 joins TikTok, their direct messaging will now be set to 'no one' by default. To message others, they will need to actively switch to a different sharing option. Existing accounts who have never used DMs before will receive a prompt asking them to review and confirm their privacy settings the next time they use this feature. 2. Decide who can watch videos A new pop-up will appear when teenagers under the age of 16 are ready to publish their first video. It will ask them to choose who can watch the video – their followers, only friends or just themselves. They won't be able to publish their video until they make a selection. 3. Push notifications TikTok is also making changes that reduce the time period during which younger teens can receive push notifications. Accounts of users aged between 13 and 15 will not receive push notifications from 9pm. Meanwhile, accounts of users aged 16 and 17 will have push notifications disabled starting at 10pm. This change is not optional, but compulsory, TikTok confirmed to MailOnline. Reducing the time period during which under-18s receive push notifications will help them focus on the time they have set aside for their work, study, relaxation and sleep, according to the firm. 4. Choose who can download public videos Another optional feature will let teens aged 16 and 17 decide if other users can download their videos. 'If they opt to turn the feature on, they'll now receive a pop-up asking them to confirm that choice before others can download their videos,' TikTok explains. On TikTok, downloads are permanently disabled on content from accounts under the age of 16. Advertisement

The four updates follow the decision taken by the platform earlier this year to set accounts belonging to under-16s to private by default and limit features such as direct messaging to those aged 16 and older.

'TikTok's priority is to ensure our community has a safe and positive experience on the platform,' said Alexandra Evans, TikTok's head of child safety public policy.

'This announcement builds on our groundbreaking decision to make all under-16 accounts private by default, and adds to our growing list of features designed to safeguard our teenage users.

'Through our work with teenagers, parents, NGOs and academics, we'll continue to develop new ways to allow teens to express their creativity and find joy on TikTok whilst ensuring they have a safe experience.'

The Chinese-owned video sharing app, which allows users to make short lip-syncing clips to share with their followers, is particularly popular with children

TikTok said it wanted its younger users to 'develop positive digital habits early on' and managing screen time was a key aspect of this.

'These changes continue to build on our ongoing commitments as there's no finish line when it comes to protecting the safety, privacy, and well-being of our community,' Evans said in a blog post announcing the changes.

'We're working with teens, community organisations, parents and creators to further innovate and we're excited to share more over the coming months.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Products featured in this Mail Best article are independently selected by our shopping writers. If you make a purchase using links on this page, we may earn an affiliate commission.

If you're looking for an affordable indoor wireless home security camera that's packed with features like 360 degree motion tracking, superior night vision, real-time motion and sound alerts, and two-way audio, then we recommend hot-footing it over to Amazon.

The Nooie WiFi Indoor Security Camera is currently part of the site's Lightning Sale, reduced to just £29.74.

If you want to check in on you pets while you're at work or need to make sure the kids are behaving, then an indoor security camera like this can give you peace of mind. And at a bargain price.

The highly-rated Nooie WiFi Indoor Secruity Camera is now under £30 on Amazon

An indoor home security camera gives you peace of mind when you're not there, whether that's checking up on your dog or for picking up on abnormal sounds.

Not all cameras are created equal, however, so it pays to go by recommendations. And according to 1,700 Amazon shoppers, the Nooie WiFi Indoor Security Camera is well worth the £29.74 investment.

In fact, shoppers have been blown away by the quality and performance of the camera, raving about how it 'punches well above its price point' and offers 'great quality at a great price'.

Despite the low price point, the Nooie WiFi Indoor Security Camera is loaded with features that help you stay in the know.

Features like superior night time vision, two-way audio, app notifications and pan and tilt for 360 degrees of protection are often found in models triple the price, but you get all this and more with the Nooie.

Shoppers have reported that the Nooie app allows you to see, listen and speak to your pets or children in real time, so you can keep an eye and ear on things.

Users have been hugely impressed by the 1080P full HD camera which allows you to get a crisp picture even in a blacked out room. This has been a particular bonus for parents who want to keep an eye on their kids or those training their pets.

The two-way audio allows you to listen and talk to your pets or baby from anywhere with built-in anti-noise mic and speaker

With an impressive average score of 4.5 out of 5 on Amazon, the Nooie WiFi camera has a loyal following. Users call it an 'outstanding product, a true best buy!' and an 'excellent camera that does it all'.

One delighted shopper raved: 'Superb! Bought this camera to keep an eye on the dog whilst we are out. Absolutely fantastic product, motion tracking is great and noise detection lets us know if he is barking. Absolutely recommend these cameras.'

Another added: 'I use this as a cam for the kid's room. It has excellent night vision. And I mean excellent. We use a black out blind at night, so it is pitch black in there.

'With the camera you can see everything clear as day. The motion and sound detection is brilliant because you can adjust its sensitivity.'

A third penned: 'Great quality, very easy to set up, motion detection and tracking functions work extremely well and pictures are crystal clear.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A never-before-seen jellyfish with a red disk-shaped body that has been hiding nearly 2,300 feet below the surface in the Atlantic Ocean has been captured on film for the first time.

The 'undescribed species' is in the genus Poralia, which includes jellyfish with a bell-shaped top, up to 30 tentacles and is among the most fragile of its kind.

This jellyfish was just one of 'several potentially undescribed/unknown animals' found by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Ocean (NOAA) Exploration that conducted a deep-sea dive on July 28.

Biologists also captured images of hydrozoans, which are related to jellyfish and coral, filter feeders that produces a mucus house and a juvenile rattail fish.

The new jellyfish and other unknown creatures were discovered during the 2021 North Atlantic Stepping Stones expedition, conducted from June 30 through July 29.

Scroll down for video

A stunning jellyfish with a red disk-shaped body has been hiding nearly 2,300 feet below the surface in the Atlantic Ocean – and the elusive creature has, for the first time, been captured on film

The expedition traveled along the US east coast in search of never-before-seen marine life that may be lurking hundreds to thousands of feet below the ocean's surface.

NOAA researchers used a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) for dives at depths ranging from 820 to 13,124 feet.

For reference, the ROV is 10 feet long, 6.5 feet wide and 8.5 feet tall.

'The data collected during a total of 25 planned ROV dives along with collected mapping data will enable scientists and managers to build a better understanding of the diversity and distribution of deepwater habitats in this region, allowing for informed resource management decisions,' NOAA shared in a statement.

The 'undescribed species' is in the genus Poralia, which includes jellyfish with a bell-shaped top, up to 30 tentacles and is among the most fragile of its kind

The red jellyfish was spotted by Quinn Girasek, an intern and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Hollings Scholar with the NOAA Ocean Exploration, who was assisting with the research.

'As a Hollings intern, I am conducting research to further our understanding of previously unexplored ocean habitats,' she explained.

'My project this summer focuses on the abundance of organisms within the mesopelagic, or twilight zone 656 to 3,281 feet depth in the Atlantic Ocean around the Gulf Stream and within the deep scattering layer.'

'Overall, a variety of animals were seen, like ctenophores, cnidarians, crustaceans, and Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes). We also saw several undescribed families and potential new species,' she continued.

This jellyfish was just one of 'several potentially undescribed/unknown animals' found by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Ocean (NOAA) Exploration that conducted a deep-sea dive on July 28. Pictured is a bathocyroe fosteri ctenophore

Biologists also captured images of hydrozoans pictured, which are related to jellyfish and coral and filter feeders that produces a mucus house

The Poralia jellyfish and other unknown creatures, like this new type of rattail fish, were discovered during the 2021 North Atlantic Stepping Stones expedition conducted from June 30 through July 29

The teams started in Newport, Rhode Island and moved west further into the Atlantic Ocean, following the New England and Corner Rise seamount chains, which comprise a line of seamounts that extend from near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the eastern continental margin of the US.

The last dive of the expedition focused on the water column within Hydrographer Canyon through two series of transects.

The team sent the ROV through a range of depths during the first series of the dive, starting with 984 feet, then 1,640, 2,297, and ending with 2,953 feet.

NOAA researchers used a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) for dives at depths ranging from 820 to 13,124 feet. For reference, the ROV is 10 feet long, 6.5 feet wide and 8.5 feet tall

The teams started in Newport, Rhode Island and moved west further out into the Atlantic Ocean following the New England and Corner Rise seamount chains

The second part of the mission undertook the bathypelagic or midnight zone of the ocean, which is 3,937 feet below the surface and then the ROV dove 2,067 feet.

'The DSL is a region in the water column where there is such a high density of marine organisms that they generate their own sonar signal,' NOAA explained.

'During the dive, we observed more than 650 individuals throughout the water column, including ctenophores, siphonophores, jellyfish, arrow worms, shrimp, larvaceans, and several different fishes.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Minor volcanic eruptions at Vesuvius and Santorini could cause a 'domino effect', inducing tsunamis that smash submerged cable networks and seal off the Suez Canal, a new study has warned.

Researchers at the University of Cambridge warn that it's not only rare Hollywood-style 'mega-colossal' volcanic eruptions that could lead to catastrophe for humanity.

Instead, minor eruptions at 'pinch points' across the world could wipe out vital global infrastructure, according to the team.

The experts have identified seven pinch points where clusters of relatively small but active volcanoes sit alongside vital infrastructure that, if paralysed, could have severe global consequences.

These regions include volcano groups in Taiwan, North Africa, the North Atlantic, the Mediterranean and the northwestern US.

Scroll down for video

Researchers have identified seven 'pinch points' made up of volcanic clusters in the world

SEVEN PINCH POINTS There are seven pinch points where clusters of relatively small but active volcanoes sit alongside vital infrastructure that, if paralysed, could have severe global consequences: - China-Korea - North Atlantic - Luzon - Malay - Mediterranean - Taiwan - Pacific Northwest Advertisement

The study has been led by researchers at the University of Cambridge's Centre for the Study of Existential Risk (CSER).

'Even a minor eruption in one of the areas we identify could erupt enough ash or generate large enough tremors to disrupt networks that are central to global supply chains and financial systems,' said study author Dr Lara Mani at CSER.

'At the moment, calculations are too skewed towards giant explosions or nightmare scenarios, when the more likely risks come from moderate events that disable major international communications, trade networks or transport hubs.

'This is true of earthquakes and extreme weather as well as volcanic eruption.'

Dr Mani said it's time for civilisation to change how we view extreme volcanic risk.

'We need to move away from thinking in terms of colossal eruptions destroying the world, as portrayed in Hollywood films,' she said.

'The more probable scenarios involve lower-magnitude eruptions interacting with our societal vulnerabilities and cascading us towards catastrophe.'

It's commonly thought that the more powerful a volcanic eruption, the worse it will be for society and human welfare.

However, the experts argue too much focus is on the risks of these 'massive yet rare' events and too little attention is paid to the potential domino effects of moderate eruptions.

In the Mediterranean pinch point, for example, even small eruptions at Vesuvius (pictured) or Santorini could smash submerged cable networks, leading to breakdowns in telecommunication signals, or even seal off the Suez Canal

THE VOLCANIC EXPLOSIVITY INDEX The volcanic explosivity index (VEI) is a numeric scale that measures the relative explosivity of historic eruptions. Volume of products, eruption cloud height, and qualitative observations (using terms ranging from 'gentle' to 'mega-colossal') are used to determine the explosivity value. The scale is open-ended with the largest volcanic eruptions in history (supereruptions) given magnitude 8. A value of 0 is given for non-explosive eruptions, defined as less than 350,000 cubic feet of tephra ejected; and 8 representing a mega-colossal explosive eruption that can eject 240 cubic miles of tephra and have a cloud column height of over 20 km (12 mi). Source: USGS Advertisement

For background, a supervolcano is defined as a volcano that has had an explosion of at least 8 on the volcanic explosivity index (VEI), with an erupted tephra volume of more than 1,000 cubic kilometers, as measured by the US Geological Survey.

Supervolcano eruptions are considered 'extremely rare', occurring once every 100,000 years.

But smaller eruptions ranking up to six on the VEI – rather than the 7s and 8s that tend to occupy 'catastrophist' thinking – could easily produce ash clouds, mudflows and landslides that scupper undersea cables, the team warn.

This could lead to financial market shutdowns or devastate crop yields, causing food shortages that lead to political turmoil.

As an example from recent history, the team point to events of 2010 at the Eyjafjallajökull volcano in Iceland that caused chaos for aviation.

A magnitude 4 eruption from Eyjafjallajökull, close to the major North Atlantic 'pinch point', saw plumes of ash carried on northwesterly winds close European airspace at a cost of $5 billion to the global economy.

But when Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted in 1991, a magnitude 6 eruption some 100 times greater in scale than the 2010 Icelandic event, its distance from vital infrastructure meant that overall economic damage was less than a fifth of Eyjafjallajökull.

The eruption of Mount Pinatubo on June 15, 1991 was the second largest volcanic eruption of the twentieth century, after Novarupta on the Alaska Peninsula in 1912.

A giant volcanic mushroom cloud explodes some 20 kilometers high from Mount Pinatubo above almost deserted US Clark Air Base, on June 12, 1991

WHAT ARE SUBMARINE CABLES? A submarine communications cable is a cable laid on the sea bed between land-based stations. It is laid by specially designed ships that can carry thousands of miles of coiled cable in their holds and can lay it as it travels across the ocean. The first commercial cables were laid in 1850 to send telegraphy traffic. Since then the cables have been used to send telephone traffic, and most recently data traffic. Many of the modern cables are made of fibre optic. Trial cables were laid in 1842 in New York harbour and were insulated with tarred hemp and rubber. Nowadays, cables are protected using polyethylene. Traditionally the cables were owned by service providers, yet websites have also started buying submarine cables to control their networks including Google and Facebook. Advertisement

Pinatubo would have a global economic impact of around $740 million (£530 million) if it occurred in 2021.

So this is a good example of how a volcano can be described as catastrophic if it's closer to vital infrastructure, rather than measuring higher on the VEI.

The seven 'pinch point' areas identified by the experts – within which relatively small eruptions could inflict maximum global mayhem – also include the volcanic group on the northern tip of Taiwan.

Home to one of the largest producers of electronic chips, if this area – along with the Port of Taipei – was indefinitely incapacitated, the global tech industry could grind to a halt.

Eruptions in the US state of Washington in the Pacific Northwest, meanwhile, could trigger mudflows and ash clouds that blanket Seattle, shutting down airports and seaports.

A magnitude 6 eruption from Mount Rainier in Washington state could have potential economic losses of more than $7 trillion over the ensuing five years.

Also, highly active volcanic centres along the Indonesian archipelago – from Sumatra to Central Java – also line the Strait of Malacca, which is one of the busiest shipping passages in the world, with 40 per cent of global trade traversing the narrow route each year.

The Luzon Strait in the South China Sea, encircled by the Luzon Volcanic Arc, is another key shipping route,.

Researchers warn it's the crux of all the major submerged cabling that connects China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan and South Korea.

The eruption of Mount Pinatubo on June 15, 1991 was the second largest volcanic eruption of the twentieth century

Pictured: an active lava flow on Iceland's Mount Fagradalsfjall. Earlier in 2021, Fagradalsfjall erupted after lying dormant for 800 years

And plumes of ash from the volcanic region straddling the Chinese-North-Korean border would disrupt the busiest air routes in the east.

A reawakening of Icelandic volcanoes, including Eyjafjallajökull, would do the same in the west.

It was only in March this year that Iceland's Fagradalsfjall volcano erupted after lying dormant for 800 years. The event reached a VEI of just 2, according to the UN's Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System.

'Critical systems and infrastructures, such as shipping passages, submarine cables, and aerial transportation routes, are essential to sustain our societies and to ensure their continued development,' the team conclude in their paper.

'We observe that many of these critical infrastructures and networks converge in regions where they could be exposed to moderate-scale volcanic eruptions [with a VEI between 3 and 6].'

The study has been published today in the journal Nature Communications.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Whether it's a snap of your WiFi password or silly selfie, there are often times when we wish our photos and videos would quickly disappear from a chat.

Now, WhatsApp has launched a new Snapchat-like feature called View Once, which causes your photos and videos to 'self-destruct' once they've been opened.

The feature differs from the recently-launched 'Disappearing Messages' feature, which causes messages to disappear within seven days of being opened.

The Facebook-owned app hopes the new feature will make it easier and safer for users to send sensitive information.

If you don't see the feature yet, don't panic - WhatsApp says it will be rolling out to users worldwide by the end of this week.

Scroll down for video

WhatsApp has launched a new feature called View Once, which causes your photos and videos to 'self-destruct' once they've been opened

How to send a View Once photo or video 1. Open an individual or group chat 2. Tap 'Camera' to take a photo or video, or select one from your Albums 3. Tap '1' 4. Tap 'Send' You'll see an Opened receipt in the chat once the recipient has viewed the photo or video. Advertisement

WhatsApp announced the new feature in a blog today.

'While taking photos or videos on our phones has become such a big part of our lives, not everything we share needs to become a permanent digital record,' it explained.

'On many phones, simply taking a photo means it will take up space in your camera roll forever.

'That's why today we're rolling out new View Once photos and videos that disappear from the chat after they've been opened, giving users even more control over their privacy.'

As with all messages sent on WhatsApp, any View Once photos or videos will be protected by end-to-end encryption, ensuring only you and the person you're communicating with can read or listen to what is sent.

WhatsApp reassured: 'With end-to-end encryption, your messages are secured with a lock, and only the recipient and you have the special key needed to unlock and read them.'

View Once photos and videos will also be clearly marked with a new 'one-time' icon.

Several excited users have taken to Twitter to discuss the new feature, with one joking that some users are likely to use the feature to send saucy photos

Once the recipient has viewed the media, the message will appear as 'opened' to avoid any confusion about what was happening in the chat at the time.

And while standard photos and videos are automatically saved to the recipient's camera roll, WhatsApp reassures that View Once media will not be saved.

WhatsApp added: 'We're rolling out the feature to everyone starting this week and are looking forward to feedback on this new way to send private and disappearing media.'

As with all messages sent on WhatsApp, any View Once photos or videos will be protected by end-to-end encryption, ensuring only you and the person you're communicating with can read or listen to what is sent

Several excited users have taken to Twitter to discuss the new feature.

One user wrote: 'Really am loving this "view once" thing on WhatsApp,' while another added: 'view once option on whatsapp omg i'm gonna have fun with this.'

Meanwhile, another joked that some users are likely to use the feature to send saucy photos.

'Whatsapp added that view once feature for pictures. Nudes are going to move,' they wrote.

The View Once launch comes shortly after WhatsApp introduced 'disappearing messages', which vanish after seven days.

Either user can activate the feature for themselves, while in group conversations the admin user will have control.

'We're starting with seven days because we think it offers peace of mind that conversations aren't permanent,' a WhatsApp spokesperson said.

This can be done 'while remaining practical so you don't forget what you were chatting about,' they added.

'The shopping list or store address you received a few days ago will be there while you need it, and then disappear after you don't.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have created three more embryos to help save the functionally extinct northern white rhino, bringing the total to 12 embryos they have created so far.

The newest embryos were created after Fatu, who lives with her mother Najin on Kenya's 90,000-acre Ol Pejeta wildlife conservancy, provided eggs for them.

The sperm from two different deceased males was used to fertilize the eggs.

Scientists created three more embryos to help save the northern white rhino. The sperm came from two different deceased males

This group of three brings the total to 12 embryos created so far

The news, announced Thursday night, comes six months after researchers from the BioRescue team at the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research created five embryos using eggs from Fatu.

The first batch of embryos was created in 2019.

Fatu, right, and her mother Najin are the only two remaining northern white rhinos. Fatu provided the eggs for the embryos

In a press release, Biorescue described how the eggs were collected from Fatu in early July and then subsequently airlifted to a lab in Italy for fertilization, development and preservation.

WHY ARE WHITE RHINOS ON THE BRINK OF EXTINCTION? Northern white rhinos were once found in southern Chad, the Central African Republic, southwestern Sudan, northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, and northwestern Uganda, and as recently as 1960, there were more than 2,000 remaining, according to WWF. However, poaching has led to their extinction in the wild, with just two known individuals left. WWF explained: 'Uncontrolled hunting in the colonial era was historically the major factor in the decline of white rhinos. Today, poaching for the illegal trade in their horns is the major threat. 'Powdered horn is used in traditional Asian medicine as a supposed cure for a range of illnesses – from hangovers to fevers and even cancer.' Advertisement

Both Fatu and Najin are unable of carrying a calf to term, so surrogate mothers for the embryos will be selected from a population of southern white rhinos.

'During the recent procedures it was clear that Nájin's ovaries are no longer producing large number of eggs and that their quality is compromised,' said Jan Stejskal, Director of International Projects at Safari Park Dvůr Králové in the release.

'She is an old lady, and it seems it's not worth subjecting her to the stress of any further procedures. However, her health status will be frequently monitored.'

It is estimated there are around 18,000 southern white rhinos left in the world, with a status that is classified as 'near threatened,' according to the World Wildlife Fund.

Ol Pejeta director Richard Vigne told AFP on Friday that he believed in the project's chances of success, while emphasizing the high stakes.

'No one is going to pretend that this is going to be easy,' he said.

'We are doing things which are cutting-edge from a scientific perspective and we a dealing with genetics, with the two last northern white rhinos left on the planet,' said Vigne.

'There are many, many things that could go wrong,' he added.

'I think everybody understand the challenges that remain.'

Since 2019, Biorescue has collected 80 eggs from Najin and Fatu, but the 12 viable embryos all hail from the younger rhino.

A surrogate mother will be selected from a group of southern white rhinos

The project is a multi-national effort with scientists from the German Leibniz Institute backing the Kenya Wildlife Service and Ol Pejeta, and the Italian Avantea laboratory providing fertilization support.

Kenyan Tourism Minister Najib Balala welcomed the news.

'It is very encouraging to note that the project has continued to make good progress in its ambitious attempts to save an iconic species from extinction,' he said in the press release.

Since 2019, 80 eggs have been collected from Najin and Fatu, but the 12 embryos all come from Fatu

'With 12 pure northern white rhinoceros’ embryos so far developed, the project should now focus on the next steps of embryos transfer into the surrogate females at Ol Pejeta Conservancy for it to achieve its ultimate objective.'

Rhinoceroses have very few natural predators but their numbers have been decimated by poaching since the 1970s.

Modern rhinos have roamed the planet for 26 million years and it is estimated that more than a million still lived in the wild in the middle of the 19th century.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People who have got to the age of 100 – known as centenarians – can attribute their long life to an increased presence of unique bacteria in their gut, a study suggests.

Odoribacteraceae, a gram-negative family of bacteria, stops the growth of other more dangerous bacteria that cause disease by producing unique anti-microbial bile acids, report the authors.

In experiments, they found more Odoribacteraceae bacteria present in the guts of centenarians than people in their eighties, as well as much younger adults.

It may be possible to exploit the bile-acid-metabolising capabilities of these good bacteria for their health benefits.

In people over the age of 100, an increased presence of Odoribacteraceae can generate unique bile acids - and may contribute to longevity by inhibiting the growth of gut pathogens

WHAT IS THE GUT MADE OF? Living inside of your gut are 300 to 500 different kinds of bacteria containing nearly 2 million genes. Paired with other tiny organisms like viruses and fungi, they make what’s known as the microbiota. Like a fingerprint, each person's microbiota is unique: The mix of bacteria in your body is different from everyone else's mix. It’s determined partly by your mother’s microbiota - the environment that you’re exposed to at birth - and partly from your diet and lifestyle. The bacteria live throughout your body, but the ones in your gut may have the biggest impact on your well-being. They line your entire digestive system. Most live in your intestines and colon. There is evidence it affects everything from your metabolism to your mood to your immune system. Source: WebMD Advertisement

The Japanese team of experts don't know exactly why centenarians have more of the beneficial Odoribacteraceae bacteria, however.

'Perhaps genetic factors and diet have influenced on the composition of the gut microbiota,' study author Professor Kenya Honda, at Keio University School of Medicine in Tokyo, told MailOnline.

'These bugs could also be inherited but we don’t have any data indicating this possibility.'

It's also unknown if Odoribacteraceae is something we acquire more of once we reach 100, or if people with more Odoribacteraceae are more likely to reach 100.

What is known is that centenarians are less susceptible to age-related chronic diseases and infection than are elderly individuals below the age of 100.

It's thought that the composition of the gut microbiota in centenarians may be associated with extreme longevity, but the mechanisms have been unclear.

For the study, the experts analysed the microbiota – the trillion-strong community of microorganisms – of centenarians based on their stool samples.

Microbiota is also known as the microbiome – although this latter term includes the collective genomes of the microorganisms in a particular environment, as well as the microorganisms themselves.

To probe the potential link between microbiota composition and longevity, researchers studied three groups of Japanese people – 160 people aged 100 at least, 112 elderly individuals (aged between 85 and 89 years old) and 47 younger individuals (aged between 21 and 55 years old.

From the samples, they found centenarians were enriched in the gut microbes capable of generating the unique bile acid, compared with elderly and young individuals.

The bile acid, known as isoallo-lithocholic acid (isoalloLCA), has already been shown to have antimicrobial effects against a range of gut pathogens.

IsoalloLCA showed 'potent' antimicrobial effects against pathogens that are resistant to drugs, including Clostridioides difcile and Enterococcus faecium, the researchers found.

Artist's impression of the microbiota - the trillion-strong community of microorganisms that's inside us all (stock image)

C. difficile is a bacterium that can cause severe diarrhoea, especially in people who are being treated with antibiotics.

The NHS describes C. difficile infections as 'unpleasant' and says they can sometimes cause serious bowel problems.

Experiments in mice have also already suggested that isoalloLCA can inhibit the growth of C. difficile.

E. faecium, meanwhile, has an 'inherent tenacity to build resistance to antibiotics and environmental stressors' that allows it to thrive in hospital environments, according to a 2020 study.

It has the ability to cause infections of the bloodstream, urinary tract infections (UTI) and wound infections.

While it may be possible to exploit the bile-acid-metabolising capabilities of bacterial strains identified to manipulate the bile acid for health benefits, further studies are needed to validate the link between bile acids and longevity.

'Our findings show an association between Odoribacteriaceae and centenarians,' said Professor Honda.

'Although it might suggest that these bile-acid-producing bacteria may contribute to longer lifespans, we do not have any data showing the cause and effect relationship between them.'

The study has been published today in the journal Nature.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A star more than 4,000 light years away has gone through such an epic eruption that it is currently visible with the naked eye from Earth, astronomers said.

Located in the constellation of Ophiuchus, the star's eruption has seen it go from being 12th magnitude object, to 4.8 magnitude on the scale used by astronomers to determine how visible something will be when viewed from Earth.

The naked eye limit for humans is magnitude 6.5, but this can vary depending on light pollution levels and can be as low as 4.6 magnitude in a big city.

The erupting star, RS Ophiuchi is a rare type of stellar phenomenon as we have only discovered 10 in the Milky Way so far, out of 100,000 million stars in our galaxy.

Viewing it with the naked eye will likely require you to be in a low light pollution area, and it will be visible due south after dawn for up to two months, astronomers say.

A star more than 4,000 light years away has gone through such an epic eruption that it is currently visible with the naked eye from Earth, astronomers said

This artist rendering depicts the RS Ophiuchi binary system shortly after the white dwarf (right) has exploded as a nova. The other star is a red giant

RS OPHIUCHI: BINARY STAR SYSTEM WITH AN EXPLOSIVE NATURE RS Ophiuchi is a binary star system about 4,566 light years from Earth. One star in the pairing is a red giant and the other the core of a dead star known as a white dwarf. They orbit each other every 454 days with hydrogen being siphoned from the red giant on to the white dwarf. The binary pair, due to this close orbital period, is a recurrent nova variable type with explosions every 15 years or so due to build up of hydrogen on the white dwarf surface. Eventually the white dwarf will explode in a Type 1a supernova, spelling the end of the binary pair. Name : RS Ophiuchi

: RS Ophiuchi Type : White dwarf, red giant

: White dwarf, red giant Variable : Recurrent nova

: Recurrent nova Distance : 3,900 – 6,500 ly

: 3,900 – 6,500 ly Constellation : Ophiuchus

: Ophiuchus Right ascension : 17h 50m 13.2s

: 17h 50m 13.2s Declination : −06° 42′ 28″

: −06° 42′ 28″ Apparent magnitude : 9.6 - 13.5 (quiet), 4.5 (nova) Advertisement

It is known as a recurrent nova type object and goes off about once every 15 years, with the last in 2006 and the latest detected on August 8, 2021 by Irish amateur astronomer Keith Geary.

As it is 4,566 light years away from the Earth the explosion actually happened 4,566 years ago - it just took that long for the light to reach us.

The regular and repeated novae is the result of the fact RS Ophiuchi being a binary star - a white dwarf in a close orbit with a red giant.

Hydrogen is being regularly siphoned from the red giant on to the surface of the smaller, but much denser white dwarf - the stellar remnant of a near dead star.

A white dwarf has a mass similar to that of the Sun but with a volume hundreds of times smaller, similar to that of the Earth.

Hydrogen builds up on the surface of the white dwarf and after about 15 years it triggers a thermonuclear explosion, violently sending excess material out into space and generating a nova.

The most extreme of these cause the star system to become significantly brighter.

In this case it becomes visible with the naked eye when viewed from the Earth, despite being more than 4,500 light years away from our world.

It is such an intense event that the material being flung from the surface of the white dwarf star travels at 5.8 million miles per hour.

Observations of the outburst have been shared from around the world.

It was also confirmed by the Fermi Gamma Ray Telescope, that spotted a gamma-ray source at the time and location of the explosion.

Over time these regular novas will stop - probably in about 100,000 years - as enough mass will be accumulated by the red dwarf that it will reach critical mass.

The star will fall 'just' within the visible range when viewing without a telescope or binoculars at 4.6 magnitude

Recurrent Nova RS Ophiuchi is currently in outburst at magnitude +4.5/+5.0 over the past weekend... the last outburst was 2006. Look for the novae due south at dusk. More to come! pic.twitter.com/m63Ey7dV7P — Dave Dickinson (@Astroguyz) August 9, 2021

This threshold is called the Chandrasekhar limit. This is where it becomes unstable, explodes in a type 1a supernova and spells the end of the binary pair.

In the meantime though, we are witnessing another, if larger than usual, nova event - not the big one.

Based on previous observations after the rapid burst of brightness, which started on August 8, it will gradually fade over the next two months.

It will finish up at its usual 12th magnitude apparent magnitude, which will require a large telescope to view, rather than with the naked eye.

Radio map and measurements of the outburst of the binary system RS Ophiuchi in 2006

It will be another 15 to 20 years before it builds up enough material for another nova explosion, so around the mid 2030s.

The first recorded nova from RS Ophiuchi was in 1898 and they have been consistently happening every 15 to 20 years since then.

The last one saw a 21 year gap - from 1985 to 2006, so it could be longer than 20 years before we see the next, or it could happen in as little as a decade.

The longest recorded gap between explosions was 26 years from 1907 to 1933, although the 1907 outburst was not observed during the event itself, rather from a dip in brightness seen in archive observations.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A new material inspired by chain mail used in armour worn by medieval knights could be used to create spacesuits of the future, according to its developers.

The material can hold over 30 times its own weight while also being flexible, and was created by experts from the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.

As well as helping astronauts walk on Mars in the future, the 3D printed material may also cover the spacecraft - shielding it from meteorites and other deep space perils.

More down to Earth, it offers extra protection for sports men and women due to its ability to turn from soft and bendable to rigid and back again.

The hi-tech garment also opens the door to a smart exoskeleton that enables paralysed people to walk again, or could provide armour for modern soldiers.

The team hasn't said how much the 3D printed material will cost or even when it will be available for use commercially or in spacecraft.

A new material inspired by chain mail used in armour worn by medieval knights could be used to create spacesuits of the future, according to its developers. Stock image

As well as helping astronauts walk on Mars in the future, the 3D printed material may also cover the spacecraft - shielding it from meteorites and other deep space perils

HOW IT WORKS: 3D PRINTED CHAIN MAIL-INSPIRED MATERIAL Structured fabrics, such as woven sheets or chain mail , derive their properties both from the constitutive materials and their geometry. Their design can target desirable characteristics, such as high impact resistance, thermal regulation, or electrical conductivity. Once realised, however, the fabrics’ properties are usually fixed. This material is a structured fabric with tunable bending modulus, consisting of three-dimensional particles arranged into layered chain mails. The chain mails conform to complex shapes, but when pressure is exerted at their boundaries, the particles interlock and the chain mails jam. 'We show that, with small external pressure (about 93 kilopascals), the sheets become more than 25 times stiffer than in their relaxed configuration,' the team wrote. 'This dramatic increase in bending resistance arises because the interlocking particles have high tensile resistance, unlike what is found for loose granular media.' 'Our work provides routes towards lightweight, tunable and adaptive fabrics, with potential applications in wearable exoskeletons, haptic architectures and reconfigurable medical supports.' Advertisement

Traditional chain mail, as worn by knights in the medieval-era, is made up of a series of linked metal rings.

When put together they are designed to be firm and strong but also pliable, so they can be worn on the body.

It cushioned warriors from arrows and blows from swords, axes, maces and other weapons, while snuggly draping round their body.

The new textile, created in California, is made from plastics rather than fibres or metal, and switches between rigid and soft states as necessary.

Project leader Professor Chiara Daraio says the material is tunable.

'Stiffness changing material may be used in space applications,' he said.

'Indeed, one of our co-authors Dr Doug Hofmann is from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

'We think fabrics that can change stiffness on command could be very useful in deployable structures that change shape and size - as protective layers.'

Such devices are used in solar panels and sails on spacecraft.

'When fabricated at different scales, or with different constitutive materials, they could be used as either protective wearables or for emergency shelters,' said Daraio.

In tests, when any pressure was exerted the layers of interlocked particles underwent a phenomenon known as 'jamming transition'.

This profoundly altered the mechanical make-up, transforming the hollow shells from floppy to hard, according to Daraio, who said it could be useful in a range of robotic and medical applications in the future.

The US team 3D printed the chain mail, in which each link was constructed from connecting struts and then put in a sealed plastic bag and pumped out the air.

When the air was removed the resulting pressure increased stiffness by a factor of more than 25, the team discovered.

The team hasn't said how much the 3D printed material will cost or even when it will be available for use commercially or in spacecraft

The 3D printed material may also cover the spacecraft - shielding it from meteorites and other perils. It offers extra protection for sports men and women too - and even today's soldiers

The material described in Nature offers hope of immensely hardy clothes or exoskeletons that conform to the human body and can be used to make lifting heavy objects easier and safer

Professor Daraio said that in its native state the fabric is flexible and can be draped over complex objects like any other fabric, such as a human body.

'When it is compressed, the interlinked particles become jammed together, making the fabric around 25 times stiffer than in its relaxed configuration,' he said.

'The resulting structure can hold loads over 30 times its own weight.'

The material described in Nature offers hope of immensely hardy clothes or exoskeletons that conform to the human body and can be used to make lifting heavy objects easier and safer.

It can also form complex architectures that are then locked in place, without the need to switch back to being flexible.

One example of where this can be used is on spacecraft travelling to another planet and in need of protection from asteroids and space debris.

NASA is investigating a range of hi-tech fabrics it hopes can be used to protect spacecrafts and astronauts.

One use for this will be during crewed missions to Mars in the 2030s and 40s.

It could also be used on probes searching for life on Jupiter's icy moon Europa and other alien worlds where the environment is intense.

More down to Earth, It offers extra protection for sports men and women due to its ability to turn from soft and bendable to rigid and back again

The material can hold over 30 times its own weight while also being flexible was created by experts from the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena

Prof Caraio said the work provides the first steps towards a material that is both lightweight and tunable, as well as being protective.

He said the adaptive fabrics created from this research will have a wide range of potential applications.

These will be seen in the form of wearable exoskeletons, haptic architectures and reconfigurable medical supports.

Dr Laurent Orgeas, a mechanical engineer at Grenoble Alpes University in France, who was not involved in the study, said it has many potential applications.

The team haven't said how much the 3D printed material will cost or even when it will be available for use commercially or in spacecraft

The new textile, created in California, is made from plastics rather than fibres or metal, and switches between rigid and soft states as necessary

He said: 'A chain mail could conceivably be draped into multiple configurations before being 'jammed' into a chosen static shape that has load-bearing capabilities such as an exoskeleton for biomedical, sport or military applications.

'Chain mails could also be useful in civil or mechanical engineering as deployable structures that alter their size - for example, to create a temporary shelter or bridge.'

Dr Orgeas added: 'The use of AI (artificial intelligence) algorithms might be an attractive approach to optimise the geometry of the links for targeted combinations of flexibility, jamming behaviour and load-bearing capabilities.'

The findings have been published in the journal Nature.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From Shakira to Olivia Rodrigo, and Robbie Williams to Piers Morgan, Google has revealed how our internet searches have changed over the past 15 years.

The tech giant shared a comparison between 2006 and today of the top celebrities, song lyrics, recipes and places to travel that people have Googled.

Nelly Furtado's Maneater, Ne-Yo's Sexy Love and Rihanna's Unfaithful were all popular terms for karaoke fans more than a decade ago, while England's run to the final of Euro 2020 played a big part in the song searches of Britons last month.

Google shared the comparisons in celebration of the 15th anniversary of its Google Trends tool, which was launched in 2006 to provide journalists, scholars, researchers and the general public with an insight into cultural and societal trends around the world.

Scroll down for video

From Shakira (pictured left) to Olivia Rodrigo (right), Google has revealed how our internet searches have changed over the past 15 years

HOW TODAY'S GOOGLE SEARCHES IN THE UK COMPARE TO THOSE IN 2006 Category July 2006 July 2021 Celebrities Lily Allen

Johnny Depp

Syd Barrett

Christina Aguilera

Robbie Williams Britney Spears

Jadon Sancho

Florence Pugh

Tom Cruise

Piers Morgan Song lyrics Unfaithful (Rihanna)

Smile (Lily Allen)

Buttons (Pussycat Dolls)

Sexy Love (Ne-Yo)

Maneater (Nelly Furtado) Sweet Caroline (Neil Diamond)

Three Lions (Baddiel & Skinner)

Bad Habits (Ed Sheeran)

Vindaloo (Fat Les)

Traitor (Olivia Rodrigo) Exercises Stomach exercises

Toning exercises

Circuit training

Pilates exercises

Cross training Hiit workout

Pelvic floor exercises

Plantar fasciitis exercises

Kettlebell workout

Back exercises Sporting events WWE

World Cup

Wimbledon

Tour de France

F1 Wimbledon

F1

Copa America

Euros

Olympics

In July 2006, the top celebrity searches by Britons were for actor Johnny Depp, pop stars Lily Allen, Robbie Williams, and Christina Aguilera, and Pink Floyd founder Syd Barrett, who died aged 60 that month.

By comparison, last month the most popular celebrities in internet searches were Britney Spears, Tom Cruise, actress Florence Pugh, Piers Morgan and England and Manchester United footballer Jadon Sancho.

When it comes to sporting events, Formula 1 and Wimbledon were both top searches this summer and 15 years ago, but while WWE and the Tour de France featured in 2006, they dropped out of the top five in 2021.

In July 2006, Johnny Depp, Robbie Williams, Christina Aguilera and Lily Allen (pictured) were the top celebrity searches by Britons

HOW TODAY'S GOOGLE SEARCHES WORLDWIDE COMPARE TO THOSE IN 2006 Category July 2006 July 2021 People Zinedine Zidane

Shakira

Paris Hilton

Cristiano Ronaldo

John Lewis Lionel Messi

Conor McGregor

Olivia Rodrigo

Roger Federer

Matteo Berrettini Recipes Chicken

Banana bread

Mojito

Pancake

Sangria Banana bread

हलवे की रेसिपी (halwa recipe)

Pancake

きゅうり レシピ (cucumber recipe)

Resep nasi goreng Places to travel Las Vegas

Barcelona

Dubai

Niagara Falls

Italy Barcelona

Brazil

Dubai

Maldives

Bali Games Tetris

跑 跑 卡丁车 (Run Go Kart)

Rockstar Supernova

Grand Theft Auto

劲舞 团 (Audition - Japanese game) Genshin Impact

Sonic

로 블록 스 (Roblox)

FIFA 22

ポケモン go (Pokemon Go)

That was likely due in part to the Olympics — which unusually took place this year because of a delay caused by the coronavirus pandemic.

It was not an Olympic year in 2006, so it was not a top search term then, while for football fans there was also a World Cup rather than last month's Euros.

Copa America was also in the top five sporting event searches by Britons in 2021 along with the Euros.

Google shared the comparisons in celebration of the 15th anniversary of its Google Trends tool, which was launched in 2006 to provide journalists, scholars, researchers and the general public with an insight into cultural and societal trends around the world

Top searches in 2020 How to make a face mask?

How to make hand sanitizer?

How to make bread?

Coronavirus

US election

Caroline Flack

Coronavirus symptoms

Afternoon tea delivery

Wine delivery

KFC recipe

IKEA meatball recipe

Joe Wicks kids workout

Phillip Schofield

Carole Baskin

Joe Exotic

Love Island

Dennis Nilsen

Sean Connery

What is VE day?

What is coronavirus?

What tier am I in?

What does woke mean?

What does furlough mean? Advertisement

When comparing fitness regimes, stomach exercises, cross training and Pilates were all popular search terms 15 years ago, replaced by Hiit workouts, pelvic floor exercises and kettlebell workouts today.

On a global scale, in July 2006 people were searching for Las Vegas, Barcelona, Dubai, Italy and Niagara Falls as places to travel.

But although Barcelona and Dubai featured on the list 15 years later, this time they were joined by Brazil, Bali and the Maldives as Google users across the world looked to exotic climes for their holidays.

When it comes to famous people, Shakira, Paris Hilton and French footballer Zinedine Zidane were all among the top global searches in July 2006, while in July 2021 they had been replaced by the likes of Olivia Rodrigo, Lionel Messi and Roger Federer.

Tetris and Grand Theft Auto were in the top five most searched for video games 15 years ago, while today they have been replaced by Sonic, Pokemon Go and FIFA 22.

Last year Google's list of the 'big hitter' search terms for 2020 by tech users in the UK was, unsurprisingly, dominated by coronavirus.

From the search for symptoms and pandemic updates to the Eat Out To Help Out scheme, it represented four of the top ten searches.

Those looking for 'How to' answers to cope during lockdown lodged millions of questions around making face masks and hand sanitiser.

The third most asked question involved how to make bread, which explains the shortage of flour in supermarkets during the crisis, while millions sought advice on hair cutting and styling at home.

With government advice to stay inside apart from essential trips, many saw online sessions by the nation's PE teacher, Joe Wicks, as a lifeline.

For fitness, the top two searches were for 'Joe Wicks kids workout' and 'Joe Wicks workout'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

One of the most spectacular meteor showers of the year reached its peak on Thursday evening, with up to 40 shooting stars visible every hour in some areas.

Skywatchers across the UK had less of a show, with parts of the country covered in blanket cloud, and light pollution making fewer shooting stars visible in other areas.

The shower takes place when the Earth ploughs through debris left behind by the Swift-Tuttle Comet during its trips through the inner solar system.

Posting to UK Astronomy groups on social media, British skywatchers reported seeing between two and 20 shooting stars per hour in various parts of the country.

Also known as the 'fiery tears of Saint Lawrence', it was visible both north and south of the equator, with sensational images of the space rocks being shared from Russia, Spain, Macedonia, US and the UK.

NASA has warned that we may not get another 'good' view of the Perseid meteor shower until 2024.

'With a full Moon (and lower meteor activity) during the Perseids’ peak in 2022 and a waning crescent high in the sky for 2023, this might [have been] your best chance to do some summer skywatching for a few years.'

Scroll down for video

Twitter user Mary McIntyre captured this shooting star over Oxfordshire, UK on Thursday night while running two cameras to capture as much of the Perseids meteor shower as possible

A view of the Perseid meteor shower over the Church of St Paraskevi of Iconium in the village of Russkoye Khodyashevo in Russia's Republic of Tatarstan

A shooting star seen from the sanctuary of the Virgen de las Nieves more than 2,600 meters above sea level on August 12, 2021 in Sierra Nevada, Spain

Sam Binding captured this stunning image of a meteor flying over Stonehenge. He said there was a 'bucketload of mist arriving, which created the otherworldly starlight (Jupiterlight)' visible in the image

WHERE DO METEORS COME FROM? Meteors come from leftover comet particles and bits from broken asteroids. When comets come around the sun, they leave a dusty trail behind them. Every year Earth passes through these debris trails, letting the bits collide with our atmosphere and disintegrate, creating fiery streaks in the sky. Source: NASA Advertisement

Light pollution and cloud cover are the two biggest issues skywatchers face when staying out overnight to watch for shooting stars.

It means that rather than see the 40 per hour predicted, many will only be able to view a small handful of meteors.

The quality of the show from a meteor shower depends on a number of factors and can vary dramatically year-by-year, according to NASA, with light pollution having a major impact.

Bill Cooke from the US space agency said the Perseids have a theoretical maximum of 100 per hour, but in reality many people will see far fewer.

'In the 1980s, meteor researchers were searching for a way to compare the meteor shower rates observed by various individuals and groups across the globe,' he said.

The rate published each year, in this case 40 per hour, known as the Zenithal Hourly Rate, is based on what the perfect observer would see under perfect skies if it was straight ahead. That never happens, said Cooke.

Conditions in the area, such as light pollution levels, cloud cover and the position of the radiant of the shower, all play a part in the true number visible per hour.

As well as capturing a picture of a shooting star from the Perseids meteor shower, Twitter user Mary McIntyre also photographed an explosive star in the form of Kappa Cygnid, seen next to Jupiter in this image

Perseid meteor shower at Tres Mares peak, in Cantabria, northern Spain. One of the most spectacular meteor showers of the year reached its peak on Thursday evening, with up to 40 shooting stars visible every hour in some areas

A Perseid meteor streaks across the night sky over Izmir, Turkey on August 13, 2021. The shower takes place when the Earth ploughs through debris left behind by the Swift-Tuttle Comet during its trips through the inner solar system

A double one on camera!!! #Perseids

(and two shorter, but colourful ones).

They all emerge from a bit below Cassiopeia, so most likely this was indeed the end for some Swift-Tuttle leftovers... pic.twitter.com/gmYVybusT1 — Philippe Smet (@pfsmet) August 13, 2021

In the UK and US countryside, with clear skies and no cloud, you could expect to see about 40 per hour, or one every couple of minutes, but it is likely to be less.

Even in the best conditions, the quality of the shower can also depend on the phase of the moon and even your own eyesight.

In an area of higher light pollution it will drop to about 10 or less per hour, and in a city such as London it will drop to one or two at most.

A Perseid meteor streaks above a sandstone outcropping at Redstone in the Pinto Valley wilderness area on August 12, 2021 in the Lake Mead National Recreation Area, Nevada

In this 30 second cameras exposure, a meteor streaks across the sky during the annual Perseid meteor shower, Wednesday, Aug. 11, 2021, in Spruce Knob, West Virginia

This is why astronomers recommend those wanting to catch a glimpse of a meteor shower to find somewhere away from the lights of towns, cities, buildings and trees, and where there is a clear view of the horizon.

At this year's peak, the moon was in a thin crescent phase, creating perfect viewing conditions without interference from moonlight because it will only be at about 20 per cent illumination.

A Perseid meteor streaks across the night sky over Izmir, Turkey. Posting to UK Astronomy groups on social media, British skywatchers reported seeing between two and 20 shooting stars per hour in various parts of the country

Perseid meteorites streak over the stone dools near the village of Kuklica in the municipality of Kratovo, Northern Macedonia, an area of naturally formed stone pillars that resemble humans

WHAT IS THE SWIFT-TUTTLE COMET? The pieces of space debris that interact with our atmosphere to create the popular Perseids meteor shower originate from Swift-Tuttle. This annual meteor shower takes place each August, and peaks mid-month. It was Giovanni Schiaparelli who realised in 1865 that this comet was the source of the Perseids. Comet Swift-Tuttle was discovered in 1862 independently by both Lewis Swift and Horace Tuttle. Swift-Tuttle is a large comet – its nucleus is 16 miles (26 kilometers) across – and it last passed near Earth in 1992. Source: NASA Advertisement

The Perseids actually started in mid-July, reaching their full illumination on Thursday when the Earth passes through the bulk of the debris.

When comets travel close to the sun, they heat up and disintegrate. If this happens in Earth's path around the sun, they can head towards our atmosphere at high speeds.

The superheated air around the meteors glows and leaves behind trails of light and explosions in the form of fireballs.

The Swift-Tuttle Comet, which causes the Perseids, spans 16-miles wide and is formed of ice and rock.

It ploughs through our Solar System once every 133 years, with the last pass in 1992.

The comet will come within one million miles of Earth on August 5, 2126 and August 24, 2261.

The name 'Perseids meteor shower' comes from the fact meteors appear to shoot out from the Perseus constellation – the 24th largest constellation in the sky.

The event is best for viewing in the Northern Hemisphere, according to Dr Massey.

'The radiant for the Perseids – the point in the sky the meteors appear to come from – is in Perseus, and high in the Northern Hemisphere of the sky,' he said.

'It's 58 degrees north of the celestial equator, which means it would be overhead from 58 degrees north (the latitude of places like Ullapool in Scotland).

'This also means the radiant never rises for places south of 32 degrees south, so the southernmost parts of Australia, and much of Argentina and Chile.

Milky way during Perseid meteor shower at Tres Mares peak, in Cantabria, northern Spain. NASA has warned that due to a variety of reasons we may not get another 'good' view of the Perseids meteor shower until 2024

Perseid meteorites streak over the stone dools near the village of Kuklica in the municipality of Kratovo, Northern Macedonia. Light pollution and cloud cover are the two biggest issues skywatchers face when staying out overnight to watch for shooting stars

A shooting star and the Milky Way seen from the sanctuary of the Virgen de las Nieves more than 2,600 meters above sea level. The quality of the show from a meteor shower depends on a number of factors and can vary dramatically year-by-year, according to NASA, with light pollution having a major impact

'The upshot is that the Northern Hemisphere has the best potential view, as the radiant is higher in the sky and visible for longer, so in theory more meteors are visible.

'As you move further south the number declines, and south of 32 degrees south essentially none are seen.'

The sparkling show is set to continue over the Northern Hemisphere for a few days after the peak with reduced activity. .

The next major meteor shower will be the Draconids in October, although it tends to be a less active shower than the Perseids.

Several shooting stars next to the Milky Way seen from the sanctuary of the Virgen de las Nieves in Sierra Nevada, Spain. The Perseids actually started in mid-July, reaching their full illumination on Thursday when the Earth passes through the bulk of the debris

View of a Perseid meteor shower in the Tatra Mountains, southern Poland, 13 August 2021. The name 'Perseids meteor shower' comes from the fact meteors appear to shoot out from the Perseus constellation – the 24th largest constellation in the sky
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The US government will formally investigate Tesla's Autopilot partially automated driving system over 11 accidents - one deadly - feared to have been caused because the system has trouble spotting parked emergency vehicles.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said the investigation covers 765,000 vehicles, nearly everything Tesla has sold domestically since 2014. Of the 11 crashes that have been identified over the past three years, 17 people were injured and one was killed.

That deadly accident happened in Interstate 70 in Cloverdale, Indiana, in December 2019 and saw passenger Jenna Monet, 23, killed after the Tesla being driven by her husband Derrick slammed into the back of a parked firetruck.

In December 2019 Jenna Monet, 23, (pictured) was killed after the Tesla being driven by her husband Derrick slammed into the back of a parked firetruck

The 11 crashes have occurred when Teslas on Autopilot or Traffic Aware Cruise Control hit vehicles at scenes where first responders have used flashing lights, flares, an illuminated arrow board or cones warning of hazards.

The NHTSA is formal investigating Tesla's Autopilot, saying it has trouble spotting parked emergency vehicles, resulting in 11 accidents since 2018. The investigation covers 765,000 vehicles, nearly everything Tesla has sold domestically since 2014. In the 11 crashes identified, 17 people were injured and one was killed

Scroll down for videos

Shares of Tesla fell more nearly 4.5 percent to $685.20 in early Monday trading on back of the news

Shares of Tesla fell more nearly 4.5 percent to $685.20 in early Monday trading on back of the news.

The NHTSA said the investigation covers the entire product lineup of the Elon Musk-led company, the Models Y, X, S and 3 from the 2014 through 2021 model years.

The assisted driving system has frequently been misused by Tesla drivers, some of whom have been caught driving drunk or riding in the rear passenger seat while driving down a California highway.

In May 2018, Tesla sedan in Autopilot mode crashed into a parked police cruiser in Laguna Beach. Laguna Beach Police Sgt. Jim Cota said the officer was not in the cruiser and the Tesla driver suffered minor injuries

How does Tesla's Autopilot work? Autopilot uses cameras, ultrasonic sensors and radar to see and sense the environment around the car. The sensor and camera suite provides drivers with an awareness of their surroundings that a driver alone would not otherwise have. A powerful onboard computer processes these inputs in a matter of milliseconds to help what the company say makes driving 'safer and less stressful.' Autopilot is a hands-on driver assistance system that is intended to be used only with a fully attentive driver. It does not turn a Tesla into a self-driving car nor does it make a car autonomous. Before enabling Autopilot, driver must agree to 'keep your hands on the steering wheel at all times' and to always 'maintain control and responsibility for your car.' Once engaged, if insufficient torque is applied, Autopilot will also deliver an escalating series of visual and audio warnings, reminding drivers to place their hands on the wheel. If drivers repeatedly ignore the warnings, they are locked out from using Autopilot during that trip. Any of Autopilot's features can be overridden at any time by steering or applying the brakes. The Autopilot does not function well in poor visibility. Advertisement

Since June 2016, the NHTSA has investigated 31 crashes related to partially automated driver assist systems. These systems are designed to keep a vehicle centered in its lane and a safe distance from vehicles in front of it. Of the 31 crashes, 25 involved Tesla Autopilot, resulting in 10 deaths, according to data released by the NHTSA.

In April, Musk tweeted Teslas with Autopilot engaged were 'approaching 10 times lower chance of accident than average vehicle.'

Tesla and other manufacturers warn that drivers using the systems must be ready to intervene at all times. Teslas using the system have crashed into semis crossing in front of them, stopped emergency vehicles and a roadway barrier.

Musk has not yet responded to an inquiry from DailyMail.com.

Tesla has disbanded its traditional media relations office.

The crashes into emergency vehicles cited by NHTSA began on Jan. 22, 2018 in Culver City, California, near Los Angeles.

That sawa Tesla using Autopilot struck a parked firetruck that was parked partially in the travel lanes with its lights flashing. Crews were handling another crash at the time.

Since then, the agency said there were crashes in Laguna Beach, California; Norwalk, Connecticut; Cloverdale, Indiana; West Bridgewater, Massachusetts; Cochise County, Arizona; Charlotte, North Carolina, Montgomery County, Texas; Lansing, Michigan; and Miami, Florida.

'The investigation will assess the technologies and methods used to monitor, assist and enforce the driver's engagement with the dynamic driving task during Autopilot operation,' NHTSA said in its investigation documents.

A 2018 Tesla Model 3 on Interstate 95 in Norwalk, Connecticut using the Autopilot driver assistance system rear-ended a parked police car, pictured

A 2019 Tesla on Interstate 70 in Cloverdale, Indiana hit the back of a parked firetruck

A Tesla on autopilot crashed into a Michigan State Police car in March 2021. Troopers from the Lansing Post had been investigating a crash involving a car and a deer on I-96 near Waverly Rd in Eaton County

A Tesla driving in Arlington, Washington hit a police vehicle that resulted in 'significant damage' to the police car. There were no injuries reported from the incident

Tesla with Autopilot engaged now approaching 10 times lower chance of accident than average vehicle https://t.co/6lGy52wVhC — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) April 17, 2021

In addition, the probe will cover object and event detection by the system, as well as where it is allowed to operate. NHTSA says it will examine 'contributing circumstances' to the crashes, as well as similar crashes.

An investigation could lead to a recall or other enforcement action by NHTSA.

The National Transportation Safety Board, which also has investigated some of the Tesla crashes, has recommended that NHTSA and Tesla limit Autopilot´s use to areas where it can safely operate. The NTSB also recommended that NHTSA require Tesla to have a better system to make sure drivers are paying attention. NHTSA has not taken action on any of the recommendations.

In June, the NHTSA said it was looking into 30 Tesla crashes that resulted in 10 deaths linked to its assisted driver system, including a fiery April 17 crash that killed two men in Texas.

Separately that month, the US agency ordered all automakers to report any crashes involving fully autonomous vehicles or partially automated driver assist systems.

The measures show the agency has started to take a tougher stance on automated vehicle safety than in the past. It has been reluctant to issue any regulations of the new technology for fear of hampering adoption of the potentially life-saving systems.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Facebook has removed hundreds of accounts linked to a mysterious advertising agency emanating from Russia that tried to pay social media influencers to smear COVID-19 vaccines made by Pfizer and AstraZeneca, the social network said on Tuesday.

A network of 65 Facebook accounts and 243 Instagram accounts was traced back to Fazze, an advertising and marketing firm registered in the UK.

Facebook said Fazze's work was primarily done from Russia on behalf of an unknown client.

DailyMail.com has reached out to Facebook for further information. Attempts to reach Fazze at a phone number in London were unsuccessful.

According to Nathaniel Gleicher, Facebook's head of security policy, the network created fake accounts to spread rumors contradicting the safety of both Pfizer-BioNTech and AstraZeneca's vaccines, with one claiming that AstraZeneca's shot would turn a person into a chimpanzee.

Facebook has removed hundreds of accounts linked to a disinformation network operating out of Russia that sought to smear COVID-19 vaccines made by Pfizer and AstraZeneca. The company said Tuesday, Aug. 10 that it has banned the advertising firm behind the campaign, which had offered to pay social media influencers in Europe if they posted their misleading content

Other accounts went after audiences in India, Latin America and, to a lesser extent, the US, utilizing multiple social media platforms, including Facebook and Instagram.

Russia and President Vladimir Putin have been actively marketing its COVID-19 vaccine, Sputnik V, to other countries for geopolitical purposes, but Facebook did not speculate on a reason for the smear campaign.

On Monday, the Sydney Morning Herald reported Sputnik is authorized in 69 countries and it is being used in Serbia and Hungary, while countries such as India and South Korea have signed deals to make it.

There are other instances of countries, such as Iran and Mexico, who have signed deals to get the vaccine, but have yet to receive the millions of doses promised.

In January, the Kremlin aimed to get 60 percent of its population vaccinated by autumn 2021, but last month, said it would fall short of that goal

In January, the Kremlin aimed to get 60 percent of its population vaccinated by autumn 2021, but last month, said it would fall short of that goal.

The vaccine was granted emergency approval in August 2020, despite the fact that data from its phase one and phase two trials had not yet been published.

Russia and President Vladimir Putin have been actively marketing its COVID-19 vaccine, Sputnik V, to other countries for geopolitical purposes

In June, Putin said during his annual televised phone-in that he was vaccinated with Sputnik V in a two-dose shot in March and April, though no images of him getting it were released, leading to speculation he may have had been jabbed with another vaccine or not at all.

He also took a swipe at other vaccines during the conversation, specifically calling out AstraZeneca and Pfizer by name.

'As you can see, everything is in order, and thank God we don't have such tragic situations after vaccinations like AstraZeneca or Pfizer,' he said at the time.

In June, Putin took a swipe at other vaccines during the conversation, specifically calling out AstraZeneca and Pfizer by name

As far back as May, several social media influencers across the globe, including French YouTuber Léo Grasset, who also goes by Dirty Biology, who has over 1.2 million subscribers, tweeted about the tactics put forth by the Fazze network.

'It's strange,' Grasset tweeted at the time. 'I received a partnership proposal which consists of breaking down the Pfizer vaccine on video. Colossal budget, client who wants to remain incognito and you have to hide the sponsorship.'

Influencers in other countries, such as Germany, also exposed the offer.

The anti-smear campaign continued in July, following a report from the Network Contagion Research Institute, DailyMail.com reported.

Fazze's effort did not get much traction online, with some posts failing to get even a single response. But, while the campaign may have fizzled, it's noteworthy because of its effort to enlist social media influencers, according to Gleicher.

'Although it was sloppy and didn't have very good reach, it was an elaborate set up,' Gleicher said on a conference call.

As social media companies have improved their ability to spot and remove fake accounts, disinformation campaigns have had to adjust. Paying social media influencers to repost their content provides the potential of exposure to the influencer's audience, but there's the risk that social media influencers will refuse or, as happened in this case, call them out.

Facebook investigators say some influencers did post the material, but later deleted it when stories about Fazze's work began to emerge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have been baffled by Jupiter's 'energy crisis' for 50 years, the idea that a planet that far from the sun should be about 163 degrees Fahrenheit, yet the gas giant's atmosphere is 798 degrees Fahrenheit.

To solve this mystery, scientists at the University of Leicester, along with NASA, created heat maps of Jupiter and found intense auroras are driving the extreme temperatures, despite only covering less than 10 percent of the planet.

Charged particles that escape from Jupiter's volcanic moon Io are captured by the planet's magnetic field, which in turn produces ultraviolet auroras.

Models of the atmosphere's of gas giants suggest that the auroras work like a giant refrigerator, with heat energy drawn from the equator towards the pole that is released in the lower atmosphere throughout pole regions.

These new findings suggest that fast-changing aurorae may drive waves of energy against this poleward flow, allowing heat to reach the equator.

Scroll down for video

Scientists have been baffled by Jupiter's 'energy crisis' for 50 years, which is the idea that a planet this far from the sun should be about 163 degrees Fahrenheit, yet the gas giant's atmosphere is 798F

Dr James O'Donoghue, a researcher at Japan's JAXA space agency and the lead author of the study, said in a statement: 'We first began trying to create a global heat map of Jupiter's uppermost atmosphere at the University of Leicester.

'The signal was not bright enough to reveal anything outside of Jupiter's polar regions at the time, but with the lessons learned from that work we managed to secure time on one of the largest, most competitive telescopes on Earth some years later.

'Using the Keck telescope we produced temperature maps of extraordinary detail. We found that temperatures start very high within the aurora, as expected from previous work, but now we could observe that Jupiter's aurora, despite taking up less than 10% of the area of the planet, appear to be heating the whole thing.'

Earth has similar light shows, known as the Aurora Borealis and Australis (or more commonly known as the northern and southern lights), which form when ions of solar winds collide with atoms of oxygen and nitrogen in the atmosphere.

To solve this mystery, space scientists at the University of Leicester, along with NASA, created heat maps of Jupiter and found intense auroras are driving the extreme temperatures, despite only covering less than 10 percent of the planet

However, Jupiter's cosmic event is fueled by its volcanic moon, Io, and produces the most powerful aurora in the solar system.

The fact that Io plays a key role in Jupiter's auroras was only discovered in March, utilizing data captured by NASA's Juno spacecraft.

Also known as the Jovian polar light show, or the auroral dawn storms, the auroras start off as particles that become ionized and trapped around the gas giant planet by its magnetic field, creating the circular early morning light show around the polar regions.

Scientist have previously speculated the Jovian aurorae was the mechanism behind Jupiter's atmospheric heating, but the study is the first to confirm it.

The team used the powerful Keck Observatory in Hawai'i to create 'the most-detailed yet' map of the gas giant's upper atmosphere, allowing them to provide evidence that the stunning light show is delivering planet-wide heating.

Charged particles that escape from Jupiter's volcanic moon Io (pictured) are captured by the planet's magnetic field, which in turn produces ultraviolet auroras.

Researchers created five maps of the atmospheric temperature at different spatial resolutions, with the highest resolution map showing an average temperature measurement for squares two degrees longitude 'high' by two degrees latitude 'wide.'

The team scoured more than 10,000 individual data points, only mapping points with an uncertainty of less than five percent.

Observations also showed a region of localized heating in the sub-auroral region that could be interpreted as a limited wave of heat propagating equatorward, which might also show evidence of the process driving heat transfer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Images taken during the Apollo missions have helped NASA scientists find water ice on the moon, hiding in shadows cast by the 'rough' lunar surface.

Experts from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) studied images taken during the lunar landings from 1969-1972 to solve a discrepancy between prediction and what was seen in observations.

Simulations suggested that any water ice that forms during the lunar night would quickly burn off as the Sun climbs overhead, but observations by NASA spacecraft have since detected the presence of water on the dayside surface of the moon.

A new model was created to factor in surface roughness seen in the Apollo images by the NASA team.

The shadows cast by the roughness of the moon's surface create small cold spots for water ice to accumulate, even during the harsh lunar daytime, the team found.

This could one day help ensure the long-term viability of lunar bases, as it could mean it is easier to access water on the moon, rather than ship it from Earth.

The moon is covered in craters and rocks, creating a surface 'roughness' that casts shadows as seene in this 1972 photo from the Apollo 17 mission. The shadows allow ice to form and remain

KEY FINDINGS: ICE HIDES IN SHADOWS The observed presence of water molecules in the dayside lunar regolith was an unexpected discovery and remains poorly understood. Models predict temperatures that are too high for adsorbed water to be stable, but observations disprove this. Researchers found the models were wrong, as they assume a relatively flat surface with few sheltered areas. They created a model that explicitly considered surface roughness, and accounted for shadows. They used images taken by Apollo-era astronauts of the lunar surface to feed their model, to show true impact of rocks and boulders on shadows. The team found that surface roughness substantially increases the capability of the moon to retain water on its sunlit hemisphere at any latitude. It also retains water within 45 , and within 45 degrees of the poles at any time of the lunar day. Lunar surface roughness has a strong influence on lunar water adsorption and desorption. Therefore, it is of critical importance to take account of surface roughness to get an accurate picture of the amount of water on the moon’s surface and in its exosphere. Advertisement

They expect to find water ice at the poles of the moon hidden inside the permanently shadowed craters, an area set to be explored by a future NASA moon rover.

'Over a decade ago, spacecraft detected the possible presence of water on the dayside surface of the Moon, and this was confirmed by NASA's Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy [SOFIA] in 2020,' said NASA's Björn Davidsson.

'This challenges our understanding of the lunar surface and raises intriguing questions about how volatiles, like water ice, can survive on airless bodies.'

In a new study, Davidsson and co-author Sona Hosseini, found that shadows created by the 'roughness' of the lunar surface provide refuge for water ice.

Davidsson and Hosseini revised the computer model to factor in the surface roughness apparent in images from the Apollo missions from 1969 to 1972.

This images show a landscape that is not flat, but rather strewn with boulders and pockmarked with craters, creating lots of shady areas even near noon.

Because there is no thick atmosphere to distribute heat around the surface, extremely cold, shaded areas can neighbour hot areas exposed to the Sun.

This creates a significant difference in temperature, with hot areas seeing heat of 240 degrees F, and the cold areas dropping to minus 350 degrees Fahrenheit.

As the Sun tracks through the lunar day, the surface frost that may accumulate in these cold, shaded areas is slowly exposed to sunlight and cycled into the moon's exosphere - the collection of gases acting as an extremely thin atmosphere.

The water molecules then refreeze onto the surface, re-accumulating as frost in other cold, shaded locations around the natural satellite.

One hypothesis is that water molecules are trapped within lunar material (left). But a new study posits that water molecules (right) remain as frost on the surface in cold shadows and move to other cold locations via the thin exosphere

'Frost is far more mobile than trapped water,' said Davidsson, adding that the model provides a new mechanism to explain how water moves over the lunar surface.

'Understanding water as a resource is essential for NASA and commercial endeavours for future human lunar exploration,' Hosseini said.

'If water is available in the form of frost in sunlit regions of the Moon, future explorers may use it as a resource for fuel and drinking water. But first, we need to figure out how the exosphere and surface interact and what role that plays in the cycle.'

To test this theory, Hosseini is leading a team to develop ultra-miniature sensors to measure the faint signals from water ice.

This illustration shows how shadows enable water ice to survive on the sunlit lunar surface. When shadows move as the Sun tracks overhead, the exposed frost lingers long enough to be detected by spacecraft

The Heterodyne OH Lunar Miniaturized Spectrometer (HOLMS) is being developed to be used on small stationary landers or autonomous rovers – like JPL's Autonomous Pop-Up Flat Folding Explorer Robot (A-PUFFER).

This may be sent to the moon in the future to make direct measurements of hydroxyl, a molecule that contains one hydrogen atom and an oxygen atom.

Hydroxyl, which is a molecular cousin of water, can serve as an indicator of how much water may be present in the exosphere.

Both water and hydroxyl could be created by meteorite impacts and through solar wind particles hitting the lunar surface.

Measuring the presence of these molecules in the moon's exosphere can reveal how much water is being created while also showing how it moves from place to place.

The researchers revised the computer model to factor in the surface roughness apparent in images from the Apollo missions from 1969 to 1972. Pictured: Buzz Aldrin during the 1969 Apollo 11 mission

But time is of the essence to make those measurements, as increased exploration by more and more nations and private firms could change the lunar environment.

'If this trend continues, we will lose the opportunity to understand the natural lunar environment, particularly the water that is cycling through the Moon's pristine exosphere,' explained Hosseini.

'Consequently, the advanced development of ultra-compact, high-sensitivity instruments is of critical importance and urgency.'

The researchers point out that this new study could help us better understand the role shadows play in the accumulation of water ice and gas molecules beyond the moon, such as on Mars or even on the particles in Saturn rings.

The study was published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two Sumatran tigers at an Indonesian zoo are recovering from COVID-19 after the rare big cats tested positive for the virus last month, the Jakarta government said on Sunday.

Tino, a 9-year-old tiger and Hari, a 12-year-old, both tested positive after showing signs of the virus, including shortness of breath, sneezing and a runny nose.

Both animals also lost their appetite, officials added.

Tino first started showing symptoms on July 9 and two days later, Hari had the same symptoms.

Two Sumatran tigers at an Indonesian zoo are recovering from COVID-19. Tino, 9, and Hari, 12, tested positive after showing signs on July 9 and 11

Both tigers experienced shortness of breath, sneezing and a runny nose. They were treated with antibiotics, antihistamines, anti-inflammatory drugs and multivitamins for 10 and 12 days

Tino and Hari's positive COVID-19 results were publicly released after testing positive last month

Both tigers were treated with antibiotics, antihistamines, anti-inflammatory drugs and multivitamins for 10 and 12 days.

They have showed signs of recovery, Jakarta's Head of the Parks and City Forest Office, Suzi Marsitawati, said.

'Their appetites have returned and they are back to being active,' Suzi said, adding both tigers remain under close observation.

It's unclear how the animals, which are at Ragunan zoo in the Indonesian capital, contracted the virus.

The zoo was 'already closed due to emergency mobility restrictions,' Suzi added.

The Ragunan zoo (pictured) was closed due to emergency mobility restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic

Officials are trying to figure out how the tigers became infected None of the zoo's workers tested positive for COVID-19 around the time the animals were infected

It's unclear how the animals, which are at Ragunan zoo (pictured) in Jakarta, contracted the virus

Currently, officials are performing tracking and tracing to figure out how the tigers, known for their heavy black stripes, became infected.

None of the caretakers or workers at the zoo tested positive for COVID-19 around the time the animals were infected.

Indonesia has suffered the worst coronavirus infection in Southeast Asia with over 3.4 million infections and more than 94,000 deaths since the start of the pandemic.

The country has reported more than 3.4 million cases and 94,119 virus deaths, but the official tally is widely believed to be a severe undercount, due to low testing and tracing rates.

According to the World Wildlife Fund, there are less than 400 Sumatran tigers left on Earth and they are considered 'critically endangered.'

Sumatran tigers have experienced population declines from habitat loss due to deforestation and rampant poaching, WWF added.

When fully grown, they can weigh anywhere between 165 and 300 pounds, with males skewing towards the larger end.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just when you thought it was safe to go back in the water.

Six species of large coastal sharks – including the deadly bull shark – hunt in 'shifts' to avoid clashing with each other for food according to a new study.

Researchers from Murdoch University in Perth Australia looked at different kinds of sharks in the Gulf of Mexico and found those that share the same water have separate hunting times during the day.

Bull sharks, widely considered to be the most dangerous sharks in the world, are most active in the early morning hours, while tiger sharks are active around midday.

Sandbar sharks are active around the afternoon, and Blacktip sharks head out to hunt in the evening hours.

Scalloped and great hammerhead sharks have a 'substantial overlap' for peak activity, with both species being most active during the night-time.

A bull shark equipped with an acceleration data-logger swimming after release

Bull shark (pictured). Bull sharks tended to be most active in the early morning hours, peaking around 6 am

'This is a relatively rare way of sharing resources in nature, but it could be more common than we think in understudied marine ecosystems,' said the study's lead author, Dr. Karissa Lear in a statement.

'We saw six species of large coastal sharks sharing common food resources in Florida by foraging at different times of the day.'

The researchers tagged 172 sharks with acceleration data loggers, a similar technology to what is used in Fitbits and other smart devices, to monitor the movements of the different species.

In total, Lear and the other researchers obtained 3,766 hours worth of data.

Researchers from Murdoch University in Perth Australia looked at different kinds of sharks in the Gulf of Mexico and found those that share the same water have separate hunting times during the day

The scientific names of the six species are: blacktip sharks (Carcharhinus limbatus), bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas), sandbar sharks (Carcharhinus plumbeus), tiger sharks (Galeocerdo cuvier), great hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna mokarran) and scalloped hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna lewini).

It's unclear at this time why the different species of sharks hunt at different times, but researchers think it could be to peacefully coexist, share resources and not bump into one another.

'This both reduced the competition for food and, for some species, reduces the chances of being preyed upon by larger species,' said study co-author Dr. Adrian Gleiss.

'Indeed, the timing is likely to be at least partially driven by hierarchy - forcing less dominant predators to forage in less optimal periods to avoid those larger sharks.'

The researchers tagged 172 sharks with acceleration data loggers (pictured), a similar technology to what is used in Fitbits and other smart devices, to monitor the movements of the different species. In total, Lear and the other researchers obtained 3,766 hours worth of data

They found that there was little overlap among the six species, with bull sharks most active in the early morning hours

Bull sharks tended to be most active in the early morning hours, peaking around 6 a.m.

Conversely, tiger sharks and sandbar sharks are active in midday and the afternoon, peaking around 12 p.m. and 4 p.m., respectively.

Blacktip sharks are most active during evening hours, peaking just before 8 p.m.

Tiger shark (pictured). Tiger sharks were active in midday, peaking around 12 pm

Sandbar shark (pictured). Sandbar sharks were active in the afternoon, peaking around 4 pm

Blacktip shark (pictured). Blacktip sharks were most active during evening hours, peaking just before 8 pm

Scalloped and great hammerhead sharks have a 'substantial overlap' for peak activity, with both species most active during the night-time, peaking around 10 p.m. and 2 a.m., respectively.

'To our knowledge, these results are the first example of diel temporal partitioning in a marine predator guild,' Lear added.

Scalloped hammerhead shark (pictured). Scalloped hammerhead peaked around 10 pm

Great hammerheard shark (pictured). Great hammerhead sharks peaked around 2 am

In an interview with New Scientist, Bournemouth University professor Georgia Jones, who was not involved in the study said it's likely smaller species like blacktips, avoid larger species, such as tiger sharks, because they 'will predate them.'

It's possible this kind of behavior could exist in other marine life to preserve a healthy ecosystem, Lear added.

'Understanding the mechanisms that allow marine predators to coexist will help us to preserve and restore healthy, predator-rich marine systems.'

The research has been published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The UK government is seeking British victims of the Kaseya ransomware attack over the weekend – the biggest global ransomware attack on record.

National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), which is part of government intelligence agency GCHQ, said it's currently 'investigating its impact on the UK'.

It's not known how many or which British firms are affected by the ransomware attack on Friday, which was courtesy of Russian hacking group REvil.

REvil – which managed to breach the systems of US-based software firm Kaseya – is demanding $70 million (£50.5 million) in cryptocurrency to fix it.

The hackers managed to bring down the firms by infiltrating VSA, a piece of Kaseya software that is used to manage much larger IT networks.

The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) said it is currently investigating the impact of the Kaseya ransomware attack on the UK

Each victim's IT systems are scrambled and rendered un-usable, but if the ransom is paid, hackers deliver a decryptor key that unscrambles the network.

Analysts said it is no coincidence that it coincided with July 4 – Independence Day in the US – when US companies would be understaffed and less able to respond over the long weekend.

MailOnline has contacted NCSC regarding the specific UK firms that are confirmed to have been impacted by the mass extortion attack.

'We are aware of a cyber incident involving Kaseya, and we are investigating its impact on the UK,' the NCSC said in a statement.

'Ransomware is a growing, global cyber threat, and all organisations should take immediate steps to limit risk and follow our advice on how to put in place robust defences to protect their networks.'

Ciaran Martin, founder of NCSC, told Radio 4: 'The scale and sophistication of this global crime is rare, if not unprecedented.

'It is a really serious, global operation.'

Kaseya said just a few dozen of its customers were directly affected by the attack, but knock-on effects have brought down firms in 17 countries.

According to a spokesperson for London software company Egress, UK customers are 'believed to have been affected alongside those in the US, Canada, Germany, South Africa and Colombia'.

It has wiped out more than 500 Coop grocery stores in Sweden, as well as schools in New Zealand and two major Dutch IT firms.

Each victim's IT systems are scrambled and rendered un-usable, but if the ransom is paid, hackers deliver a decryptor key that unscrambles the network

Geography of attempted attacks resulting from the original breach of Kaseya, based on Kaspersky’s telemetry

WHITE HOUSE 'REACHING OUT TO VICTIMS' The White House said on Sunday it was reaching out to victims of the ransomware outbreak. White House deputy national security adviser for cyber and emerging technology, Anne Neuberger, said that the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security's cyber arm 'will reach out to identified victims to provide assistance based upon an assessment of national risk'. Miami-based Kaseya has said that fewer than 60 of its customers had been "directly affected" by the attack. But the Kaseya software tool VSA, commandeered by the cyber criminals is used by so-called managed service providers, outsourcing shops that other businesses use to handle their back-office IT work, like installing updates. One cybersecurity executive said his company alone had seen 350 customers attacked. Source: Reuters Advertisement

Coop had to close hundreds of stores on Saturday because its cash registers had been knocked offline as a consequence of the attack.

Meanwhile, Kaspersky said it has observed more than 5,000 attack attempts in 22 countries. The most affected were Italy, followed by the US, Colombia, Germany and Mexico.

REvil is best known for extorting $11 million from the meat-processor JBS back in May this year after a Memorial Day attack.

This time, REVil infected Kaseya, a provider of IT management software for managed service providers (MSPs) – companies that remotely manage a customer's IT infrastructure.

Essentially, REvil used Kaseya's access to breach not only its clients, but its clients' clients – in other words, both MSPs and their customers.

This set off a chain reaction that paralysed computers of hundreds of firms worldwide.

REVil has an affiliate structure, occasionally making it difficult to determine who speaks on the hackers' behalf, Reuters reports.

But Allan Liska of cybersecurity firm Recorded Future said the message 'almost certainly' came from REvil's core leadership.

Ian Porteous at IT security firm Check Point Software said any company running Kaseya's VSA should 'unplug it from the network right now, although it might be too late'.

'Check with security product vendors to verify protections are in place for REvil ransomware,' he added.

'If help is needed, call in a team of experts to help verify the situation within the environment.'

⚠️ If your organisation's systems have been infected with malware, follow our 9 steps urgently ⤵️https://t.co/7cm6jQswGb#Kaseya pic.twitter.com/bhENVKwC5Q — NCSC UK (@NCSC) July 5, 2021

NCSC also tweeted its list of nine steps to take 'if your organisation is already infected', including disconnecting infected computers, laptops or tablets from all network connections.

UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson is yet to publicly address the attack. In the US, meanwhile, the White House said on Sunday that it was reaching out to victims of the outbreak 'to provide assistance based upon an assessment of national risk'.

US President Joe Biden, who last month warned President Putin to take action against hacking groups targeting the US from Russia, said the FBI is investigating the latest hack and he will take action if Moscow is deemed to be responsible.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British scientists working from the Halley research station in Antarctica breathed a sigh of relief after a London-sized iceberg brushed the coast of the frozen continent.

The massive block of ice, known as A74, covers an area of almost 500 square miles and has been closely monitored by the British Antarctic Survey for the past six months as the currently mothballed Halley research station is in the same area.

Between August 9 and August 11 the iceberg made a very light contact with the Antarctic coast, scraping along the edge of the western Brunt ice shelf, Antarctica.

The scraping against the ice shelf was likely caused by strong easterly winds pushing the iceberg towards the coast, according to British Antarctic Survey experts.

British scientists working from the Halley research station in Antarctica breathed a sigh of relief after a London-sized iceberg brushed the coast of the frozen continent

BAS continues to monitor the #BruntIceShelf in #Antarctica and iceberg A74, which calved earlier this year. #A74 and has moved 30 km in the last 3 days, driven by strong easterly winds. Follow latest progress in this animation from glaciologist Oliver Marsh @ojmarsh pic.twitter.com/NUgtP8nx0N — British Antarctic Survey (@BAS_News) August 11, 2021

HALLEY RESEARCH STATION Halley is an internationally important platform for, atmospheric and space weather observation in a climate-sensitive zone. It sits on Antarctica’s up to 150m thick Brunt Ice Shelf, that floats on the frozen continent and flows at a rate of about 1.5 miles per year. Long-term monitoring of the changes that occur in the ice shelf revealed changes, including growth of a recently-formed chasm, the North Rift. It has been unoccupied during the last four winters because of the complex and unpredictable glaciological situation. Advertisement

The Brunt ice shelf is made from glacier ice that has flowed off the land in Antarctica and floated out to sea, with pieces gradually breaking off.

The Halley station is in the larger East Brunt region, with the A74 iceberg hitting West Brunt, which has a chasm between it and the East block.

It is still attached to East Brunt, but 'only just' as an enormous crack has opened up over the pst few years bringing the 650 sq mile shelf close to breaking off.

There was concern that if A74 had hit West Brunt harder, it would finally cause it to break off from the main ice shelf and create a new iceberg.

'We've been monitoring the situation very closely for the past six months because A74 has been drifting around in the same kind of area,' Dr Ollie Marsh from the British Antarctic Survey told BBC News.

'But then there were some really strong easterly winds and these seemed to trigger a rapid movement in A74 that saw it scrape along the edge of the western Brunt.'

There are GPS sensors on the ice shelf and on A74 to help the British Antarctic Survey experts track their movements on an hourly and daily basis.

It is designed to catch any sudden movements in the ice and it revealed the small scrape against West Brunt did cause a tiny amount of rotation but not enough to break it off.

The Halley station is in the larger East Brunt region, with the A74 iceberg hitting West Brunt, which has a chasm between it and the East block

'So there does appear to have been a bump, and it does seem to have had a bit of an effect on the western Brunt, but not enough to cause a calving,' Dr Marsh told the BBC.

The BAS wrote on Twitter that it would continue to monitor the ice shelf and the A74 iceberg, which first calved earlier this year and has been floating about since then.

Scientists found that A74 had moved about 18 miles between August 9 and August 11, driven by strong easterly winds.

They hope that Brunt breaks up soon as it would bring an end to uncertainty over the Halley research station.

The Brunt ice shelf is made from glacier ice that has flowed off the land in Antarctica and floated out to sea, with pieces gradually breaking off

It was mothballed over uncertainty over the way the ice in the region might behave in the near future.

It is about 12 miles from the crack in the ice that would be disturbed by a large calving, such as one that would be triggered by West Brunt breaking off.

It would be very difficult to try to evacuate personnel from the research station in the middle of a calving event, according to BAS, especially now, during winter when there is 24-hour darkness.

The 12-person team working at the station left mid-February by BAS Twin Otter aircraft. The station is now closed for the Antarctic winter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@While Google's new $800 Pixel 3 handset may not be groundbreaking in terms of software, it really is one smart phone.

AI seems to permeate every part of its software, from the ability to answer calls for you to being able to almost perfectly predict your morning commute.

It's a great phone, with one caveat - to get the best out of it, you need to let Google collect a lot of data about you.

Scroll down for video

It's a great phone, with every feature you could ask for, from wireless charging and a superb camera to a sleek design - and thankfully the smaller model forgoes the horrific notch on the bigger Pixel XL

We tried out the base Pixel 3, the smaller of the two new handsets Google announced.

It's a great phone, with every feature you could ask for, from wireless charging and a superb camera to a sleek design - and thankfully the smaller model forgoes the horrific notch on the bigger Pixel XL.

One of the most useful features, particularly for American owners plagued by robocalls, is a call screening feature.

When a mystery call comes in, just hit 'Screen call', and Google's voice assistant takes over and asks for a name and purpose of the call.

Transcribed responses appear in real time, so you can decide whether to pick up.

You can even request more information by tapping buttons such as 'Tell me more.'

While great in concept, the reality is a little disappointing - I often found it quicker to take the call and hang up.

However, one can definitely see the potential, if the system as able to screen calls without involving the user.

The Google Pixel 3, left, and Google Pixel 3 XL, and wireless charging stand in New York. Google's new Pixel 3 phone plays catch-up with Apple and Samsung on hardware. It's really designed to showcase Google's advances in software, particularly in artificial intelligence.

The cameras on the back of the Google Pixel 3 XL, left, and Google Pixel 3 smartphones: AI seems to permeate every part of its software, from the ability to answer calls for you to being able to almost perfectly predict your morning commute.

It is, however, also great for annoying friends and family by fobbing them off with a robotic voice (sorry mum!).

The camera also has some smart features, such as Google Lens, which can extract numbers from business cards, translate menus and even try to identify anything you point the camera at.

The new camera can even can capture multiple pictures to choose from

FILE- In this Tuesday, Oct. 9, 2018, file photo New Google Pixel 3 smartphones are displayed in New York. Google's new Pixel 3 phone plays catch-up with Apple and Samsung on hardware. It's really designed to showcase Google's advances in software, particularly in artificial intelligence. (AP Photo/Richard Drew, File)

It can also monitor your face, waiting for a smile of funny face to take the perfect selfie, and for regular shots, can capture multiple pictures to choose from.

It also boasts wireless charging, and placing the phone on an optional $79 Pixel Stand charging station, and it can display a rotating set of images from an album you choose, or pick what it thinks are your best snaps.

HOW GOOGLE'S PIXEL 3 CAN ANSWER THE PHONE FOR YOU Gogole boasts its AI will allow the Pixel 3 to answer calls for you. 'First, starting out in English in the U.S., Pixel 3's on-device AI helps you screen phone calls and avoid spam calls. 'Imagine you're at dinner with family or in a meeting at work and a call from an unknown caller comes in. 'Just tap on 'Screen call' to find out who's calling and why, as well as other information (as prompted by you). 'You'll immediately see a transcript of the caller's responses so that you can then decide whether to pick up, respond by tapping a quick reply (e.g., 'I'll call you back later'), or mark the call as spam and dismiss. The call screen feature allows the phone to answer calls for you when telemarketers call. The user is able to see the call transcribed in real-time on the device's screen 'Processing the call details on-device means these experiences are fast, private to you, and use up less battery.' Pixel users in the U.S. will also be the first to get access to an experimental new Google Assistant feature, powered by Duplex technology, which helps users complete real-world tasks over the phone, like calling a restaurant to book a table. This feature will initially be available later this year in New York, Atlanta, Phoenix and the San Francisco Bay Area to help people book restaurant reservations and will roll out to other U.S. cities in the future. However, Google addressed the concenrs it coudl fool humans. 'As we develop new calling technologies, we believe it’s critical that we help people understand the context of the conversation. 'We’ll disclose to businesses receiving the call that they're speaking to an automated system, and we have developed controls to protect against spam and abuse, as well as the ability for a business to opt out of receiving calls. 'For Call Screen, we will also let the caller know that a screening service is being used.' Advertisement

Soon, you'll be able to let Google's facial-recognition technology just pick out photos of your family, including new shots as you take them (though not in the European Union, where privacy regulations are tighter.)

The stand also has some smart features, offering to set your alarms before bed.

It the morning , it can show you how your commute is going, and displays this on the always on screen, a hugely useful, if creepy, feature.

Overall, the Pixel 3 is a superb handset.

It's fast, sleek and everything a flagship device should be.

Pair that with Google's smartest version of Android , and it really does give the iPhone XS a run for its money - albeit with some lingering concerns of whether it has got a little too smart for its own good.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: From rollup TVs to 5G phones: Gadget makers set to unveil their 2019 plans at CES next week

New LG 65 inch OLED TV showcased at CES 2018 in Las Vegas can roll up like a poster.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Alexa can now remind you to turn off the lights and lock your door: Amazon release 'hunches' as part of major update to its smart assistant

Alexa is coming to your CAR: Amazon's voice assistant to be integrated into vehicles and chargers in smart assistant war with Apple and Google.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: From a helmet that fights baldness to virtual reality SLIPPERS: CES Unveiled gives a glimpse at this year's emerging technology

The Consumer Electronics Show (CES) attracts over 3800 companies, thousands of journalists and many more technology lovers every year in Las Vegas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A factory worker had to have a nail removed from his scrotum after he accidentally shot himself with a nail gun.

The unidentified 27-year-old man, from Italy, was rushed to hospital after his horrific pneumatic gun injury.

But when doctors first looked at his scrotum, they could not see any sign of the nail — despite him being in obvious agony.

There was no clear wound in his skin, forcing medics to use an ultrasound to find the hidden 1.8cm nail.

Urologists noticed a thin white line behind his right testicle and whisked him away for surgery in case it was the missing nail.

Their suspicion proved true, with the nail stuck between the top of his testicle and his penis.

Remarkably, he suffered no lasting damage to his right testicle or epididymis — the tube that stores sperm.

The nail was removed safely and the man, of Ancona, was discharged from hospital the next day.

A package centre worker had to have a missing 3/4in (1.8cm) nail removed from his scrotum after he shot himself with a nail gun in Ancona, Italy

Only one other similarly grisly scrotal injury caused by a nail gun has been reported in medical literature.

Doctors from Verona, Italy, revealed a man punctured his scrotum with a nail in 2017.

Workers rely on the tool in construction, particularly in framing and sheathing, where 70 per cent of the injuries occur.

There have also been occasional cases of chest or head injuries, which can prove to be fatal.

Scrotum ultrasounds are usually used to locate tumours and identify any source of pain in the testicles.

HOW DOES ULTRASOUND WORK? An ultrasound scan, sometimes called a sonogram, is a procedure that uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of part of the inside of the body. A small device called an ultrasound probe is used, which gives off high-frequency sound waves. You can't hear these sound waves, but when they bounce off different parts of the body, they create 'echoes' that are picked up by the probe and turned into a moving image. This image is displayed on a monitor while the scan is carried out. Source: NHS Advertisement

In this case, the procedure was used to detect the nail, which would have otherwise remained inside the man.

Writing in Radiology Case Reports, Dr Maria Pia Pavia said the case 'highlighted the value and role of scrotal ultrasonography in case of closed scrotal trauma'.

She said it showed all cases of injuries with sharp objects should be reviewed with ultrasounds by urologists — even if foreign objects cannot be seen from outside the wound.

Experts have said the man was lucky to have escaped without more permanent damage.

Dr Fardod O'Kelly, consultant paediatric and adolescent urological surgeon at the Becaon Hospital in Dublin, told MailOnline: 'Nail guns are essentially responsible for sharp projectiles which penetrate various parts of the body at high speed — up to 930 miles per hour depending on the gun type.

'To put that into context you need about 100 miles per hour to penetrate skin, and about 135 miles per hour to fracture bones.

'The other issue is the shock wave which is produced when a projectile comes to a "sudden" stop.'

Dr O'Kelly added: 'The patient in this report was a little unusual as he... had no obvious signs of a puncture wound on the scrotal skin.

'He was extremely fortunate in many ways that the nail and ensuing shock wave didn’t rupture the testis which may have required the testis to be removed, or injured the urethra which could have left scarring and a large operation to repair.

'Or even punctured the femoral vessels in the groin region which are not too far away and could have had serious consequences for him.

'Any degree of penetrating injury — provided the patient is stable — should always be imaged with at least an ultrasound, and subsequently explored in an operation.

'Had this patient not been explored, he would likely have developed a significant abscess (pocket of infection/pus) from the nail, which would potentially have made him very unwell, and would also require a surgical procedure.

'It is not likely that he would have been able to get away without having this dealt with one way or another.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk has turned tour guide in a new video showing off the SpaceX Starbase factory in Texas as it prepares to launch the 230ft Starship Super Heavy rocket.

Speaking to Everyday Astronaut, a spaceflight news service, Musk talked about the preparations required to send the giant Starship rocket on its first orbital test flight.

Work is currently underway at Starbase to build up the Super Heavy booster, including installing 29 Raptor engines near the Texas village of Boca Chica.

The firm rolled out the 230ft Super Heavy, known as Booster 4, from its facility a few miles down the road, and will soon subject it to pressurisation and engines tests.

When they are all complete and the engineering team are happy, it is hoped the first orbital launch attempt of Starship will happen, sometime in the next few months.

In the video, Musk talked about the need to keep margins low, and other aspects that go into designing a fully reusable spacecraft that will one day take humans to Mars.

When Super Heavy and Starship are combined they stand 394ft tall, and will be able to carry a payload of more than 220,000lb into low Earth orbit and be fully reusable

Work is currently underway at Starbase to build up the Super Heavy booster, including installing 29 Raptor engines near the Texas village of Boca Chica

In the interview, Musk spoke about the importance of the manufacturing process over design when it comes to building a major rocket system

STARSHIP AND SUPER HEAVY LAUNCHER SpaceX Starship is made up of two stages, the Super Heavy booster and the Starship vehicle on top. Super Heavy fires and gives Starship the boost it needs to reach orbit. Once in space, Starship separates and continues its journey, while Super Heavy returns to land on the ground. It is designed to be a reusable launch vehicle that could put humans on Mars, according to founder Elon Musk. Super Heavy The first stage, or booster, of the next-generation launch system with a gross liftoff mass of over three million kg. It uses sub-cooled liquid methane and liquid oxygen (CH4/LOX) propellants. The booster will return to land at the launch site on its six legs. Height: 70m (230ft) Diameter: 9m (30ft) Starship Starship is the fully reusable spacecraft and second stage of the Starship system. It offers an integrated payload section and is capable of carrying passengers and cargo to Earth orbit, planetary destinations, and between destinations on Earth. Height: 50m (160ft) Diameter: 9m (30ft) Advertisement

The tour was filmed on July 30, the day Musk tweeted an image of the Raptor Engine system part of the Super Heavy booster that will send Starship into orbit.

SpaceX is working to construct a 160-foot-tall Starship prototype, known as SN20, which they will strap to the Super Heavy booster and launch into orbit.

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined, the two reach a whopping 394 feet tall, much larger than the Statue of Liberty with its full plinth, which reaches 305 feet and taller than the NASA SLS moon rocket at 321 feet.

In the interview, Musk spoke about the importance of the manufacturing process over design when it comes to building a major rocket system.

'The launch system and the tower are as complex as either of the stages,' Musk said, adding they can build boosters easier than constructing the launch site.

'People generally think this Eureka moment, you come up with an idea and that it is, but there is 10,000% more work that goes into the production system than the thing itself,' he said.

Adding that it is 10 to 100 times more complex to design the manufacturing system itself than in the design process itself, with design effort rounding down to zero.

'There have been a lot of great rocket engine designs, but the hard part isn't can you design a stage combustion rocket engine, that has been done, what is super hard about Raptor is how we make it where the cost per tonne of thrust is under $1000.'

Musk said his goal was to ensure the cost per tonne of orbit needs to come down, to a point where it is cheap enough to make humans a multi-planetary species.

'This is at its heart a fundamentally optimisation of cost per tonne to orbit, then ultimately cost per tonne to the surface of Mars,' said Musk speaking to Everyday Astronaut.

He talked through the various structures around Starbase, including large buildings designed to prepare and hold the booster for launch.

Super Heavy Booster moving to orbital launch mount pic.twitter.com/axaDnXNm84 — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) August 3, 2021

He said in the interview the avionics, grid fins and batteries were all too heavy, with the grid fins (black top) each weighing roughly three tonnes

In the video, Musk talked about the need to keep margins low, and other aspects that go into designing a fully reusable spacecraft that will one day take humans to Mars

The most recent progress saw the team fire off Booster 3, the first prototype Super Heavy to roll to the launch site, on July 19. A total of three-engine Static Fire tests were conducted, which paves the way for Booster 4, which is now at Starbase

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined, the two reach a whopping 394 feet tall, much larger than the Statue of Liberty with its full plinth, which reaches 305 feet and taller than the NASA SLS moon rocket at 321 feet

Musk also outlined his engineering philosophy to Tim Dodd, suggesting that requirements should be 'less dumb'

Musk said Starship and Super Heavy was still at the development stage, with everything too heavy to meet his goal of reducing the cost per tonne to orbit.

He said in the interview the avionics, grid fins and batteries were all too heavy, with the grid fins each weighing roughly three tonnes.

By reducing the weight of the launch vehicle, it will mean less fuel is required to get to space, and in turn reduce the overall cost per tonne of payload being sent into orbit on the rocket.

Musk also outlined his engineering philosophy to Tim Dodd, suggesting that requirements should be 'less dumb'.

'It doesn't matter who gave them to you, the requirements are dumb,' said Musk.

In the video, Musk talked about the need to keep margins low, and other aspects that go into designing a fully reusable spacecraft that will one day take humans to Mars

Musk said Starship and Super Heavy was still at the development stage, with everything too heavy to meet his goal of reducing the cost per tonne to orbit

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined the two reach a whopping 394ft tall, larger than the Statue of Liberty and its full plinth

STARSHIP: ELON MUSK'S 'BIG F***ING ROCKET' The BFR (Big F***ing Rocket), now known as Starship, will complete all missions and is smaller than the ones Musk announced in 2016. The SpaceX CEO said the rocket would take its first trip to the red planet in 2024, carrying only cargo, followed by a manned mission in 2026 and claimed other SpaceX's products would be 'cannibalised' to pay for it. The rocket would be partially reusable and capable of flight directly from Earth to Mars. Once built, Musk believes the rocket could be used for travel on Earth — saying that passengers would be able to get anywhere in under an hour. To date, the Starship series of rockets have seen 9 test flights — some resulting in successful short-distance hops, while others led to explosions or crash landings. The most recent experimental launch — involving the Starship SN15 prototype — took place on May 5, 2021 and saw the craft complete a 33,000 feet high-altitude flight test into low-lying clouds, complete with successful ascent, engine cut-offs, flip manoeuvre, flap control and soft touchdown. A small fire did erupt at the base of the rocket following its landing, but this was later extinguished. Advertisement

He also said he works to delete parts of the process, simplify and optimise the design and accelerate cycle time, saying 'you're moving too slowly, go faster'.

The other aspects he mentioned was automation, removing in-process testing after problems have been diagnosed and ensuring things go as smoothly as possible.

A year ago, Elon Musk announced to SpaceX employees that Starship progress was a top priority, with progress accelerating 'dramatically and immediately.'

That resulted in a rapid increase in Starship prototypes being built, often with a new prototype ready before the previous one had even been tested.

The test flights have ranged from static firing the engines, to launching up to six miles into the air and attempting to land back down on the launch pad.

The first time SpaceX achieved a landing without blowing up was on May 5, when the SN15 rocket flew six miles up then returned safely to the landing pad.

Efforts are now going into preparing the Super Heavy to have Starship strapped to the top and it ready to go into orbit for the first orbital test flight later this year.

According to a filing with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the prototype will launch from Texas and make a 'soft ocean landing' off the coast of Hawaii after spending 90 minutes in orbit.

Once the booster gets Starship into orbit, it will come back to Earth, where it will land in the Gulf of Mexico about 20 miles from shore.

Although the massive Starship is still sitting in pieces on the launch pad at SpaceX's Boca Chica, Texas facility, the firm is moving along with testing.

The most recent progress saw the team fire off Booster 3, the first prototype Super Heavy to roll to the launch site, on July 19.

A total of three-engine Static Fire tests were conducted, which paves the way for Booster 4, which is now also at the Boca Chica Starbase.

When Super Heavy and Starship are combined they stand 394ft tall, and will be able to carry a payload of more than 220,000lb into low Earth orbit and be fully reusable. Making it the largest rocket ever created

SpaceX has completed a number of tests on the 160ft Starship upper stage, with the most recent, SN15, landing on the launch pad after a short high-altitude flight, but this will be the first test of the full Starship system, including the booster stage

SpaceX is working with the FCC, US Air Force, NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration for the flight to arrange the safest time to launch.

One of SpaceX's key goals is to ensure that the Starship rockets are reusable, and future tests will see both stages return to the launch pad, rather than the ocean.

Musk has calculated that to reach his goal of putting one million humans on Mars by 2025, his Starship rockets would need to conduct around three flights a day and a total of 1,000 flights a year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The world's first high-resolution 3D image of a monkey brain has been revealed, in a breakthrough that could pave the way for treatments for human diseases including Parkinson's.

A detailed map of a complete macaque monkey brain was created using fluorescent imaging techniques by a team from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.

The team used a new technique to show how nerve cells are organised and connected within the monkey brain at a 'micron resolution'.

The human brain comprises nearly a hundred billion nerve cells with delicate and complex connections, and while up to 17 times larger than that of a macaque, it is similar enough for comparisons to be made between the two, researchers claim.

Until now, a mouse brain was the largest to be mapped, taking days to create a complete 3D image, but the new technique made it possible to move up to a macaque brain, which is about 200 times larger in volume than that of a mouse.

The team, including researchers from Zhejiang University, say that having such a detailed map of a primate brain will help in understanding human diseases.

The world's first high-resolution 3D image of a monkey brain has been revealed in a breakthrough that could be used to treat human diseases including Parkinson's

A detailed map of a complete macaque monkey brain was created using fluorescent imaging techniques by a team from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing (stock image)

WHAT IS PARKINSON'S? THE INCURABLE DISEASE THAT STRUCK BOXER MUHAMMAD ALI Parkinson’s disease affects one in 500 people, including about one million Americans. It causes muscle stiffness, slowness of movement, tremors, sleep disturbance, chronic fatigue, an impaired quality of life and can lead to severe disability. It is a progressive neurological condition that destroys cells in the part of the brain that controls movement. Sufferers are known to have diminished supplies of dopamine because nerve cells that make it have died. There is currently no cure and no way of stopping the progression of the disease, but hundreds of scientific trials are underway to try and change that. The disease claimed the life of boxing legend Muhammad Ali in 2016. Advertisement

The new imaging technique allowed the team to map every neuron and fibre of the monkey brain in greater detail than previously possible.

They were able to peer down to the single micron level, viewing braincells typically 100 microns across in levels of detail never before observed in a primate brain.

The resulting images are massive, taking up more than a petabyte of data - 1,000 terabytes or about 30million high-definition movies.

With billions of neurons captured in unprecedented detail, the team turned to artificial intelligence to study the results.

To capture this detail they created a new technique, known as Volumetric Imaging with Synchronous on-the-fly-scan and Readout (VISoR).

Compared with commonly used 3D optical imaging techniques, VISoR eliminates the time loss caused by moving and pausing while switching fields of view.

This means that they can complete a 3D image of a much larger brain than was previously possible, the team explained.

They can take a full image of a monkey brain in under four days - about the same time it previously took to capture a full mouse brain, which is 200 times smaller.

The team tested its process on the brains of three 10-year-old macaque monkeys and say the technique could work on other organs in the body.

The application of VISoR may be extended to the imaging of other tissues and organs, including samples from clinical pathology.

It is anticipated that by combining the obtained huge imaging data with AI analysis, this technique may help to understand the fine 3D structure of the brain and body as well as how they change in various disease conditions.

'Hopefully, this technology will be further improved for broader and larger scale applications, to make important contributions to the mapping and understanding of primate and eventually the human brain,' said study author Duan Shumin.

Until now a mouse brain was the largest to be mapped, taking days to create a complete 3D image, but the new technique made it possible to move up to a macaque brain, which is about 200 times larger in volume than that of a mouse

Our brain comprises nearly a hundred billion nerve cells with delicate and complex connections, and while up to 17 times larger than that of a macaque, it is similar enough for comparisons to be made between the two, researchers claim

The team, including researchers from Zhejiang University, say that having such a detailed mapping of a primate brain will help in understand human diseases

The new imagine technique allowed the team to map every neuron and fibre of the monkey brain in greater detail than previously possible

Professor David C Van Essen from Washington University in St Louis, not involved in the study, described the work as a 'technical tour de force.'

He said that besides the technical achievement, their exciting discovery may have profound implications for understanding brain morphogenesis.

'Brain connectome at the mesoscopic level is important but so far limited to rodents,' said Professor Wang Xiojing, not involved in the research.

'This work demonstrates a powerful method that enables researchers to dissect mesoscopic connectome of monkeys at one micron resolution, in four days.'

The findings have been published in the journal Nature Biotechnology.

The resulting images are massive, taking up more than a petabyte of data, that is 1,000 terabytes or about 30million high-definition movies

With billions of neurons captured in unprecedented detail, the team turned to artificial intelligence to study the results

Parkinson's disease affects one in 500 people, and around 127,000 people in the UK live with the condition.

It causes muscle stiffness, slowness of movement, tremors, sleep disturbance, chronic fatigue, an impaired quality of life and can lead to severe disability.

It is a progressive neurological condition that destroys cells in the part of the brain that controls movement.

Sufferers have diminished supplies of dopamine because nerve cells that make it have died.

There is currently no cure and no way of stopping the disease progressing, but hundreds of scientific trials are underway to try and change that.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The next iteration of the iPhone isn't expected for at least another month, but insiders are already saying it'll come with a much longer battery life.

The iPhone 13 will be a 'little thicker' than the current iPhone 12, ZDNet reports, and rumors are that's because 'Apple plans to bump the battery capacity of the new lineup and bump it up quite significantly'

Tech columnist Adrian Kingsley-Hughes says he's heard the Pro Max battery capacity will go up from 3687mAh to 4352mAh, and the Pro and regular models going from 2815mAh to 3095mAh.

Even the iPhone 13 Mini will get a bump, from 2227mAh to 2406mAh.

Adding in talk that the phone's A15 processor will lower energy consumption by 15 to 20 percent, Kingsley-Hughes predicts the new iPhone could have the best battery life from the company to date.

Scroll down for video

The latest word on the upcoming iPhone 13 is that it will have a lot more battery power, as much as 4352mAh for the iPhone Pro Max, up from 3687mAh

'And given that everything else about the iPhone 12 — from the camera to the screen to the performance -- is so good that improvements just won't be noticeable, better battery life would be a strong selling point indeed, appealing both to upgraders and those switching to iPhone from Android.'

There had been talk the bulkier model was because Apple was going to add reverse charging capabilities, allowing owners to use their phone to power small devices like AirPods or an Air Tag.

Kingsley-Hughes calls that a 'dumb idea,' given how poor battery life is already a huge complaint among iPhone users.

'Now that Apple has readily adopted wireless charging, there are many options for topping up your phone, headsets, and watches without plugging a cable into the mobile gear.'

The new phone, expected to drop next month, is rumored to be bulkier, which some experts took to mean it would have reverse charging capabilities to power small devices like AirPods

Even if the next iPhone isn't thicker, according to DigiTimes, the phone could make use of 'slimmer' integrated passive device (IPD) chips, rather than the expected A15 chipset, leaving more room for larger batteries.

Rumors about the next iPhone have been circulating almost since the 12 dropped in October 2020: In July 2021, leaked images of a device purported to be the iPhone 13 suggested it will have a larger camera bump with lenses laid out diagonally, allowing users to take better wide-angle and zoomed-in photos.

Snapshots of dummy units of the phones were posted on Chinese social media site Weibo.

Other claims about the upcoming release, expected in September 2021, include a slightly larger camera 'bump,' a 2.5x telephoto zoom, and an upgrade to the super wide-angle lens.

MacRumors reported the iPhone 13's camera will have a f1.8 aperture, lower than the f2.4 on the iPhone 12.

A lower aperture means more light enters, which creates dynamic photos and a nice depth of field. It's also useful for shooting under lower light, like at night.

The improvement could come to all four rumored models, the site said, the iPhone 13, iPhone 13 Mini, iPhone 13 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro Max.

According to Tom's Guide, the lenses will also include automatic focus and sensor-shift optical image stabilization (OIS), which help counter shakiness.

Photos purported to be of the upcoming iPhone 13 surfaced on Weibo in July and suggest the camera will have a larger 'bump' and diagonal lens, making for better wide-angle and zoomed-in photos

Tom's Guide also referenced a portrait mode for video and an astrophotography mode for shooting the night sky.

Its also been suggested the company will bring back Touch ID, as face masks have interfered with some users' ability to use Face ID.

Of course, since Apple hasn't officially shared any specs, everything about the iPhone 13 is speculation—even its name: a survey conducted by the used-phone site SellCell found that almost 75 percent of respondents thought Apple would avoid labeling its next-gen smartphone with the number '13,' considered unlucky in some cultures.

Nearly one in five (18.3 percent) said they'd refuse to buy anything called the 'iPhone 13' because of the superstition.

Of course, Apple did launch iOS 13 in 2019—and the number 13 is only bad luck in the West.

in China, it means 'assured growth' or 'definitely vibrant,' and denotes good fortune.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Books of Amos and Zechariah in the Old Testament describe an earthquake that rocked the city Jerusalem about 2,800 years ago and archaeologists have now found the first evidence of biblical event.

The Israel Antiquities Authority's (IAA) excavations in the City of David National Park uncovered a layer of destruction during excavations, which consists of collapsed walls, broken pottery and bits and pieces of other goods.

Researchers say that since there was no signs of fire or an ancient conquest the destruction had to have been caused by an earthquake that hit Israel during the 8th century BC.

Some evidence of the event has been found in surrounding areas, but this is the first time archaeologists can prove it hit the major city.

Scroll down for video

The Israel Antiquities Authority's (IAA) excavations in the City of David National Park uncovered a layer of destruction during excavations, which consisted of collapsed walls, broken pottery and bits and pieces of other goods

In the book of Amos, the passage reads: 'The words of Amos, a sheep breeder from Tekoa, who prophesied concerning Israel in the reigns of Kings Uzziah of Judah and Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel, two years before the earthquake.

'And the Valley in the Hills shall be stopped up, for the Valley of the Hills shall reach only to Azal; it shall be stopped up as it was stopped up as a result of the earthquake in the days of King Uzziah of Judah,' reads another passage in Zechariah, recalling the event some 200 years later, to suggest how strong of a collective memory it left.'

Among the artifacts, archaeologists found were fragments of pottery, some nearly intact that they could be put back together, and small tables, The Jerusalem Post reports.

Since the artifacts were discovered deep into excavation site, experts say residents had to have built on top of the ruins following the earthquake, which preserved traces the event occurred.

Researchers say that since there was no signs of fire or an ancient conquest the destruction had to have been caused by an earthquake that hit Israel during the 8th century BC. Pcutred are collapsed walls that ruins of the event

Among the artifacts, archaeologists found were fragments of pottery, some nearly intact that they could be put back together, and small tables

IAA excavation directors Dr. Joe Uziel and Ortal Chalaf said in a statement: 'When we excavated the structure and uncovered an 8th century BCE layer of destruction, we were very surprised, because we know that Jerusalem continued to exist in succession until the Babylonian destruction, which occurred about 200 years later.

'We asked ourselves what could have caused that dramatic layer of destruction we uncovered.

'Examining the excavation findings, we tried to check if there is a reference to it in the biblical text.

'Interestingly, the earthquake that appears in the Bible, in the books of Amos and Zechariah, occurred at the time when the building we excavated in the City of David collapsed.'

Another biblical find was discovered in Israel last month - a pottery fragment unearthed in Israel bears the name of the biblical judge 'Jerubbaal,' which was inked on the artifact 3,100 years ago

Another biblical find was discovered in Israel last month - a pottery fragment unearthed in Israel bears the name of the biblical judge 'Jerubbaal,' which was inked on the artifact 3,100 years ago.

Mentioned in the Hebrew bible, Jerubbaal was a military leader, judge and prophet whose story is recounted in chapters 6 to 8 of the Book of Judges.

The ceramic artifact was discovered in an archeological excavation at Horbat al-Ra'i, near Kiryat Gat in Israel, which experts say it was part of a small jug that carried precious liquids.

'The name written on the jug, Yarubaal, may allude to biblical Jerubbaal, also known as the judge Gideon ben (son of) Yoash, but we cannot be sure if he owned the inscribed vessel,' the Israel Antiquities Authority shared in a statement.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the world dominated by the need to have the latest technological gadgets, PlayStation is kicking it old school by releasing a smaller version of the iconic PlayStation One games console that will come with 20 retro games.

The company is taking a leaf out of Nintendo’s book, which released the NES Classic console, a revamp of its 1980s Nintendo Entertainment System, in 2016 and relaunched again in June 2018.

The NES Classic, which featured games including Mega Man 2, Donkey Kong and Castlevania, was so popular following its 2018 relaunch that it actually outsold all the other major games consoles in June including PlayStation 4, XBox One and Nintendo Switch.

The original PlayStation One became the first games console to sell 100 million units worldwide.

Here is all you need to know about the new PlayStation Classic including what is it, when will it be released, how much will it cost and what games can you play on it.

PlayStation is releasing a modern version of its iconic 1990s PlayStation One games console

When will PlayStation Classic be released?

The PlayStation Classic will be released worldwide on December 3, 2018. The release date is not without meaning.

The original PlayStation One was released on December 3, 1994 and so the Classic is released on its 24th anniversary.

How much will it cost?

In the US, the console will set you back $99.99, while in the UK it will cost £89.99.

Pre-order the PlayStation Classic

You can pre-order the PlayStation Classic in Japan, Europe, the UK and the US. In the UK it can be pre-ordered from Game, Amazon, ShopTo and Smyths.

What games are pre-loaded on it?

PlayStation has now announced the full 20-strong list of games that will come preloaded on the console. These are:

Battle Arena Toshinden

Cool Boarders 2

Destruction Derby

Final Fantasy VII

Grand Theft Auto

Intelligent Qube

Jumping Flash!

Metal Gear Solid

Mr. Driller

Oddworld: Abe’s Oddysee

Rayman

Resident Evil Director’s Cut

Revelations: Persona

Ridge Racer Type 4

Super Puzzle Fighter II Turbo

Syphon Filter

Tekken 3

Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six

Twisted Metal

Wild Arms

How big is the PlayStation Classic console?

The retro console is 45 percent smaller than the original and can be easily carried in one hand.

PlayStation Classic comes with two controllers that are replicas of the PlayStation One ones

What’s in the box?

The PlayStation Classic comes with two normal-sized controllers, replicas of PS1, and has an HMDI slot, meaning the console can be connected to your TVs.

The console is smaller in part because it doesn’t require a CD drive, with all the games appearing on a software database inside it.

The open button on the console will flick between games and progress is saved on virtual memory cards.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists have discovered a rare stone that once outlined the city limits of ancient Rome, dating from the age of Emperor Claudius in AD 49.

The rare stone – made of travertine, a type of limestone – was found during excavations for a new sewage system in the Italian city.

It formed part of the pomerium, a sacred perimeter marking the sacred heart of the city from its outer territory.

In ancient Rome, the area within the pomerium was a consecrated piece of land where it was forbidden to farm, live, build or enter with weapons.

A detail of an archaeological finding emerged during the excavations at a Mausoleum is pictured during its presentation to the press in Rome, Friday, July 16, 2021

The travertine pomerium at the Ara Pacis Museum is pictured here to the right of a bust of Emperor Claudius

The pomerium marked the heart of ancient Rome - tiny compared to modern Rome, which is big and sprawling

WHAT WAS THE POMERIUM? The pomerium was Rome's sacred perimeter marking the edge of the city from its outer territory. Romans prohibited their armies from entering the gates of their city, noting a clear divide between what should be considered domestic and martial. The pomerium, which was said to have dated back to Rome's founding, marked that dividing line Source: Bryn Mawr College Advertisement

The pomerium is thought to have dated back to the time of Rome's founding – more than 2,700 years ago.

Rome rapidly expanded beyond its pomerium, but the date of its demarcation – April 21, 753 BC – is still celebrated as the anniversary of the city’s foundation.

The slab was found on June 17 during excavations for a rerouted sewer under the recently restored Mausoleum of Augustus, right off the central Via del Corso in Rome's historic centre.

Rome Mayor Virginia Raggi was present at its unveiling to the press last Friday (July 16).

Mayor Raggi noted that only 10 other stones of this kind had been discovered in Rome, the last one 100 years ago.

'Rome never ceases to amaze and always shows off its new treasures,' she said.

The stone is now on display at the Ara Pacis museum in the city, which is known for housing the Ara Pacis altar, before moving to the Mausoleum of Augustus.

At a press conference in the Ara Pacis museum near the mausoleum, Claudio Parisi Presicce, director of the Archaeological Museums of Rome, said the stone had both civic and symbolic meaning.

The monumental pomerial stone is dating back to Roman Emperor Claudio and was used to mark the pomerium

The pomerium was the sacred boundaries of the 'Urbe', the city of Rome, during the Roman Empire

Antique statue of Emperor Claudius as Jupiter in the Vatican Museum, Italy. Claudius ruled the Empire between AD 41 and AD 54

'The founding act of the city of Rome starts from the realisation of this pomerium,' he said.

The stone features an inscription that allowed archaeologists to date it to Claudius and the expansion of the pomerium in AD 49, which established Rome's new city limits.

Claudius was the fourth Roman emperor who ruled the Empire between AD 41 and AD 54.

Dr Andrew Sillett at the University of Oxford's department of classics, said the inscribed boundary stones from Claudius' expansion of the pomerium are some of the best evidence for the new letters Claudius invented.

Photographers take pictures during the presentation to the press of the newly-recovered part of the pomerium

The slab in all its glory: The pomerium is said to have dated back to Rome's founding but it was expanded in AD 49 during the reign of Claudius

'The pomerium was the boundary separating the civic and military spheres – a general's power to command troops lapsed if he crossed it,' Dr Sillett told MailOnline.

'The only generals who could cross the pomerium were those given permission to celebrate a triumph.

'So you used to have the sight of generals waiting outside the pomerium for years waiting for the Senate to vote them a triumph.

'It was also traditionally expanded whenever the boundaries of the empire were expanded. Claudius did it after he invaded Britain.'

Only 10 other stones of this kind had been discovered in Rome - the last one 100 years ago, according to Rome's mayor

Rome's Mayor Virginia Raggi (pictured) during the presentation to the press of the major archaeological finding

Rome's Mayor Virginia Raggi, centre, backdropped by the Ara Pacis (Altar of Peace) at the Ara Pacis museum in Rome, where the pomerium is currently being housed

Claudius was preceded by Caligula, the third leader of the Roman Empire, who was renowned for living a depraved lifestyle.

Caligula indulged in brazen affairs with wives of his allies and incestuous relationships with his sisters before his murder in AD 41.

As well as indulging in the carnal pleasures of sex and gluttony, Caligula would torture high-ranking senators by making them run for miles in front of his chariot.

It is also believed he used to roll around in cash and drink precious stones dissolved in vinegar.

Bust of Emperor Caligula in Modena, Italy. He is generally considered Rome's most tyrannical emperor. (Stock image)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Modern-day people in the Philippines have the most Denisovan DNA in the world, a new study reveals.

Researchers in Sweden have found that the Philippine Negrito ethnic group known as the Ayta Magbukon have the highest level of Denisovan ancestry today.

The Ayta Magbukon people, who occupy the Philippines' Bataan Peninsula, have more Denisovan DNA than the Papuan Highlanders, who were previously known as the present-day population with the highest level of Denisovan ancestry.

Ayta Magbukon people have 5 per cent Denisovan ancestry, the experts say, which is around 30 to 40 per cent greater than that of Papuans and Australians.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago.

Although remains of these mysterious early humans have mostly been discovered at the Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains in Siberia, DNA analysis has shown the ancient people were widespread across Asia.

Denisovans and Neanderthals bred with humans around 50,000 years ago, meaning the DNA of the early hominids survives today.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago. Pictured, a reconstruction of a juvenile female Denisovan who lived sometime between 82,000 and 74,000 years ago

The Ayta Magbukon people (pictured) who occupy the Bataan Peninsula, part of the Philippines

THE PHILIPPINE NEGRITO PEOPLE The Philippine Negrito ethnic group is composed of dark skinned people who are ethnically different from other people in the Philippines. The are believed to be the original inhabitants of the Philippines. Their origins are obscure. Some anthologists believe they are descendant of wandering people that formed an ancient human bridge between Africa and Australia. The Negritos of the Philippines are comprised of approximately 25 different ethnolinguistic groups, widely scattered throughout the archipelago, totalling an estimated 15,000 people Source: Factsanddetails / Culturalsurvival Advertisement

Scientists already know that Denisovans interbred with modern humans in the distant past, but the new study identifies the Ayta Magbukon people as the humans with 'the most Denisovan DNA'.

'We made this observation despite the fact that Philippine Negritos were recently admixed with East Asian-related groups – who carry little Denisovan ancestry, and which consequently diluted their levels of Denisovan ancestry,' said study author Maximilian Larena, from Uppsala University in Sweden.

'If we account for and masked away the East Asian-related ancestry in Philippine Negritos, their Denisovan ancestry can be up to 46 per cent greater than that of Australians and Papuans.'

For the new study, published in Current Biology, Larena and colleagues aimed to establish the demographic history of the Philippines.

They analysed about 2.3 million genotypes from 118 ethnic groups of the Philippines including diverse self-identified Negrito populations.

The Negritos of the Philippines are comprised of approximately 25 different groups, widely scattered throughout the archipelago, totalling an estimated 15,000 people.

The sample also included high-coverage genomes of AustraloPapuans and Ayta Magbukon Negritos.

Bataan is a province and peninsula on the Philippine island of Luzon. The Ayta Magbukon people who occupy the peninsula have the most Denisovan DNA from our ancient human ancestors - not those from Papua New Guinea as previously thought

Remains of the Denisovans have mostly been discovered at the Denisova Cave (pictured) in Siberia

The experts found that Ayta Magbukon possess the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world, consistent with an 'admixture event' into Negritos from Denisovans.

Genetic admixture occurs when previously diverged or isolated genetic lineages mix, leaving a characteristic signature in DNA.

The data suggests there were multiple archaic species that inhabited the Philippines prior to the arrival of modern humans, and that these archaic groups may have been genetically related.

This is corroborated by the discovery of a small-bodied hominin, called Homo luzonensis, in 2019 in the Philippines.

Denisovans are a group of extinct hominins that diverged from Neanderthals about 400,000 years ago. Pictured is a model of the phylogeny of H. sapiens over the last 600,000 years

Altogether, the researchers say that the findings unveil a complex intertwined history of modern and archaic humans in the Asia-Pacific region.

Distinct Islander Denisovan populations differentially admixed with incoming Australasians across multiple locations and at various points in time.

'This admixture led to variable levels of Denisovan ancestry in the genomes of Philippine Negritos and Papuans,' said study author Mattias Jakobsson, also at Uppsala University.

'In Island Southeast Asia, Philippine Negritos later admixed with East Asian migrants who possess little Denisovan ancestry, which subsequently diluted their archaic ancestry.

'Some groups, though, such as the Ayta Magbukon, minimally admixed with the more recent incoming migrants.

'For this reason, the Ayta Magbukon retained most of their inherited archaic tracts and were left with the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world.'

The researchers plan to sequence more genomes in the future to assess how inherited archaic tracts influenced our biology and contributed to our adaptation as a species.

It is thought that the shared ancestors of Denisovans and Neanderthals, which are unknown in the fossil record, likely split from the ancestors of modern humans around 800,000 years ago

Earlier this year, scientists reported that DNA discovered in Siberia's Denisova Cave suggests early modern humans lived alongside Denisovans and Neanderthals at least 44,000 years ago.

And last October another team reported the discovery of Denisovan DNA in the Baishiya Karst Cave in Tibet.

This discovery marked the first time Denisovan DNA has been recovered from a location that is outside Denisova Cave in Siberia, Russia.

In August 2020, researchers revealed that DNA from an unknown ancient ancestor of humans that bred with Denisovans is still around today.

In February 2020, researchers concluded that a 'super-archaic' human mated with the primitive ancestor of Denisovans and Neanderthals, 700,000 years ago, the earliest known episode of interbreeding between the species.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Having a 30-minute power nap during the middle of the day won't make up for not getting a good night's sleep, a study has determined.

In tests involved 275 participants, Michigan State University experts measured the extent to which sleep deprivation led to cognitive impairment.

They found that short naps to be only associated with slight relief from sleep deprivation — and, then, only in those cases where deep sleep was reached.

According to the team, their study is one of the first to evaluate the usefulness of taking short naps — which are often all that people have time to fit into their days.

Having a 30-minute power nap during the middle of the day won't make up for not getting a good night's sleep, a study has determined. Pictured: a man takes a nap (stock image)

'We are interested in understanding cognitive deficits associated with sleep deprivation,' said paper author Kimberly Fenn of the Michigan State University.

'In this study, we wanted to know if a short nap during the deprivation period would mitigate these deficits.

In their study, the researchers recruited 275 college-aged volunteers and had them complete a series of cognitive tests twice — once in the evening, and then again the following morning. However, what the subjects did in between the tests varied.

One group of the volunteers was sent home to get a good night's sleep, while the others remained in the lab overnight — staying awake all night in one case, and being allowed to take a 30- or 60-minute nap in the other case.

The tests were designed to test both attention and so-called placekeeping — the ability to complete tasks in a set order even when interrupted.

'The group that stayed overnight and took short naps still suffered from the effects of sleep deprivation and made significantly more errors on the tasks than their counterparts who went home and obtained a full night of sleep,' Professor Fenn said.

'However, every 10-minute increase in slow-wave sleep reduced errors after interruptions by about 4 per cent.'

Slow-wave sleep is the deepest and most restorative stage of sleep — characterised by high amplitude, low frequency brain waves — during which our muscles fully relax, and our heart rate and respiration reach their slowest levels.

'Slow-wave sleep is the most important stage of sleep,' explained Professor Fenn.

'When someone goes without sleep for a period of time, even just during the day, they build up a need for sleep; in particular, they build up a need for slow-wave sleep,' she added.

'When individuals go to sleep each night, they will soon enter into slow-wave sleep and spend a substantial amount of time in this stage.'

These small improvements, the researchers noted, could mean the difference between life and death when considering the risks of sleep deprivation in professions like long-distance truck drivers, police officers or surgeons.

Professor Fenn said that she hopes the findings highlight the importance of giving priority to sleep — alongside acknowledging that daytime naps, even if they include slow-wave sleep, cannot serve as a replacement for a proper night's sleep.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Sleep.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@New infographics created by scientists at Kings College London show how the generation we belong to affects our opinions and lifestyle.

The interactive graphs show how schools of thought differ between Millennials, Baby Boomers and Gen X around subjects including homosexuality, race and gender roles.

According to the data, British Millennials, who were born between 1977 and 1995, aren't as tolerant as Gen Z when it comes to same-sex marriage.

And the youngest generation of adults, known as Gen Z, are not only rejecting cigarettes and alcohol but have the healthiest body weight too.

If you were born between 1977 and 1995, you're officially a Millennial (also known as Generation Y), pictured

The graphs are available on a new website, created by the Policy Institute at King's, and tell the story of 'how when we're born shapes who we are'.

It uses data from a variety of sources, including Health Survey for England and British Social Attitudes – an annual survey conducted in Britain.

Adults born since 1996 are commonly described as Gen Z, while Millennials are people born between 1977 and 1995.

Gen X, meanwhile, are people born between 1965 and 1976, while Baby Boomers are those born between 1946 and 1964.

Those born prior to 1946 are called the pre-war 'silent generation', while kids born since 2011 are known as 'Gen Alpha'.

PUBLIC HEALTH

Gen X and Millennials have the most smokers per cohort in England - 22 per cent. Only 5 per cent of the 'silent generation' (pre-war) in England are current smokers, according to the data

DEFINING THE GENERATIONS Gen Alpha - born 2011 to the present day Gen Z - 1996 to 2010 Millennials - 1977 to 1995 Gen X - 1965 to 1976 Baby Boomers - 1946 to 1964 Pre-war or 'silent generation' - before 1946 Advertisement

According to the scientists, the graphs reveal some fairly positive findings when it comes to public health, at least for the youngest generation of adults.

Only around 13 per cent of Gen Z adults in England are smokers, compared to 22 per cent for both Millennials and Gen X.

And despite living through the golden era of tobacco advertising throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the pre-war generation in England now smoke the least (just 5 per cent in England are current smokers).

It's a totally different story when it comes to alcohol consumption, however. 25 per cent of pre-war adults – more than any other generation – drink alcohol five or more days a week.

Being teetotal seems to be more of a trendy option the younger we are – 19 per cent of Baby Boomers, 10 per cent of Gen X, 6 per cent of Millennials and 0 per cent of Gen Z drink alcohol five or more days a week in England.

The Policy Institute calls very regular drinking 'a hugely generational habit' that's almost entirely absent among Gen Z.

0 per cent of Gen Z drink alcohol five or more days a week, showing very regular drinking is 'a hugely generational habit'

Gen Z has the highest proportion of adults in England who have a healthy weight (61 per cent). Baby Boomers have the lowest (25 per cent)

But it's not all good news on health – of the first lot of Millennials in England who became adults in 1996, 77 per cent were a healthy weight.

But this slumped to 41 per cent in 2017, likely as a result of poor diets and sedentary lifestyles.

As of 2017, 61 per cent of Gen Z have a healthy weight, compared with 28 per cent for Gen X, 25 per cent for Baby Boomers and 27 per cent for pre-war.

SEX AND MARRIAGE

The death of marriage is exaggerated, but it is declining across generations, the data shows

Only 10 per cent of Gen X and Millennials in the US had no sexual partners in the last year. This compared with 30 per cent for Baby Boomers and 31 per cent for Gen Z

According to the Policy Institute, the death of marriage is exaggerated, but it is declining across generations.

Ninety-four per cent of pre-war Brits were married at some point in their life, but this figure steadily slides for the younger generations.

Eighty-five per cent of Baby Boomers, 72 per cent of Gen X, 39 per cent of Millennials and 3 per cent of Gen Z have married.

The stats also reveal more about the sex lives of the Americans – 31 per cent of US Gen Z adults have had no sexual partners in the last year, which is on a par with Baby Boomers (30 per cent).

This compares with 10 per cent for both Gen X and Millennials adults, suggesting these generations have the most active sex lives in the US at least.

HOME OWNERSHIP

37 per cent of Millennial Brits own a home or are paying off a mortgage - compared with 76 per cent of Baby Boomers and 77 per cent of those born before 1946

Depressingly for Millennials, the data shows high property prices really are forcing them to rent when it comes to home ownership.

Just 37 per cent of Millennial Brits own a home or are paying off a mortgage – compared with 76 per cent of Baby Boomers and 77 per cent of pre-war babies.

According to the Policy Institute, younger generations have been 'increasingly locked out' of owning a home as they enter careers and start families.

'Back in 1984, when the average Baby Boomer was in their late twenties, two-thirds of their generation already owned their own home,' it says.

As of 2016, 45 per cent of Millennials are renting privately - which is more than any other generation

'But by 2016, when the average Millennial was in their late twenties, only 37 per cent of them owned their own home.

'This change has utterly reshaped life experiences in the space of two generations.'

The 'inevitable consequence' has been a huge increase in renting – 45 per cent of Millennials are private renters, compared with 18 per cent of Gen X, 8.5 of Baby Boomers and 3 per cent of pre-war.

HOMOSEXUALITY

79 per cent of British Gen Z adults say same-sex sexual relations are 'not wrong at all', compared with 65 per cent of Baby Boomers

Those born after 1996 (known as Gen Z) are growing up in a world that has always been associated with technology. They are said to be the most connected, educated and open minded generation (stock image)

According to the data, 79 per cent of British Gen Z adults think same-sex sexual relations are 'not wrong at all' – more than any other generation – suggesting tolerance of other people's sexuality is on the rise.

This relatively high proportion compares with 65 per cent of Baby Boomers, 74 per cent of Gen X and 74 per cent of Millennials.

Pre-war babies are less convinced by same sex relationships, however – only 38 per cent described them as not wrong, according to the most recent data – suggesting the more recently we were born, the more supportive of gay rights we are.

'Our attitudes to homosexuality have changed enormously in just a few decades,' the Policy Institute says.

'In Britain, only around one in 10 thought that sexual relations between the same sex were "not wrong at all" in the late 1980s, and now it's around seven in 10.

'All generations have moved a long way, with the pre-war generation the only cohort standing out as significantly different.'

The US shows a similar pattern – just 34 per cent of pre-war babies think same-sex relations are not wrong at all, compared with 77 per cent for Gen Z.

RACE

12 per cent of white British Millennial adults would mind if 'one of their close relatives were to marry a person of black or West Indian origin'. This was higher for Gen X (16 per cent), Baby Boomers (22 per cent) and pre-war (45 per cent)

The data also reveals some slightly concerning stats regarding race relations in Britain.

As of 2013, 12 per cent of white British Millennial adults would mind if 'one of their close relatives were to marry a person of black or West Indian origin'.

This compared with 16 per cent for Gen X, 22 per cent of Baby Boomers and almost half – 45 per cent – for the pre-war 'silent generation'.

'Attitudes to race and racism have moved a long way in a relatively short period of time – but it’s also clear that racist attitudes persist among significant minorities of the public,' the Policy Institute says.

'For example, over half of Brits said they would mind if a relative married a black person in 1983, but this was under one in five for all except the pre-war generation by 2013.'

GENDER ROLES

Baby Boomers (8 per cent) Gen X (8 per cent), Millennials (7 per cent) and Gen Z (6 per cent) largely disagree that 'the job of the man is to earn money and the job of the woman is to look after the home and family'

As for gender roles in the home, Baby Boomers Gen X, Millennials and Gen Z largely disagree that 'the job of the man is to earn money and the job of the woman is to look after the home and family'.

This is less the case for the silent generation – 24 per cent of whom agreed with the archaic statement.

'This oldest group have moved a long way, but their formative experiences in a different social context means around a quarter hold on to this view,' the Policy Institute says.

Interestingly, in the US, a greater proportion of Gen Z adults (22 per cent) agreed with the statement than Millennials (19 per cent).

But, again, a greater percentage of the silent generation (53 per cent) agreed with the statement compared with any other generation.

In the US, patterns were similar to the Brits when it comes to beliefs in 'traditional' gender roles

There are currently 15 graphs for users to interact with on the site, separated into six categories – homosexuality, sex and marriage, health, race, gender roles and home ownership.

More data and stories will be added over the coming weeks, and there's also a quiz that tests people’s knowledge and perceptions of different generations.

The infographics have been launched to mark the publication of Generations, the new book by Bobby Duffy, a professor of public policy and director of the Policy Institute.

The book reveals that some of the common preconceptions of the generational cohorts are just 'tired stereotypes'.

Professor Duffy recently conducted a survey that found Britain was ranked one of the nations most against political correctness.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's often seen as a lazy activity, but a new study suggests that playing video games can actually help you to lose weight.

Research by Stakester revealed that male gamers can burn a whopping 420 calories over a two-hour gaming session, while female gamers can burn up to 472 calories – the equivalent of doing 1,000 sit ups.

'We all know that competition increases our heart rate and most of us have experienced the "gaming sweat" that happens when you're searching for a last-minute goal in FIFA or in a tight spot in Warzone,' said Tom Fairey, CEO and founder of Stakester.

'It's no surprise that this burns calories, but we we're surprised to see just how many is burned during a 2-hour session, it certainly beats doing 1000 sit ups!'

Scroll down for video

Research by Stakester revealed that male gamers can burn a whopping 420 calories over a two-hour gaming session, while female gamers can burn up to 472 calories – the equivalent of doing 1,000 sit ups (stock image)

Stakester is an app that connects players who want to put their gaming skills to the ultimate test – by playing their favourite games for money and prizes.

In the study, the researchers used smart devices to measure the heart rates and calories burned by 50 gamers while they played FIFA and Warzone for two hours, and while they performed sit ups.

The results revealed that male gamers burned an average of 210 calories per hour during the experiment.

Meanwhile, female gamers burnt off around 236 calories per hour while playing online.

FOODS YOU COULD BURN OFF PLAYING VIDEO GAMES Food Calories Time taken to burn Mars bar 230 57 minutes Walkers Ready Salted Crisps 132 34 minutes Big Mac 257 1hr 4 minutes McDonald's Medium Fries 320 1hr 21 minutes Greggs sausage roll 328 1hr 23 minutes Domino's medium Margherita pizza slice 200 50 minutes

To put that into context, it suggests that it would take around 57 minutes to burn off a Mars bar (230 calories), 1 hour and 4 minutes to work off a Big Mac (257 calories), and 50 minutes to burn off a medium slice of Domino's Margherita pizza (200 calories).

This isn't the first time that research has indicated that playing video games could actually be good for your health.

Last year, a team from Queensland University of Technology uncovered players are up to 21 percent more likely to have a healthier body weight than the average person.

The survey also revealed that esport gamers smoke and drink less than the general public and are significantly more active as a result of certain video games.

Queensland University of Technology (QUT) conducted the study by surveying 1,400 gamers from 65 countries in, what they say is, the first study to investigate the BMI (Body Mass Index) status of a global sample of esports players.

QUT esports researcher Michael Trotter said: 'The findings challenge the stereotype of the morbidly obese gamer.

'When you think of esports, there are often concerns raised regarding sedentary behavior and poor health as a result, and the study revealed some interesting and mixed results.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: The smart bra, steam wardrobe and six other new gadgets we didn't know we needed on display at annual electronics show

Daily Mail tries out portable immersive Royole headset at CES
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Feeding your dog the remains of your dinner can seem like a harmless thing to do, but a new study warns peas could increase their risk of getting heart disease.

Scientists in Massachusetts have found a link between canine consumption of peas and the development of canine dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) – an often fatal condition that causes a dog's heart muscle to enlarge.

As the heart dilates and becomes larger, it becomes harder to pump, which can lead to heart valve leaks or a build-up of fluids in the chest.

Worrying, peas and other legumes including lentils and chickpeas have been ingredients in some 'grain-free' dog foods for years – and could be responsible for hundreds of dog deaths.

'Grain-free' dog foods containing legumes instead of grain have already been investigated by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Although the scientists have now revealed a link between canine consumption of legumes and DCM, they don't know how the former causes the latter.

The study suggests the dangers of giving your dog peas and other pulses, although many veterinary organisations say it's fine to do so

The researchers specifically looked at compounds in grain-free dog food that have been flagged as the FDA as potentially causing DCM.

But they believe more research is needed into how pulses may cause the condition and aren't advising a product recall for grain-free dog foods just yet.

'Until we know the exact cause, we want to be cautious of all the ingredients the FDA is investigating,' study author Dr Lisa Freeman and Tufts University told NBC News.

CANINE DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY Canine dilated cardiomyopathy is a disease of a dog's heart muscle that results with an enlarged heart As the heart dilates and becomes larger, it becomes harder to pump, which can lead to heart valve leaks or a build-up of fluids in the chest DCM is prevalent in some breeds such as Doberman Pinscher, the Great Dane, the Golden Retriever, the Boxer and the Cocker Spaniel Symptoms include decreased appetite, coughing, lethargy DCM also affects humans and can be fatal. Advertisement

'Peas might be a good clue as to where we can be looking.

'As one more piece of the puzzle, this doesn’t give us the final answer, unfortunately. But it gives us things to follow up on.

'This research helps us narrow down the targets to look at so we can focus on the most likely causes and get to an answer more quickly and prevent other dogs from being affected.'

The study suggests the dangers of giving your dog peas and other pulses – whether or not they're an ingredient in dog food or fresh from your dinner plate – although many veterinary organisations say it's fine to do so.

For example, American Kennel Club (AKC) says dogs are fine to eat peas 'on occasion', as long as they're not tinned as these tend to have added salt.

AKC has a list of vegetables on its website that it says are either OK or not OK to give to your dog.

The UK charity People's Dispensary for Sick Animals (PDSA) also says peas are safe to give to your dogs as long as they're not tinned.

For their study, the Tufts University researchers compared 830 compounds in nine traditional dog foods to nine that have been associated with DCM by the FDA.

The DCM-linked dog food products were dubbed 3P/FDA in reference to the three pulses that they contain – pulses, potatoes and sweet potatoes – as a replacement for grains like rice and corn, to supplement the meat.

The People's Dispensary for Sick Animals (PDSA) says peas are safe to give to your dogs as long as they're not tinned

In all, 122 compounds were significantly higher in the 3P/FDA foods than in traditional foods, of which 24 were amino acid-related and 20 were plant compounds.

PULSES VS LEGUMES A legume refers to any plant from the Fabaceae family that would include its leaves, stems, and pods. A pulse is the edible seed from a legume plant. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) recognises 11 types of pulses: dry beans, dry broad beans, dry peas, chickpeas, cow peas, pigeon peas, lentils, Bambara beans, vetches, lupins and pulses nes (not elsewhere specified – minor pulses that don’t fall into one of the other categories). Source: pulses.org Advertisement

A machine learning algorithm called random forest analyses narrowed the number of suspect compounds to 30.

Peas were the most strongly associated with these 30 compounds, and it's likely that the more peas that are in dog food recipes, the more likely a dog goes on to develop DCM, the FDA suggests.

Some of the suspect ingredients are in dog foods that haven’t been linked to DCM, the agency says, so it could be an issue of quantity.

Genetic factors may also play a risk. It's already known that DCM is prevalent in breeds such as Doberman Pinscher, the Great Dane, the Golden Retriever, the Boxer and the Cocker Spaniel.

'Maybe if you have subpar nutrients and a particular genetic type, you might get the perfect storm,' Dr Joseph Wakshlag, a professor of nutrition at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine who wasn't involved in the study, told NBC.

According to the FDA, from January 1, 2014 to April 30, 2018 there were 524 reports of DCM – 515 for dogs and 9 for cats – submitted to the FDA.

Between 2014 and 2021, more than 1,100 cases of diagnosed DCM have been reported to the FDA, at least 280 of which have died from the condition.

MailOnline has contacted the Kennel Club, the British Veterinary Association, the British Small Animal Veterinary Association, the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and Pet Food Manufacturers’ Association for comment.

British Veterinary Association senior vice president Daniella Dos Santos said: 'We’re following this investigation into the link between cases of DCM and certain pet foods with interest.

'As the FDA has stated, this is a complex scientific issue that may involve multiple factors, though the overarching link appears to be grain-free diets.'

The FDA is studying the link between pet heart disease - known as dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) - and certian grain-free dog foods

Dos Santos recommends caution for dog owners in choosing a grain-free diet for their pet

'We always welcome pet owners taking an interest in the sourcing and ingredients of their pet’s food, but there is currently insufficient evidence to substantiate any of the beneficial health claims of a grain-free diet,' he said.

'We’d encourage pet owners to talk to their vet for advice on a healthy, nutritionally-balanced diet that is tailored to the animal’s life stage, breed, specific health needs and lifestyle.'

A Pet Food Manufacturers' Association (PFMA) spokesperson also pointed out that pulses have been used in pet food for many years, with no evidence to indicate they are inherently harmful to dogs.

'PFMA, along with the European pet food federation FEDIAF, have been closely monitoring the situation from the offset,' Sarah Hormozi, PFMA's head of science and education, told MailOnline.

'Current research suggests that a variety of factors may influence the development of DCM in dogs and the FDA has currently no definitive information indicating that diets under investigation are inherently unsafe.'

The Tufts University study has been published in Scientific Reports.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hackers have been paid by the Ministry of Defence (MoD) to search their computer systems for vulnerabilities before they can be exploited by real criminals online.

The government department has successfully concluded its first bug bounty programme, conducted in partnership with US firm HackerOne.

The programme recruited 26 'ethical hackers' who went under the bonnet of its networks for 30 days, in a bid to get ahead of 'bad actors' and improve national security.

California-based HackerOne acts as a middleman by connecting businesses with its community of ethical hackers who have been through criminal background checks.

Neither HackerOne nor the MoD would reveal how much each hacker is getting paid as part of the programme.

However, another business already partnered with HackerOne recently handed out $50,000 (more than £36,000) for discovering a severe vulnerability – while the highest amount ever paid was $100,000 (£76,000) by another firm.

While this is an attractive sum, it's a mere drop in the pond considering how much money a single flaw can cost businesses if it's noticed by cyber criminals first.

Scroll down for video

Bug bounty programs offer 'ethical hackers' a financial reward in exchange for reporting technical flaws that could cost organisations millions

BUG BOUNTIES A bug bounty is a reward that is paid out to developers who find critical flaws in software. The bounty can be monetary reward, or being put into a 'hall of fame' list for finding the bounty, or gear from the company giving the bounty, or any combination thereof. With open-source software, anyone in the world is free to comb through the code of an application and look for flaws. Source: OSTIF Advertisement

The average bounty paid for critical vulnerabilities is much also even lower – $3,650 (£2,600), according to HackerOne, while the average amount paid per vulnerability of any severity level is $979 (£700).

Christine Maxwell, the MoD's chief information security officer, described the programme as an 'essential step in reducing cyber risk and improving resilience'.

'Working with the ethical hacking community allows us to build out our bench of tech talent and bring more diverse perspectives to protect and defend our assets,' she said.

'It is important for us to continue to push the boundaries with our digital and cyber development to attract personnel with skills, energy and commitment.'

One of the 26 ethical hackers, Trevor Shingles, said he was able to alert the MoD to a flaw he uncovered which would have allowed a bad actor to modify permissions and gain access.

'It's been proven that a closed and secretive approach to security doesn't work well,' he said.

'For the MoD to be as open as it has with providing authorised access to their systems is a real testament that they are embracing all the tools at their disposal to really harden and secure their applications.

'This is a great example to set for not only the UK, but for other countries to benchmark their own security practices against.'

Bug bounty programs offer people a financial reward in exchange for reporting technical flaws.

It is a non-traditional approach for the MoD but common practice among the technology industry and has already been adopted by the US Department of Defence to great success.

Other massive companies who have worked with HackerOne's ethical hackers include Facebook, Dropbox, AT&T, Starbucks, Shopify and Twitter.

HackerOne's advertising encourages the public to 'hack for good' to help companies prevent cyber crime. Pictured, a HackerOne billboard in San Francisco

Last September, HackerOne released its annual report of bounty data from across the industry in the previous 12 months.

It revealed more than $44.75 million (£32.2 million) in bounties were awarded to hackers across the globe over the year prior – a year-over-year increase of 87 per cent in total bounties paid.

Nine individual hackers in seven countries have each earned $1 million (£720,000) in bounties on the HackerOne platform for their efforts, it also revealed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sitting down for too long can have adverse effects on your mental health and wellbeing, a new study has warned.

It even outweighs the benefits of regular exercise, according to researchers who looked at the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on people's lives.

Being allowed an hour of outdoor exercise on a daily basis was a key part of the UK government's strategy when the first national lockdown began in March 2020.

Scroll down for video

Sitting down for too long can have adverse effects on your mental health and wellbeing, a new study has warned

However, the study by the University of Huddersfield found that many people spent more than eight hours a day sitting, either because of working from home or being at a loose end while on furlough.

Researchers said this in turn caused detrimental effects to their mental health.

Even people taking part in 150 minutes per week of moderate or vigorous physical activity experienced a negative impact on their mental health, suggesting more exercise was required to counterbalance their increased sedentary lifestyle.

'Although our sample of nearly 300 [people] was very active, they were sitting for longer periods with over 50 per cent sitting for more than eight hours a day,' said Dr Liane Azevedo, one of the study's authors.

'We found that sitting time, together with some demographics and pre-existing health conditions, were the main variables to negatively influence mental health and wellbeing.

'Other studies have shown that if you sit for longer than eight hours, in order to compensate the negative effect of sedentary behaviour on physical health outcomes you need to exercise for longer.'

She said that around 60 minutes is ideal, longer than the 30 minutes that is generally recommended as a minimum for daily exercise.

Researchers said prolonged sitting caused detrimental effects to mental health (stock image)

'Reducing sitting time has a positive effect on mental health. We recommend that together with increase in physical activity, public health should encourage reduction of sitting time for mental health benefits,' Dr Azevedo added.

She said it was important people understood that physical activity was 'not just going to the gym'.

'Going for a walk specially in green areas is really important, any type of moderate activity does have benefits,' Dr Azevedo said.

'We also noticed from our study that leisure and gardening are activities that help both physically and mentally.

'We want to develop an intervention based on these findings, to focus on the decrease of sedentary behaviour as well as increase in physical activity to promote benefits on mental health.'

The research was published in the journal Sport Sciences for Health.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Almost 400,000 people in the UK say they have been suffering from long-Covid for more than a year, data suggested today.

Around 1.46 per cent of the population claim they've been left plagued by persistent symptoms after catching the coronavirus.

The Office for National Statistics, which carried out the major poll, said this equated to around 945,000 people.

Among those, 40 per cent say they've been left battling symptoms such as tiredness and muscle pain for at least 12 months.

There is no universally agreed definition of long-Covid — but the ONS defines it as symptoms people suffer from for more than four weeks after they caught the virus that could not be explained by something else.

The poll data comes after a study this week found the poorly-understood condition is 'rare' in children.

Meanwhile, F1 driver Lewis Hamilton fears he may be suffering long Covid after he came close to collapsing at the end of the Hungarian Grand Prix.

Fatigue was the most common symptom, affecting an estimated 535,000 people, followed by shortness of breath striking 397,000 and muscle ache hitting 309,000, according to the Office for National Statistics

The ONS surveyed 313,602 people in the four weeks up to July 4. Not everyone who was asked ever tested positive for Covid.

Of those who had long Covid, 88.4 per cent had symptoms for more than 12 weeks — equating to an estimated 834,000 people in the UK.

Some 64.7 per cent said their symptoms hampered their daily activities.

And around one in five people reported their ability to engaged in daily activities had been 'limited a lot'.

Tiredness was the most commonly reported symptom, with the ONS calculating that 528,000 Brits were suffering from it.

Shortness of breath (388,000), muscle ache (296,000) and a loss of smell (285,000) were the next complained about symptoms.

WHAT ARE THE LONG-TERM SYMPTOMS OF COVID-19? Most coronavirus patients will recover within a fortnight, suffering a fever, cough and losing their sense of smell or taste for several days. However, evidence is beginning to show that the tell-tale symptoms of the virus can persist for weeks on end in 'long haulers' — the term for patients plagued by lasting complications. Data from the Covid Symptom Study app, by King's College London and health company Zoe, suggests one in ten people may still have symptoms after three weeks, and some may suffer for months. Long term symptoms include: Chronic tiredness

Breathlessness

Raised heart rate

Delusions

Strokes

Insomnia

Loss of taste/smell

Kidney disease

Mobility issues

Headaches

Muscle pains

Fevers For those with more severe disease, Italian researchers who tracked 143 people who had been hospitalised with the disease found almost 90 per cent still had symptoms including fatigue two months after first falling unwell. The most common complaints were fatigue, a shortness of breath and joint pain - all of which were reported during their battle with the illness. Source: NHS Advertisement

Self-reported long-Covid was highest in people aged between 35 and 69, with 2 per cent of that group estimated to have the condition.

Women, people living in deprived areas, healthcare workers and those with underlying conditions were also more likely to report ongoing Covid symptoms.

But the number of people the ONS thinks are suffering from the condition is down slightly from its estimate of 962,000 one month earlier.

Just 8.1 per cent of people who report having long-Covid were hospitalised with the virus, the ONS found.

And 41.4 per cent had not contacted the NHS when they were infected, suggesting the condition also affects those who had mild symptoms.

The ONS findings could over exaggerate how many people actually have the condition because it relies on people self-reporting symptoms.

A survey by researchers at Kings College London, which was published this week, found less than two per cent of children who became ill with the virus suffered persistent symptoms that lasted at least eight weeks.

The majority recovered within a week and many children who catch Covid 'don't show any symptoms at all', they found.

Meanwhile, racing driver Lewis Hamilton revealed this week that he has suspected long-Covid after 'fighting all year' with his health after catching the virus in December.

He said: 'I haven't spoken to anyone particularly about it but I think it is lingering,' he said.

'I remember the effects when I had it. The training has been different since then and the levels of fatigue you get are different and it's a real challenge.'

Dr Stuart Ritchie, a lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, told MailOnline: 'When you see numbers like this I think you should always be asking what the person means by 'long Covid'.

'Unfortunately at the moment there are an awful lot of different definitions, though the cases you hear about a lot in the media are often the most extreme ones, where people suffer very debilitating and life-changing symptoms.

'It's likely that a lot of the cases in that headline number are far milder - indeed, only around 20 per cent of the people in the ONS survey said their long-Covid symptoms had limited their daily activities by a lot.'

He added: 'There have been some confusing numbers in past research where substantial proportions of people who report long-Covid symptoms can't prove they've ever had Covid itself.

'That's not to say they're making it up - the symptoms are likely real.

'And lots of people could have had Covid and missed getting a test, especially if they had it early in the pandemic.

'But it means that researchers need to do a lot more to get to the bottom of who's having symptoms that are specifically caused by having had a previous Covid infection, and who might be suffering from problems that stem from another cause.'

He added that questions around long Covid should not make anyone less concerned about getting a vaccine, because symptomatic Covid is 'unpleasant and dangerous enough, leaving aside long-term consequences'.

Professor Kevin McConway, an emeritus professor of applied statistics at the Open University, said it's possible that the some people may report having long-Covid but are mistaking their symptoms as something else.

But he added: 'These results show quite major levels of illness, discomfort, and to some extent disability, that were mostly not there before the pandemic.'

He said the ONS figures have been criticised for being self-reported, but this is the only way to get a 'good, complete estimate' because there is a lack of support from health services.

Dr David Strain, a senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter Medical School, warned the ONS findings 'may be an underestimate' of the true figures.

He said: 'The ONS is dependent on self reported symptoms and people with more subtle deficits are unlikely to report problems.'

Professor Keith Willison, chair of chemical biology at Imperial College London, told MailOnline: 'Many virus diseases in humans cause long-term problems and Covid seems no exception.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@General Motors announced a second recall Friday for some older Chevrolet Bolts to fix persistent battery problems that have set some vehicles on fire.

The vehicle maker is urging owners to not park cars inside garages, but rather on the street, limit charging the battery to 90 percent and do not let the battery drop below 70 miles of range.

The company also says the Bolts should not be charged overnight, and should be parked outside immediately after they are charged.

The second recall comes after two Bolts that had been fixed under a previous recall caught fire, one in Vermont and the other in New Jersey.

It covers about 69,000 Bolts worldwide from 2017, 2018 and part of the 2019 model year, all of which use batteries made by LG Chem in South Korea.

General Motors is recalling some older Chevrolet Bolts for a second time to fix persistent battery problems that can set the electric cars ablaze. The second recall comes after two Bolts that had been fixed under a previous recall caught fire, one in Vermont (pictured) and the other in New Jersey

The recall is another bug in a growing global rollout of electric vehicles by all automakers to replace internal combustion vehicles to cut emissions and fight climate change.

Ford, BMW and Hyundai all have recalled batteries recently.

Separately, the US National Transportation Safety Board investigated a series of fires in Tesla vehicles and earlier this year said the high-voltage lithium-ion batteries pose safety risks to first responders after crashes.

GM said in a statement Friday that the faulty Bolt batteries can have two rare manufacturing defects in the same cell at the same time.

The carmaker is urging owners to not park cars inside garage, but rather on the street, limit charging the battery to 90 percent and do not let the battery drop below 70 miles of range.

GM will now replace any defective battery modules and possibly the whole battery pack.

Spokesman Dan Flores said engineers are working around the clock on how to find the battery defect and what the repairs will be.

He said GM doesn't know how long it will take to develop the fix.

The number of Bolts with the defect is likely to be small, Flores added.

The previous recall, announced in April, didn't fully fix the problem. It was diagnostic software designed to look for battery anomalies. If one was found, GM said it would replace faulty parts.

Some 2019 Bolts and those from the 2020 and 2021 model years are not affected, but these were made by LG in Holland, Michigan.

'We understand that the previous recall and this recall significantly inconvenience our customers,' Flores said. 'We appreciate their patience and we understand their frustration.'

GM will handle customer complaints about the inconvenience and lower travel range on a case-by-case basis, he said.

The company says owners who haven't had the first recall repairs done should still take their cars to dealers to get the fixes.

It covers about 69,000 Bolts worldwide from 2017, 2018 and part of the 2019 model year, all of which use batteries made by LG Chem in South Korea

The first recall came after the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration opened an investigation into the fires last year. The agency said in a statement Friday that it is evaluating GM's recall repairs and the fires.

Once the final recall repairs are made, the Bolts´ full range will be restored. Older Bolts can go about 238 miles per charge.

GM previously warned owners of the older Bolts s to not park their vehicles inside a garage or keep them charged overnight earlier this month.

This announcement was a result of the two bolts, one in Vermont and the other in New Jersey, catching fire after receiving the first recall repairs.

Tim Briglin, whose 2019 Bolt caught fire, said he drove it to work and back home in Thetford, Vermont, on June 30, depleting the battery to around 10 percent of its range.

He plugged it into a 240-volt outdoor charger around 8am ET and left the Bolt in his driveway after the car messaged that it would be fully recharged by 4am ET.

Around 6:30am ET the next day, Briglin saw smoke coming from the rear of the car and called the fire department.

Briglin said he had the recall repairs done on June 9, and charged his Bolt to 100 percent of its battery capacity the morning of the fire.

The fire in New Jersey happened this week, but no additional information has been released.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coffee may be the perfect morning pick-me-up, but a new study suggests drinking it in excess can compromise our brain health over time.

Researchers in Australia have found that high coffee consumption is associated with smaller total brain volumes and a 53 per cent increased risk of dementia.

The experts offer no explanation for the surprising link, which follows multiple previous studies that found drinking coffee in moderation can actually stave off dementia.

The new study also follows a wealth of prior evidence that drinking coffee does have other health benefits over time – as long as it's not consumed in excess.

Although it was not specifically determined that excess coffee consumption caused dementia, the authors of this new study warn against high consumption of the black stuff, which they define as more than six cups a day.

It's easy to knock back multiple coffees throughout the day without keeping track of how many we've had. Now, new research from the University of South Australia shows that too much could impact brain health over time

DAILY COFFEE INTAKE: WHAT'S THE OFFICIAL ADVICE? According to the US's federal dietary guidelines, three to five 8-ounce cups of coffee per day can be part of a healthy diet – but this guidance only refers to plain black coffee. An 8-ounce cup equates to around 240ml – just under half a pint – and is about the capacity of a small serving of coffee in the UK. The average cup of coffee contains about 90mg of caffeine, depending on the type of coffee and how it's made, according to the British Dietetic Association (BDA). 'A double espresso, the typical base for many coffee shop coffees, will contain about 125mg and the more shots you have in your coffee means that you will get more caffeine,' the BDA says. Health organisations around the world suggest that most people can safely consume up to 300mg of caffeine a day. In addition, despite its benefits, research has shown that caffeine also can be dangerous if consumed in excess. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that, in general, children should avoid coffee and any beverages with caffeine in them. The American Heart Association also warns that popular coffee-based drinks such as lattes and macchiatos are often high in calories, added sugar and fat - which effectively overrides any benefits of the black stuff. Advertisement

The study, published in Nutritional Neuroscience, has been led by experts at the University of South Australia (UniSA), along with academics from other institutions including the University of Cambridge and the University of Exeter.

'Coffee is among the most popular drinks in the world. Yet with global consumption being more than nine billion kilograms a year, it's critical that we understand any potential health implications,' said study author Kitty Pham at UniSA.

'This is the most extensive investigation into the connections between coffee, brain volume measurements, the risks of dementia, and the risks of stroke.

'It's also the largest study to consider volumetric brain imaging data and a wide range of confounding factors.

'Accounting for all possible permutations, we consistently found that higher coffee consumption was significantly associated with reduced brain volume.

'Essentially, drinking more than six cups of coffee a day may be putting you at risk of brain diseases such as dementia and stroke.'

According to the European Food Safety Authority, we should be drinking 400mg of coffee a day – about four to five cups – at the very most although the daily maximum is only 200mg for pregnant women.

'Typical daily coffee consumption is somewhere between one and two standard cups of coffee,' said study author Professor Elina Hyppönen.

'Of course, while unit measures can vary, a couple of cups of coffee a day is generally fine.

'However, if you're finding that your coffee consumption is heading up toward more than six cups a day, it's about time you rethink your next drink.'

Study author Professor David Llewellyn from the University of Exeter added: 'Heavy coffee drinkers can reduce their risk of dementia by moderating how much they drink – for example by drinking tea instead which wasn’t linked to dementia risk in our study.'

The experts assessed the effects of coffee on the brain among 17,702 UK Biobank participants, aged between 37 and 73.

Those who drank more than six cups of coffee a day had a 53 per cent increased risk of dementia compared with those who consumed one to two cups a day.

Drinking more than six cups of coffee was also associated with a 17 per cent increased risk of having a stroke.



About 50 million people are diagnosed with dementia worldwide, and in Australia, dementia is the second leading cause of death, with an estimated 250 people diagnosed each day.

A stroke, meanwhile, is where the blood supply to the brain is disrupted, resulting in oxygen starvation, brain damage and loss of function.

If your coffee consumption is heading up toward more than six cups a day, 'it's about time you rethink your next drink', the research suggests

COFFEE AND DEMENTIA: PREVIOUS STUDIES 2018: Krembil Brain Institute, Canada Drinking coffee may protect you against developing both Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease 2018: Rutgers University, US Two compounds in caffeine prevent accumulation of a toxic protein, alpha-synuclein, that's associated with dementia with Lewy bodies. 2016: University of Coimbra in Portugal Moderate coffee consumption can reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's by up to 27 per cent 2014: Institute for Scientific Information on Coffee Drinking between three and five cups a day could cut the chance of developing Alzheimer's disease by up to 20 per cent. Advertisement

Globally, one in four adults over the age of 25 will have a stroke in their lifetime. Data suggests that 13.7 million people will have a stroke this year with 5.5 million dying as a result.

'This research provides vital insights about heavy coffee consumption and brain health, but as with many things in life, moderation is the key,' said Professor Hyppönen.

'Together with other genetic evidence and a randomised controlled trial, these data strongly suggest that high coffee consumption can adversely affect brain health.

'While the exact mechanisms are not known, one simple thing we can do is to keep hydrated and remember to drink a bit of water alongside that cup of coffee.'

Earlier this year, Swiss researchers found regular caffeine intake reduces the volume of grey matter in the brain, suggesting coffee intake could impair our information processing ability.

The experts gave volunteers three 150mg servings of caffeine a day for 10 days – a caffeine intake equating to about four or five small cups of brewed coffee a day, or seven single espressos.

They found a reduction in grey matter, which is mostly found on the outer-most layer of the brain, or cortex, and serves to process information.

UniSA has been consistently investigating the effects of coffee – one of Australia's favourite beverages – on human health.

In February, the team revealed that long-term, heavy coffee consumption – six or more cups a day – can increase the amount of fats in your blood, increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD).

'There's certainly a lot of scientific debate about the pros and cons of coffee,' said Professor Hyppönen at the time.

'But while it may seem like we're going over old ground, it's essential to fully understand how one of the world's most widely consumed drinks can impact our health.'

Professor Hyppönen and her colleague Ang Zhou looked at genetic and phenotypic associations between coffee intake and plasma lipid profiles – the cholesterols and fats in blood.

The study, published in Clinical Nutrition, used data from 362,571 UK Biobank participants, aged between 37 and 73 years.

Not only did they find a link between the two, but causal evidence that habitual coffee consumption contributes to an adverse lipid (fat) profile.

Coffee beans contain a very potent cholesterol-elevating compound called cafestol, which mainly present in unfiltered brews, such as French press, Turkish and Greek coffees, but also in espressos.

Espressos are the base for most barista-made coffees, including lattes and cappuccinos. If you order a coffee on the high street, you're likely to be served an espresso, whether it's with or without milk.

It's therefore wise to choose filtered coffee when possible and be wary of overindulging in the drink, even if it powers us through the working day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People who are exposed to lead poisoning during childhood may be more immature and have less healthy personalities as adults, a new study suggests.

Experts found that those who grew up in areas with higher levels of atmospheric lead exhibited more neurotic and less conscientious behaviour in adulthood.

They also discovered that people born after atmospheric lead levels began to decline in their area had more mature, psychologically healthy personalities in adulthood than those born before their counties phased out lead-based products.

Scroll down for video

Warning: People who are exposed to lead poisoning during childhood may be more immature and have less healthy personalities as adults, a new study suggests (file photo)

HEALTH EFFECTS OF LEAD EXPOSURE Children: - Behavior and learning problems - Lower IQ and Hyperactivity - Slowed growth - Hearing Problems - Anemia Pregnant women: - Cause the baby to be born too early or too small - Hurt the baby’s brain, kidneys and nervous system - Increase the likelihood of learning or behavioral problems - Put the mother at risk of miscarriage Adults: - Cardiovascular effects, increased blood pressure and incidence of hypertension - Decreased kidney function - Reproductive problems (in both men and women) Source: US government Advertisement

The study, led by psychology researchers at the University of Texas at Austin (UT), sampled more than 1.5 million people in 269 US counties and 37 European nations.

'Links between lead exposure and personality traits are quite impactful, because we take our personalities with us everywhere,' said UT's Ted Schwaba.

'Even a small negative effect of lead on personality traits, when you aggregate it across millions of people and all the daily decisions and behaviors that our personality influences, can have really massive effects on well-being, productivity and longevity.'

Researchers compared historical atmospheric lead data from the Environmental Protection Agency to online personality questionnaire responses from people who grew up in the sampled locations.

Results showed that adults who were raised in US counties with higher levels of atmospheric lead were less agreeable and conscientious and, among adults in their 20s and 30s, more neurotic than those who had less lead exposure during childhood.

'These three traits – conscientiousness, agreeableness and low neuroticism – make up a large part of what we would consider a mature, psychologically healthy personality and are strong predictors of our success or failure in relationships and at work,' Schwaba said.

'Normally, across the lifespan, people become more conscientious and agreeable, and less neurotic.'

To further test whether lead exposure causes these differences, the researchers examined the effects of the 1970 Clean Air Act.

They found that people born after atmospheric lead levels began to decline in their counties had more mature, psychologically healthy personalities in adulthood than those born before their counties phased out lead-based products.

The study was also replicated in Europe, where lead was phased out later than in the US.

Experts found that people who grew up in areas with more atmospheric lead were also less agreeable and more neurotic in adulthood, but not necessarily less conscientiousness.

'For a long time, we've known lead exposure is harmful, but each new wave of research seems to identify new ways in which lead exposure harms society,' Schwaba said.

'Though there's much less lead in the atmosphere today, lead remains in pipes, the topsoil and groundwater.

'And these sources of lead exposure tend to disproportionately harm people of colour.

'Black children are twice as likely to have high levels of lead in their blood as white children.

'From an economic standpoint, from a social justice standpoint, or really any way you look at it, it's incredibly important to limit lead exposure as much as possible.'

Four star was a class of leaded petrol sold in the UK. It was banned from UK forecourts due to its health risks

Last month a separate study revealed that toxic lead – which used to be added to petrol before its phase-out in 2000 – is still plaguing London air.

A team of researchers at Imperial College London analysed lead concentrations at two central London locations with heavy traffic.

They found the toxic element is still at potentially dangerous levels – and that lead concentrations haven't significantly fallen in the last 10 years.

Lead from leaded petrol settled in the environment before its phase-out in 2000 – and is now steadily re-suspended into the air through wind and vehicle movement, the study discovered.



Exposure to lead causes neuro-developmental problems in children and cardiovascular, kidney, and reproductive problems in adults.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: CES apologizes and RETURNS robotics award to women's sex toy startup months after banning firm's smart vibrator from the show floor in move critics slammed as 'sexist' and 'biased'

Robo-stripper! Meet the bizarre pole-dancing robots on show at the Las Vegas Gentleman's Club Sapphire.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Video: Sony's puppy-sized robot dog Aibo that comes equipped with cameras, AI and an internet connection can now remotely check up on family members, children or even PETS

Sony's famed robot dog Aibo made an adorable comeback at CES 2018, charming visitors with its amazingly life-like antics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected — and heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense, a bombshell United Nations report dubbed a 'code red for humanity' has warned.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040.

The world's largest ever report into climate change also said it was 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'.

Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'

It comes as record heatwaves, wildfires and floods hit countries around the world.

Last month western Europe saw its worst flooding in decades, leaving more than 180 people dead after heavy rainfall hit Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland and the Netherlands.

A blistering heatwave killed hundreds of people across the west coast of the US and Canada earlier this summer, while more than 300 died and almost 13 million others were affected by floods that engulfed Henan province in China at the end of July.

The 1.5C mark is considered to be the point where climate change becomes increasingly dangerous. The 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change committed countries to limiting warming to 1.5C but they have already risen by 1.2C.

UN Secretary-General António Guterres called the new report a 'code red for humanity'. He warned: 'The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.'

The key findings of the report are:

Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels

It is 'virtually certain' that heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions'

A rise in sea levels approaching 2 metres by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out'

The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050

Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are higher than they have been for three million years

Some changes, such as sea level rises, will be 'irreversible' for hundreds to thousands of years

However, some experts say there is still hope that cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases could stabilise rising temperatures.

Scientists involved in the report said the 1.5C or 2C thresholds are not cliff edges the world will fall off, but that every bit of warming makes a difference, so it is important to curb temperature rises as much as possible.

Professor Richard Betts, from the Met Office Hadley Centre and a contributing author to the report, said: 'Like the speed limit on a motorway, staying below it is not perfectly safe and exceeding it does not immediately lead to calamity, but the risks do increase if the limit is passed.

Scroll down for video

If temperatures continue to rise, there could be devastating effects here on Earth, including a dramatic loss of sea-life, an ice-free Arctic and more regular 'extreme' weather

Climate change: The bombshell UN report comes as record heatwaves, wildfires and floods hit countries around the world. A firefighter is pictured above trying to extinguish a wildfire burning on the island of Evia, Greece at the weekend

These graphs show how human influence has warmed the climate at a rate unprecedented in at least the last 2,000 years

The UN scientists modelled the changes in annual mean temperatures worldwide based on 1.5C, 2C and 4C global warming

The projected changes in extremes are larger in frequency and intensity with every additional increment of global warming

Key findings from the UN's new climate science report – It is 'unequivocal' that human activity has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land – with widespread and rapid changes across the world. – Many of the changes are unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years, with the world warming at a rate unprecedented in at least 2,000 years. – Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are higher than they have been for three million years and methane concentrations are higher than they have been for 800,000 years, with rises in both greenhouse gases well above natural changes seen for hundreds of thousands of years. – Global average temperatures were nearly 1.1C higher in the last decade than in pre-industrial times, or the period 1850-1900, driven by emissions caused by human activities such as burning fossil fuels and deforestation. – Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region around the world, with stronger evidence of more frequent or intense heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts and tropical cyclones and the role humans play in driving the changes. – Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels. The rate of sea level rise is speeding up. – Global surface temperatures will continue to increase until at least mid-century, and the world will reach or exceed 1.5C of warming over the next 20 years. – Global warming of 1.5C and 2C – limits countries have committed to in order to avoid the most dangerous impacts of climate change – will be exceeded in the 21st century unless deep reductions in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions occur in the coming decades. – Continued warming will drive increases in the frequency and intensity of hot extremes, marine heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts in some regions, the proportion of intense tropical cyclones, and reductions in Arctic sea ice, snow cover and permafrost. – Every additional increment of warming causes larger changes in extremes, with every extra 0.5C temperature rises leading to clear increases in the intensity of heatwaves, heavy rain that can cause flooding, and droughts. – Under scenarios for the future with increasing carbon dioxide emissions, the ocean and land carbon sinks such as forests are projected to be less effective at slowing the accumulation of the greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. – Changes to oceans, sea levels and melting permafrost and glaciers are irreversible for decades, centuries or even millennia as a result of past and future warming. – Strong, rapid and sustained reductions in emissions of methane would help curb warming, and would also improve air quality Advertisement

'Limiting warming to 1.5C clearly needs much more urgent emissions cuts than is currently happening, but if the target is still breached we should not assume all is lost and give up – it will still be worth continuing action on emissions reductions to avoid even more warming.'

Today's report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was produced by 200 scientists from 60 countries.

Drawing on more than 14,000 scientific papers, the review includes the latest knowledge on past and potential future warming, how humans are changing the climate and how that is increasing extreme weather events and driving sea-level rises.

The authors say it is 'virtually certain' that heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions'.

They also said a rise in sea levels approaching 2 metres by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out', while the Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050.

Mr Guterres urged countries to urgently step up efforts and set out national plans for cutting emissions this decade ahead of a crucial UN climate summit taking place in Glasgow in November.

'Global heating is affecting every region on Earth, with many of the changes becoming irreversible,' he said.

'The internationally agreed threshold of 1.5C is perilously close.'

He called for an end to coal-fired power plants and fossil fuel exploration, a shift to renewable energy and funding to protect vulnerable communities, and said Covid-19 recovery spending must be in line with climate goals.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson called the report 'sobering reading' and said it was clear the next decade was going to be pivotal to securing the future of the planet.

'We know what must be done to limit global warming – consign coal to history and shift to clean energy sources, protect nature and provide climate finance for countries on the frontline,' he added.

Mr Johnson, whose government is due to publish its strategy on cutting UK emissions to zero overall by mid-century this autumn, but faces concerns over how to fairly pay for the move, said: 'The UK is leading the way, decarbonising our economy faster than any country in the G20 over the last two decades.

'I hope today's IPCC report will be a wake-up call for the world to take action now, before we meet in Glasgow in November for the critical Cop26 summit.'

It comes as the Government faces growing pressure from Tory backbenchers to delay bans on fossil fuel cars and boilers.

According to a report in the Times, Chancellor Rishi Sunak is drawing up plans for richer households to bear the brunt of funding Britain's climate-change targets in an attempt to protect low-income families.

Moves to decarbonise the economy include replacing gas boilers and switching to electric or hydrogen cars – both of which involve huge upfront costs.

Humans are 'unequivocally' to blame

UN scientists said humanity's damaging impact on the climate was a 'statement of fact', adding that it is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'.

Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels, the report said.

It also found that human activity is already responsible for 1.1C of global warming since 1850, while temperatures will continue to increase until at least the middle of this century.

Scientists said the world will reach or exceed 1.5C of warming over the next 20 years.

Weather will become more extreme

Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region around the world, the landmark report said, with stronger evidence of more frequent or intense heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts and tropical cyclones and the role humans play in driving the changes.

Heatwaves, flooding and droughts will only become more frequent and intense, the UN scientists warned.

Severe heatwaves that happened only once every 50 years are now happening roughly once a decade, while most land areas are seeing more rain or snowfall in a year and severe droughts are happening 1.7 times as often.

Arctic summers may soon be free of ice

The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050, according to the IPCC's most optimistic scenario.

The region is the fastest-warming area of the globe — at least twice as fast as the global average.

While Arctic sea ice levels vary throughout the year, the average lows during summer have been decreasing since the 1970s and are now at their lowest levels in 1,000 years. This melting creates a feedback loop, with reflective ice giving way to darker water that absorbs solar radiation, causing even more warming.

Sea level rises are 'irreversible'

Scientists warned that a rise in sea levels approaching 2 metres by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out', adding that these changes would be 'irreversible' for hundreds to thousands of years.

Warming in the polar regions is not only melting sea ice but also causing thermal expansion, where the water expands as sea temperatures rise. Both of these phenomena are factors in rising sea levels.

If they keep rising as fast as they are then coastal regions and islands could be flooded or left underwater, leading to the displacement of millions of people and the loss of land for food growing.

Projections for 2050: According to Climate Central, people in Liverpool, Hull, Blackpool and along the Norfolk coast could lose their homes if sea levels continue to rise

The authors of the IPCC report considered scenarios where global temperatures increased by 1.5C, 2C and 4C and the impact each one would have on mean temperatures and precipitation across Europe

The report also looked at how these scenarios would affect mean temperatures and precipitation levels in North America

What will happen if temperatures continue to increase? Coastal regions and islands underwater Sea level rises are 'irreversible' for hundreds or perhaps thousands of years, the report warned. It 'cannot be ruled out' that sea levels could rise by around 2m by the end of this century and 5m by 2150. This could lead to more flooding, the displacement of millions of people and a loss of land for food growing. An ice-free Arctic The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050, UN scientists said. This is causing animals such as polar bears to suffer because of their shrinking habitat. Extreme weather commonplace It is 'virtually certain' that heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense across the world. Hot extremes have become more prevalent since the 1950s, while cold events have become less frequent and less severe. Dramatic loss of sea-life The Earth's oceans will continue to warm and become more acidic, killing coral reefs and harming infant cod, blue mussels, starfish and sea urchins in particular. Advertisement

Inger Andersen, head of the United Nations Environment Programme, said the world 'listened, but did not hear' the extent of the dangers of the climate crisis.

She criticised global leaders for 'not acting strongly enough' and said a generation of politicians, business leaders and 'conscious citizens' was needed to make 'systematic changes'.

'It's time to get serious because every tonne of CO2 emission adds to global warming,' she added.

Climate activist Greta Thunberg said the report 'confirms what we already know... that we are in an emergency.'

'We can still avoid the worst consequences, but not if we continue like today, and not without treating the crisis like a crisis,' she wrote on Twitter.

Cabinet minister Alok Sharma, who is Cop26 president, said: 'The science is clear, the impacts of the climate crisis can be seen around the world and if we don't act now, we will continue to see the worst effects impact lives, livelihoods and natural habitats.

'Our message to every country, government, business and part of society is simple. The next decade is decisive, follow the science and embrace your responsibility to keep the goal of 1.5C alive.'

He called on countries to come forward with ambitious 2030 emissions reduction targets and long-term strategies with a pathway to net zero by the middle of the century.

Governments need to take immediate action to end coal power, accelerate the rollout of electric vehicles, tackle deforestation and reduce methane emissions, he urged.

Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said the report 'is the starkest reminder yet that the climate crisis is here right now and is the biggest long-term threat we face'.

He said: 'It confirms that the extreme weather events of recent months are only going to become more frequent and that we need urgent action both to drive down emissions in this decisive decade and to adapt to the changes to our climate that are already baked in.

'The biggest threat we now face is not climate denial but climate delay. Those who, like our prime minister, acknowledge there is a problem, but simply don't have the scale of ambition required to match the moment.

'Our communities and planet can no longer afford the inaction of this Government, who are failing to treat the crisis with the seriousness it deserves.'

This graphic from the UN report shows scientists' prediction of future emissions including CO2, methane and nitrous oxide

Human activity is already responsible for 1.1C of global warming since 1850, while temperatures will continue to increase until at least the middle of this century. The temperature changes from human influence, including greenhouse gas emissions, aerosols, land-use changes and aviation vapour trails are shown above

No 10 fears carbon target will hurt Red Wall voters Boris Johnson's 'net zero' plans have been thrown into doubt over fears that 'Red Wall' voters will bear the brunt of the costs. A Treasury review of the costs of reducing net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050 has been delayed since the spring. The report has yet to be published over fears that it will be politically toxic in the northern Red Wall seats won from Labour by the Tories in the last election, The Sunday Telegraph reported. Chancellor Rishi Sunak is also said to be increasingly concerned about the surging cost of lowering greenhouse emissions. A report in the Times newspaper claims he is drawing up plans for richer households to bear the brunt of funding Britain's climate-change targets. Treasury sources insisted that Mr Sunak would protect low-income families, as the Government faces growing pressure from backbench Tories to delay bans on fossil fuel cars and boilers. Ministers are said to be working on plans to achieve net zero without disproportionately 'clobbering' the finances of poorer families. Moves to decarbonise the economy include replacing gas boilers and switching to electric or hydrogen cars – which involve huge upfront costs. It comes after the Daily Mail revealed on Saturday that a court has told climate policy chiefs to show why they think reaching net zero will cost only 1.3 per cent of GDP. The target is the centrepiece of Mr Johnson's Cop26 strategy – but other countries have put a much higher cost on the same goal. A Government spokesman said: 'At every step on the path to net zero, this government will put affordability and fairness at the heart of our reforms such as through investing £1.3billion into keeping bills low.' Advertisement

The report has been published just days after a 'scary' study warned that the Gulf Stream is at its weakest for over 1,000 years due to climate change.

It is approaching a 'tipping point' where it could collapse and push temperatures in Europe down by 18F, according to the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Germany.

The Atlantic Ocean circulation system is responsible for the mild temperatures in the UK and Europe, moving heat from the tropics to the northern hemisphere.

Its underlying system has become destabilised, researchers discovered, which could eventually result in it switching to a 'weak mode' and lead to its collapse.

When it happens warm water won't be moved up through western Europe, causing freezing cold winters.

In June, an interactive map showed the British seaside spots likely to be wiped out by 2050 because of rising sea levels caused by global warming.

The map, created by US climate news website Climate Central, shows people in Liverpool, Hull, Blackpool and along the Norfolk coast would lose their homes by 2050.

Other areas that could be permanently underwater include South Wales, Gloucester, Weston-super-Mare, Portsmouth and huge swathes of East Anglia.

Campaigners seized on today's UN report to urge the UK Government to do more to reduce emissions.

Jake Woodier, from The Climate Coalition, which includes groups ranging from the National Trust and the Women’s Institute to WWF, Oxfam and the RSPB, said: 'Climate change is already here, and after a summer of chaotic and destructive weather, the public want Boris Johnson’s government to act decisively.

'We already know what’s needed to secure a safer future: from saying no to polluting fossil fuels like the Cambo oil field, to restoring the natural world, protecting forests and meeting financial promises to support people on the frontline of the climate crisis.

'Now, it's time to get on and do it,' he urged.

Professor Joanna Haigh, from Imperial College London, said: 'The window is still open for governments to avoid the worst impacts and risks and to secure a strong outcome at Cop26 just three months away – but this will depend on nations coming forward ahead of the summit to put in place robust emission reduction plans for the next decade.

'This window won't remain open for much longer,' she warned.

A near-destroyed street is pictured in the German town of Euskirchen after flooding last month caused widespread destruction, with the death toll now above 180

More than 230 deaths were reported in British Columbia after a blistering heatwave, labelled a once-in-10,000-year 'heat dome', gripped Canada and the west coast of the US. The Canadian city of Vancouver in British Columbia is pictured

WHAT ARE THE KEY GOALS OF THE PARIS CLIMATE AGREEMENT? The Paris Agreement on Climate Change has four main goals with regards to reducing emissions: 1) A long-term goal of keeping the increase in global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels 2) To aim to limit the increase to 1.5°C, since this would significantly reduce risks and the impacts of climate change 3) Goverments agreed on the need for global emissions to peak as soon as possible, recognising that this will take longer for developing countries 4) To undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with the best available science Source: European Commission Advertisement

Connor Schwartz, climate lead at Friends of the Earth, said: 'Every fraction of a degree now matters more than ever.

'Loud wake-up calls have been sounding for years but world leaders have chronically over-slept, and people are paying the price with their lives.

'If we want a habitable planet, the window is just about still open, that’s today's report in a nutshell.'

Today's report is the first comprehensive assessment of the science of climate change since 2013 and offers the starkest warning yet about the speed and scale of warming.

An interim report published in 2018 said global warming was likely to reach 1.5C between 2030 and 2052.

But the new IPCC forecasts will bring this window forward a decade to between 2021 and 2040, according to The Sunday Times.

The document is predicted to trigger a 'turning point' in the run-up to the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow in November.

The 2018 IPCC report warned that overshooting the 1.5C limit would mean more extreme weather, greater sea-level rises and damage to health, wildlife and crops.

Wildfires have also hit Greece this week, forcing the evacuation of more than 2,000 people as the country faces its worst heatwave for 30 years.

Yesterday ferries carried hundreds of tourists and residents to safety as wildfires raged on the island of Evia.

The inferno was among dozens in Greece after temperatures soared to 45C (113F).

Fire crews from London, Merseyside, Lancashire, Wales and the West Midlands flew to Athens at the weekend to help.

Ordinary Britons WILL have to pay to go green: Minister pledges help for families to pay for environmentally friendly initiatives amid Tory disquiet over punishing taxpayers

By David Wilcock, Whitehall correspondent for MailOnline

Ministers pledged help for hard-pressed families to go green today amid questions over the cost to taxpayers of the Boris Johnson's climate change plans.

The Prime Minister wants a 'net zero' Britain by 2050 that includes banning gas boilers in homes and sales of new petrol and diesel cars.

Mr Johnson today said a damning UN report highlighting the scale of global climate change was a 'wake-up call' for the world and demanded an end to the use of coal for power.

But the PM, who hosts the Cop26 meeting of world leaders to discuss climate action in Scotland in the autumn, is facing growing pressure from Tory backbenchers.

If hydrogen is part of a zero-carbon future, it could have to be produced by electrolysis (as shown above), which sees electric currents passed through water. Another option is for the plants to capture the carbon emissions and pump them underground

How much will new green and anti-obesity projects cost Britons? Boris Johnson's green and anti-obesity projects could end up costing Britain's households more than £28,000 each over the coming decade if they are fully implemented, it emerged today. The Prime Minister is considering a range of eco-friendly policies during his tenure such as a ban on new fossil-fuelled cars including hybrids by 2033. £15,000 : Extra average cost of buying a new electric vehicle is £44,000 compared to £29,000 for a new medium-sized car

: Extra average cost of buying a new electric vehicle is £44,000 compared to £29,000 for a new medium-sized car £10,500 : Extra cost of energy efficiency measures, such as improving insulation and installing low carbon boilers. A new gas-fired boiler costs about £1,500 with installation, compared to up to £11,000 for an air source heat pump

: Extra cost of energy efficiency measures, such as improving insulation and installing low carbon boilers. A new gas-fired boiler costs about £1,500 with installation, compared to up to £11,000 for an air source heat pump £2,400 : How much a 'snack tax' would cost the average family of four over a decade if implemented - which is £60 per person per year

: How much a 'snack tax' would cost the average family of four over a decade if implemented - which is £60 per person per year £200 : Average bill for new light fittings after the ban on sales of halogen bulbs from September, with an average of 4.4 new fittings each.

: Average bill for new light fittings after the ban on sales of halogen bulbs from September, with an average of 4.4 new fittings each. TOTAL: £28,100 Advertisement

Kent MP Craig Mackinlay has launched a group to push back at plans he argues could 'completely kill us off politically'.

He and others argue they will hit poorer voters in former 'Red Wall' areas who voted Conservative for the first time in 2019.

Business Secretary Kwasi Kwarteng said today that ministers 'want to try and help people make that transition' when asked about the expense to consumers of scrapping gas boilers.

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'There is a transition and that's something that we're focused on and we want to try and help people make that transition... We've got a Heat and Buildings Strategy that is going to come out very soon - I don't think it was quite January, I think it was in March, but... I'm very keen to see it published because I think that will set out a number of options.'

But he admitted he was 'concerned' about a '£20 billion hole' in the public finances created by a loss of fuel duty through the switch to electric cars, adding: ' I don't have the authority to write budgets or dictate tax policy.'

Mr Kwarteng said the UK Government was 'on track' to hit net zero emissions by 2050 but acknowledged 'it's challenging'.

He told Sky News: 'If you look since 1990 we've reduced our emissions by 45 per cent and we've managed to grow the economy by 80 per cent, this is a world-beating figure.'

He told the BBC that a carbon tax - seen as a tax on meat - is also still being considered.

He added: 'It's 2021 now, I think there's every chance we will hit the target. It's a lot of work and I think we can do that ... it is challenging, it's not an easy thing, if it were an easy thing we wouldn't be going on about it.'

But South Thanet MP Mr Mackinlay, who is also a member of the All Party Parliamentary Group for Motorists and hauliers, told the Politics Home website: 'We don't want to be on the wrong side of the electorate, that just will not wear this.'

At the weekend it was reported the green agenda had hit another stumbling block amid growing fears within government that it will hit poorest households the hardest.

Chancellor Rishi Sunak was reportedly leading push-back against net zero, fearing it will spark a cost-of-living crisis with energy bills already on the rise and inflation spiking as Covid lockdowns ease.

The National Infrastructure Commission said the poorest tenth of households will pay an extra £80 each year by 2050 while the richest tenth will face a £400 bill to help sectors that currently have a low chance of hitting the Net Zero emissions target

He is drawing up plans for richer households to take the bigger hit from green changes, the Times reported today.

Senior Tories fear the crisis could prove politically ruinous in so-called Red Wall seats in traditionally working class areas of the north that flipped blue from Labour at the 2019 election, handing Mr Johnson a landslide victory.

A Treasury review into the costs of meeting the net-zero 2050 goal has already been delayed twice from its original spring publication date.

According to the Sunday Telegraph, the delay is due to fears that analysis shows working class families bearing the heaviest share of the burden.

Last month experts advising the Government on infrastructure warned Britain's families face paying hundreds of pounds more a year on food, flying and shipping costs to help industries remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A satellite will be launched into space by Elon Musk's SpaceX next year to display adverts that will be recorded and broadcast on Twitch and YouTube, a new report claims.

Canadian startup Geometric Energy Corporation (GEC) will send a CubeSat on a Falcon 9 rocket with one side featuring a pixel display screen showing adverts.

According to an Insider report, the firm will then have a selfie stick come out of the satellite to film the screen and beam the picture back to the Earth.

The firm funding the satellite is also operating the DOGE-1 Mission to the Moon - the first-ever commercial lunar payload in history paid entirely with DOGE coin.

GEC hasn't yet said how much it will cost to buy the tokens required to advertise on the orbital billboard or how much the CubeSat will cost to launch.

Details of the design haven't been revealed, but it is thought the display will look similar to the now defunct Reddit Place or Satoshi's Place where users create a pixel drawing and pay to show it on the website.

Canadian startup Geometric Energy Corporation (GEC) will send a CubeSat on a Falcon 9 rocket with one side featuring a pixel display screen showing adverts

A satellite will be launched into space by Elon Musk's SpaceX next year to display adverts that will be recorded and broadcast on Twitch and Stream, report claims

WHAT IS DOGECOIN? The cryptocurrency Dogecoin was launched in 2013 as a 'fun payment system' with no banking fees. A light hearted alternative to Bitcoin, it was inspired by the Shiba Inu dog from the Doge meme popular at the time. It was created by IBM engineer Billy Markus and Adobe engineer Jackson Palmer with the aim of reaching a broader demographic than Bitcoin. SpaceX founder Elon Musk has become a major supporter of the cryptocurrency and his firm SpaceX sold a space launch funded by DOGE. Advertisement

Advertisers will purchase five types of tokens using cryptocurrency payments such as ethereum in order to place an advert, with Doge payments coming later.

The five token types required to place the billboard advertisement are: beta for X coordinate, Rho for Y, Gamma for brightness, Kappa for colour and XI for time.

Samuel Reid, CEO of the Canadian startup GEC said it is currently building the satellite and when in space adverts, logos and art will appear on the screen.

It will go up to space on the same ride share mission that will send the DOGE-1 mission to the Moon, launching at some point in 2022.

Each token purchased by an advertiser will control a different aspect of the display.

Gamma and Kappa tokens will control what the pixel will look like, the XI will say how long it lasts on screen - the more expensive, the longer it remains.

'I'm trying to achieve something that can democratise access to space and allow for decentralised participation,' Reid told Insider.

The firm funding the satellite is also operating the DOGE-1 Mission to the Moon - the first-ever commercial lunar payload in history paid entirely with DOGE coin, a cryptocurrency supported by SpaceX founder Elon Musk

Details of the design haven't been revealed, but it is thought the display will look similar to the now defunct Reddit Place or Satoshi's Place where users create a pixel drawing and pay to show it on the website

'Hopefully, people don't waste money on something inappropriate, insulting or offensive.'

Reid said the platform will be open to anyone that purchases the tokens - even down to artists wanting to show their work in space.

It is an idea that has been in development since 2018, when Reid first tried to convince SpaceX the idea was worth pursuing.

'There might be companies which want to depict their logo,' he said, adding 'maybe Coca-Cola and Pepsi will fight over their logo and reclaim over each other.'

The Doge-funded satellite will launch for the moon on top of a SpaceX Falcon 9 rideshare mission early in 2022

Doge was launched as a 'fun payment system' free from traditional banking fees seven years ago, inspired by the Shiba Inu dog from the 'Doge' meme

Reid and GEC's big mission, DOGE-1, is another collaboration with SpaceX and see them launch another 40kg cubesat on a Falcon 9 mission early next year.

'The payload will obtain lunar-spatial intelligence from sensors and cameras on-board with integrated communications and computational systems,' the firm said.

'This mission will demonstrate the application of cryptocurrency beyond Earth orbit and set the foundation for interplanetary commerce,' said SpaceX Vice President of Commercial Sales Tom Ochinero. 'We're excited to launch DOGE-1 to the Moon!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Boeing has scrubbed the launch of its $410 million (£294 million) Starliner astronaut capsule to the International Space Station indefinitely after struggling to find the cause of an 'unexpected valve position' in the propulsion system.

The spacecraft was due to launch atop an Atlas V rocket from Cape Canaveral space station in Florida on Wednesday August 3, with the hope of it launching today, but that has now been delayed with no new date.

If the Orbital Flight Test-2 (OFT-2) had gone ahead as planned, it would spend a day in space before docking with the ISS for up to 10 days, then returning to Earth in the New Mexico desert.

NASA and Boeing plan to work through every function of the spacecraft to identify what caused the unexpected valve position that led to the postponed launch.

During the first uncrewed test flight of Starliner in December 2019, the craft experienced a software issue, causing it to fail to dock and return to Earth early.

NASA found there were 80 things Boeing needed to do in order for the spacecraft to be sent into space for a second test flight, all of which have since been corrected.

Boeing is hoping for success as it has fallen behind SpaceX in the competition to provide commercial flights to the ISS for NASA and other space agencies.

The Elon Musk owned firm has already flown two sets of astronauts to the ISS, with another planned for October and a private flight planned for 2022.

Boeing has scrubbed the launch of its $410 million (£294 million) Starliner astronaut capsule to the International Space Station indefinitely after struggling to find the cause of an 'unexpected valve position' in the propulsion system

The spacecraft was due to launch atop an Atlas V rocket from Cape Canaveral space station in Florida on Wednesday August 3, with the hope of it launching today, but that has now been delayed with no new date

If Boeing is able to identify and fix the problem, it is hoped they will take a crew, that could include NASA astronauts Sunita Williams, Josh Cassada and Jeannette Epps, as well as Japanese space farer Koichi Wakata to the ISS in 2022

WHAT WENT WRONG IN 2019? During an initial uncrewed test flight in December 2019, the Starliner capsule failed to dock at the ISS and returned to Earth prematurely. NASA later identified 80 corrective actions Boeing needed to take. The space agency characterised the test as a 'high visibility close call' during which time the spacecraft could have been lost twice. During the test flight the Starliner experienced a timing anomaly shortly before it was due to dock with the ISS. It lunched on December 20, 2019 but after deployment, an 11-hour offset in the mission clock was detected. This caused the spacecraft computer to think it was 'in an orbital insertion burn' when it wasn't. This then caused the control thrusters to consume more fuel than planned, stopping it for docking with the ISS. This led to it coming back to Earth early, landing at White Sands Space Harbour in New Mexico. On landing it became the first space capsule intended to be crew capable to touch down in the US. This error, plus another software problem, could have caused the spacecraft to be lost had it not been detected in time. 'Ground intervention prevented the loss of the vehicle,' a NASA report later concluded. A later report found 80 items that needed to be fixed by Boeing, which the firm did in collaboration with NASA. Advertisement

As well as launching as a test flight, the mission was going to take 400lb of supplies to the ISS and demonstrate its potential as an alternative to the SpaceX Dragon capsule.

It isn't clear exactly what caused the launch to be scrapped, beyond problems with valves.

'Early in the launch countdown for the August 3 attempt, mission teams detected indications that not all valves were in the proper configuration needed for launch. Mission teams decided to halt the countdown to further analyze the issue,' NASA explained.

'NASA and Boeing worked through several steps to troubleshoot the incorrect valve indications, including cycling the service module propulsion system valves, within the current configuration of the Starliner and United Launch Alliance Atlas V.'

The spacecraft and rocket have been rolled back into the hanger, ready for a future test when issues are resolved with the valve position.

'Engineering teams have ruled out a number of potential causes, including software, but additional time is needed to complete the assessment,' said NASA.

'NASA and Boeing will take whatever time is necessary to ensure Starliner is ready for its important uncrewed flight test to the space station and will look for the next available opportunity after resolution of the issue.'

If Boeing is able to identify and fix the problem, it is hoped they will take a crew, that could include NASA astronauts Sunita Williams, Josh Cassada and Jeannette Epps, as well as Japanese space farer Koichi Wakata to the ISS in 2022.

The flight had only been given a 60 per cent chance of success anyway due to the risk of thunderstorms.

The test flight was originally supposed to take place Friday but had to be rescheduled after a Russian science module inadvertently fired its thrusters following docking with the ISS, sending the orbital outpost out of its normal orientation.

A software glitch, and possible lapse in human attention, were to blame for throwing the International Space Station out of control.

Jet thrusters on the Russian research module Nauka inadvertently reignited, causing the entire orbital outpost to pitch out of its normal flight position.

NASA took to Twitter to explain that it was working with Boeing to identify the root cause of the valve issue

NASA found there were 80 things Boeing needed to do in order for the spacecraft to be sent into space for a second test flight, all of which have since been corrected

It has since been corrected and cosmonauts are working to balance the pressure in the new module before it can be used by the crew.

After NASA ended the Space Shuttle program in 2011, it gave both Boeing and SpaceX multi-billion dollar contracts to provide its astronauts taxi services to the space station and end US reliance on Russian rockets for the journey.

SpaceX's program has moved forward faster, having now undertaken three crewed missions, including an initial test flight.

NASA and Boeing plan to work through every function of the spacecraft to identify what caused the unexpected valve position that led to the postponed launch

Boeing's program is lagging behind. During an initial uncrewed test flight in December 2019, the Starliner capsule experienced software issues, failed to dock at the ISS and returned to Earth prematurely.

NASA later identified 80 corrective actions Boeing needed to take and characterised the test as a 'high visibility close call' during which time the spacecraft could have been lost twice.

During the test flight the Starliner experienced a timing anomaly shortly before it was due to dock with the ISS.

It launched on December 20, 2019 but after deployment, an 11-hour offset in the mission clock was detected, causing the spacecraft computer to think, incorrectly, that it was in an 'orbital insertion burn'.

If the Orbital Flight Test-2 (OFT-2) had gone ahead as planned, it would spend a day in space before docking with the ISS for up to 10 days, then returning to Earth in the New Mexico desert

This then caused the control thrusters to consume more fuel than planned, stopping it from docking with the ISS, and causing ground control to begin an early return.

It landed at White Sands Space Harbour in New Mexico, where it was named Calypso and became the first space crew-capable capsule to touch down in the US.

This error, plus another software problem, could have caused the spacecraft to be lost, had it not been detected and corrected by ground control in time.

'Ground intervention prevented the loss of the vehicle,' a NASA report later concluded, identifying 80 items needing to be fixed by Boeing.

Boeing's program is lagging behind. During an initial uncrewed test flight in December 2019, the Starliner capsule experienced software issues, failed to dock at the ISS and returned to Earth prematurely

As well as launching as a test flight, the mission was going to take 400lb of supplies to the ISS and demonstrate its potential as an alternative to the SpaceX Dragon capsule

BOEING STARLINER: CREW TRANSPORTER Manufacturer: Boeing Applications: ISS crew and cargo Launch mass: 13,000 kg Crew capacity: up to 7 Diameter: 4.56m Design life: 210 days docked The Boeing Starliner capsule is a new class of reusable crew spacecraft. It is designed to send astronauts to the ISS and other, yet to be built, low Earth orbit destinations. It was commissioned by NASA from Boeing as part of the Commercial Crew Program in 2010. It is slightly larger than the Apollo lunar command module, but smaller than the upcoming Orion capsule that will return astronauts tot he Moon. It can hold up to seven people and remain in-orbit attached to a space station for up to seven months and be reused up to ten times. It is compatible with multiple rockets including the Atlas V, Delta IV, Falcon 9 and Vulcan Centaur. It uses cushioned air bags to land on the ground, rather than splash down in water like earlier NASA capsules and the Crew Dragon. There is one space tourist seat out of the seven, with Boeing given the contract to price and sell passage to low Earth orbit on that seat. Advertisement

Steve Stich, manager of NASA's commercial crew program, told reporters last week he had confidence this time around.

'We want it to go well, we expect it to go well, and we've done all the preparations we can possibly do,' he said.

'Starliner is a great vehicle, but we know how hard it is, and it's a test flight as well and I fully expect we'll learn something on this test flight.'

NASA says the test flight will demonstrate the end-to-end capabilities of the Starliner spacecraft and Atlas V rocket, from launch, to docking, to a return to Earth with a desert landing in the western United States.

The uncrewed mission will provide valuable data toward NASA certifying Boeing's crew transportation system for regular flights to and from the space station.

In 2019, Starliner failed to rendezvous with the space station during its first uncrewed test flight after being plagued by software issues.

But the spacecraft was able to successfully return to Earth two days after launch, landing at the White Sands Space Harbour in New Mexico.

Over the past 18 months, Boeing and NASA teams worked together to resolve the issues, which involved taking 80 corrective actions.

In addition to supplies and equipment, also travelling on the Boeing Starliner during the test flight will be a dummy named Rosie the Rocketeer.

She will be strapped in Starliner's commander's seat and her main aim will be to help maintain the spacecraft's centre of gravity.

Rosie will be dressed in Boeing's bright blue spacesuit, the same one astronauts will wear when they are flying on the Starliner.

Like SpaceX's Crew Dragon, the Starliner capsule is reusable but is said to have the capability to fly up to 10 missions, compared to Crew Dragon's five.

But while SpaceX has opted for ocean landings, Boeing's spacecraft will touch down on land at one of its five sites in the western US.

Boeing said this landing method 'allows for quicker access to crew and cargo, as well as makes turning around capsules for other missions more efficient'.

The test flight was supposed to take place Friday but had to be rescheduled after a Russian science module inadvertently fired its thrusters following docking with the ISS, sending the orbital outpost out of its normal orientation

In addition to supplies and equipment, also travelling on the Boeing Starliner during the test flight will be a dummy named Rosie the Rocketeer

Like SpaceX's Crew Dragon, the Starliner capsule is reusable but is said to have the capability to fly up to 10 missions, compared to Crew Dragon's five

Meanwhile, NASA has already selected the first two groups of astronauts to travel on the Starliner.

Mike Fincke, Nicole Mann and Barry 'Butch' Wilmore are expected to be the first astronauts to launch into space aboard the Starliner as part of the Crew Flight Test mission.

This will essentially be a demonstration mission to show Boeing's ability to ferry astronauts to the space station and back safely.

If successful, astronauts Sunita Williams, Josh Cassada and Jeanette Epps will then launch on Boeing's first ever operational crewed mission to the space station.

Last year Elon Musk's firm made history when it transported NASA astronauts Robert Behnken and Douglas Hurley to the space station and back, becoming the first private company to send humans into low-Earth orbit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Luxury car manufacturer Porsche has entered the space race, investing in a German start-up looking to take on the likes of Blue Origin, SpaceX and Virgin Galactic.

The Ottobrunn-based rocket firm — Isar Aerospace — develops and manages launch vehicles designed to transport satellites into orbit around the Earth.

Isar Aerospace is planning its first launch for late next year and claims that its 'Spectrum' rocket vehicle will provide cheaper and more flexible satellite launches.

Key to this promise is its plan to increase the extent of the automation in its rocket production processes, which will also incorporate 3D printing.

Porsche has given Isar $75 million (£54 million) in funding, which the automobile firm said represents a 'low single-digit percentage stake' in the start-up.

Luxury car manufacturer Porsche has entered the space race, investing in a German start-up looking to take on the likes of Blue Origin , SpaceX and Virgin Galactic. Isar Aerospace is planning their first launch for next year and claims that its 'Spectrum' rocket vehicle (pictured) will provide cheaper and more flexible satellite launches

Porsche (whose logo is pictured) has given Isar $75 million (£54 million) in funding, which the automobile firm said represents a 'low single-digit percentage stake' in the start-up

SPECTRUM ROCKET Isar Aerospace is planning their first launch for late next year. They claims that their 'Spectrum' rocket vehicle will provide cheaper and more flexible satellite launches. Key to this promise, they say, is their plans to increase the extent of the automation in their rocket production processes. The Spectrum design — which includes various 3D-printed components — will be able to carry payloads of up to 2,204 lbs (1,000 kg) into a low-Earth orbit with a fraction of the pollution thanks to its light hydrocarbon and liquid oxygen fuel. Advertisement

'As an investor with a focus on mobility and industrial technology, we are convinced that cost-efficient and flexible access to space will be an enabler of innovation in many industry sectors,' said Porsche management board member Lutz Meschke.

'With Isar Aerospace, we are investing in a company that is well-positioned to establish itself as a leading European manufacturer of launch vehicles.'

Mr Meschke added that he considered the rapid development of the rocket firm to be 'impressive'.

'The funding will allow Isar Aerospace to further invest in its launch, testing, and manufacturing infrastructure for its largely automated rocket production and commercial operations,' an Isar Aerospace spokesperson said in a statement.

'Space will become a key technological platform for many industries worldwide — from the automotive to the telecoms sector.'

This, they added, will bring 'advances and new capabilities [to the Internet of Things], data encryption and storage, as well as smart farming applications and surveillance for tackling climate change.'

Isar Aerospace is an Ottobrunn-based rocket firm that develops and manages launch vehicles designed to transport satellites into orbit around the Earth. Pictured, the Isar Aerospace team, with part of their high performance rocket engine (left to right: Lin Kayser, Markus Brandl, Daniel Metzler, Josef Fleischmann and Bulent Altan)

ISAR AEROSPACE'S OTHER INVESTORS Unlike some of its more high-profile competition — like Blue Origin's Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk's SpaceX — Isar Aerospace does not have the benefit of a billionaire's backing. However, the rocket firm has secured a grand total of $180 million (£129 million) in funding since 2018 from various investors, alongside Porsche. These include Airbus Ventures, Earlybird, HV Capital, Lakestar, Lombard Odier and former SpaceX executive Bülent Altan. Advertisement

According to the firm, the space launch services market is expected to increase to over €30 billion (£25.6 billion) within the next six years, with a third of this expected to stem from the launching of small and medium -sized satellites into orbit.

Much of this growth is expected to be driven by a boom in both satellite-driven software applications across various industries as well as earth observation missions.

According to Porsche, however, 'existing launch capacities are not sufficient, or too expensive or inflexible.'

It added: 'Private companies like Isar Aerospace aim to satisfy this demand in a more cost-effective and flexible way compared to established space companies.'

While yet to launch its first rocket, Isar Aerospace already claims Airbus Group as a paying customer — and, back in may, secured a contract from the German Aerospace Center to launch two satellites into orbit in the future.

In fact, after its maiden launch next year, the firm has plans to deploy 3–4 rockets in 2023 and aims to get up to a rate of ten launches per year after that.

Unlike Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic, however, Isar Aerospace has said that it plans to focus on cost-efficient satellite launches, and is not planning manned spaceflights or a move into the burgeoning space tourism sector.

'As an investor with a focus on mobility and industrial technology, we are convinced that cost-efficient and flexible access to space will be an enabler of innovation in many industry sectors,' said Porsche management board member Lutz Meschke. 'With Isar Aerospace, we are investing in a company that is well-positioned to establish itself as a leading European manufacturer of launch vehicles.' Pictured: a Porsche car beneath a starry sky

While yet to launch their first rocket, Isar Aerospace already claims Airbus Group as a paying customer — and, back in may, secured a contract from the German Aerospace Center to launch two satellites into orbit in the future. Pictured: Isar Aerospace's early high-performance 'Finch' rocket engine, which uses a LOX/Hydrocarbon alternative fuel

While investment in Isar Aerospace may represent only a small deal for Porsche, it represents something of a departure from their usual concerns.

The luxury vehicle manufacture's investment portfolio has primarily been composed of other automotive firms and related industries.

Some of their recent investments have resulted in notable successes — with both LiDAR for autonomous vehicle sensing developer AEVA and American 3D printer manufacturer Markforged going public.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A nearby star that looks like a young version of the sun has been discovered by NASA astronomers, and it could shed light on how life on Earth first formed.

The star, Kappa 1 Ceti has a similar mass and surface temperature to our sun, is about 30 light years away, the team from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland said, adding it is just 600 to 750 million-years-old.

The sun is considered middle-aged, at 4.6 billion-years-old, so finding a similar star in its younger years can help understand conditions in the early solar system.

'The work allows scientists to better understand how [the sun] may have shaped the atmosphere of our planet and the development of life on Earth,' said NASA.

Part of the work involved studying coronal mass ejections and stellar winds flowing from the young star to see how the sun's expulsions may have impacted the Earth.

Illustration of what the sun may have been like four billion years ago, around the time life developed on Earth

An artist concept of a coronal mass ejection hitting young Earth's weak magnetosphere

HOW DO STARS FORM? Stars form from dense molecular clouds - of dust and gas - in regions of interstellar space known as stellar nurseries. A single molecular cloud, which primarily contains hydrogen atoms, can be thousands of times the mass of the sun. They undergo turbulent motion with the gas and dust moving over time, disturbing the atoms and molecules causing some regions to have more matter than other parts. If enough gas and dust come together in one area then it begins to collapse under the weight of its own gravity. As it begins to collapse it slowly gets hotter and expands outwards, taking in more of the surrounding gas and dust. At this point, when the region is about 900 billion miles across, it becomes a pre-stellar core and the starting process of becoming a star. Then, over the next 50,000 years this will contract 92 billion miles across to become the inner core of a star. The excess material is ejected out towards the poles of the star and a disc of gas and dust is formed around the star, forming a proto-star. This is matter is then either incorporated into the star or expelled out into a wider disc that will lead to the formation of planets, moons, comets and asteroids. Advertisement

It is impossible to go back billions of years to the early solar system and see what the sun was like when life first formed on planet Earth.

However, there are more than 100 billion stars within the Milky Way, with one in ten of which are of a similar size and luminosity to our own star.

Many of these stars are in the early stages of development.

'Imagine I want to reproduce a baby picture of an adult when they were one or two years old, and all of their pictures were erased or lost,' said study author Vladimir Airapetian from NASA.

'I would look at a photo of them now, and their close relatives' photos from around that age, and from there, reconstruct their baby photos,' he said.

'That's the sort of process we are following here – looking at characteristics of a young star similar to ours, to better understand what our own star was like in its youth, and what allowed it to foster life on one of its nearby planets.'

Kappa 1 Ceti is one such solar analogue star, within our stellar neighbourhood.

The star is located about 30 light-years away, which NASA says in space teerms is like living on the next street over.

Study second author, Meng Jin, a heliophysicist with the SETI Institute and the Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory in California said it is a 'twin' of the sun when it was young.

The team adapted existing models of the solar system to try and predict some of the more difficult to measure characteristics of Kappa 1 Ceti.

This includes the strength of stellar winds and coronal ejections coming from the star as they flow out towards any potential planets - yet to be formed or discovered - within the system.

They used data from a range of space telescopes include Hubble, TESS, NICER and the ESA XMM-Newton satellites.

Like human toddlers, young stars are known for their high bursts of energy and activity - released in the form of a stellar wind.

Stellar winds, like stars themselves, are mostly made up of a superhot gas known as plasma, created when particles in a gas have split into positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons.

The most energetic plasma, with the help of a star's magnetic field, can shoot off away from the outermost and hottest part of a star's atmosphere, the corona, in an eruption, or stream more steadily toward nearby planets as stellar wind.

'Stellar wind is continuously flowing out from a star toward its nearby planets, influencing those planets' environments,' Jin said.

Global structure of the stellar magnetic corona of 1 Ceti in 2012 (left) and 2013 (right panel), with the superimposed plasma pressure along the field lines specified by the colour bars.

KAPPA 1 CETI: A TWIN OF THE YOUNG SUN Name : Kappa 1 Ceti

: Kappa 1 Ceti Constellation : Cetus

: Cetus Known planets : None

: None Spectral type: G5

G5 RA : 03h 19m 21.6960s

: 03h 19m 21.6960s DEC : +03° 22′ 12.712″

: +03° 22′ 12.712″ Distance : 29.81 light years

: 29.81 light years Mass : 1.037 solar masses

: 1.037 solar masses Radius : 0.95 solar radius

: 0.95 solar radius Luminosity : 0.85 times the sun

: 0.85 times the sun Temperature : 9,814 F

: 9,814 F Age : 600-750 million years Kappa 1 Ceti is a yellow dwarf star 30 light years away from the Earth in the constellation of Cetus. It has a rapid rotation, once every nine Earth days and so far no exoplanets have been discovered. It is regarded as a good candidate to host terrestrial planets similar to Earth. It is about the mass of the sun, with a radius 95 per cent that of our own star, but is only 85 per cent as bright. It is relatively young, at a few hundred million years old making it a good candidate to explore the sun's past. Advertisement

Younger stars tend to generate hotter, more vigorous stellar winds and more powerful plasma eruptions than older stars do.

Such outbursts can affect the atmosphere and chemistry of planets nearby, and possibly even catalyse the development of organic material – the building blocks for life – on those planets.

Stellar wind can have a significant impact on planets at any stage of life.

But the strong, highly dense stellar winds of young stars can compress the protective magnetic shields of surrounding planets, making them even more susceptible to the effects of the charged particles.

The sun is a perfect example of this process and how it changes over the lifetime of the star - from youth to middle-age.

Compared to now, in its toddlerhood, our sun likely rotated three times faster, had a stronger magnetic field, and shot out more intense high-energy radiation.

These days, for lucky spectators, the impact of these particles is sometimes visible near the planet's poles as aurora, or the Northern and Southern Lights.

Airapetian said that four billion years ago these lights would have been visible from many more different places around the globe than they are today.

That high level of activity in our sun's early years may have pushed back Earth's protective magnetosphere, and provided the planet with the right atmospheric chemistry for hte formation of the first biological molecules.

This wouldn't have happened for Venus, which was close enough to have its atmosphere torched, or Mars too far away for the radiation to reach at strength.

Similar processes could be unfolding in stellar systems across our galaxy and universe including in Kappa 1 Ceti.

'It's my dream to find a rocky exoplanet in the stage that our planet was in more than four billion years ago, being shaped by its young, active star and nearly ready to host life,' Airapetian said.

'Understanding what our sun was like just as life was beginning on Earth will help us to refine our search for stars with exoplanets that may eventually host life.'

The team used multiple instruments including Hubble and TESS to study the star to see how it compares to the young sun

THE SUN: YELLOW DWARF STAR IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM Name : Sun

: Sun Known planets : Eight

: Eight Spectral type: G2

G2 Distance : 2.7×10^17 km

: 2.7×10^17 km Mass : 1.9885×10^30 kg

: 1.9885×10^30 kg Radius : 696,342 km

: 696,342 km Luminosity : 3.828×10^26 W

: 3.828×10^26 W Temperature : 9,929 F

: 9,929 F Age : 4.6 billion years The Sun is the star at the heart of the Solar System, it is a nearly perfect sphere of hot plasma, radiating energy supporting life on Earth. It has a diameter of 1.39 million km, and is 330 times the mass of the Earth. Three quarters of the star is made of hydrogen, followed by helium, oxygen, carbon, neon and iron. It is a G-type main sequence star and is sometimes called a yellow dwarf. The Sun formed from the gravitational collapse of matter in a large molecular cloud that gathered in the centre. The rest flattened into an orbiting disc that formed planets, moons, asteroids and comets. Advertisement

Multiple agencies have sent instruments into space capable of measuring the stellar winds from the sun - but it is not yet possible to directly observe the stellar wind of other stars in our galaxy, like Kappa 1 Ceti, because they are too far away.

When scientists wish to study an event or phenomenon that they cannot directly observe, scientific modelling can help fill in the gaps.

While scientists have previously modelled the stellar wind from this star, Airapetian said they used more simplified assumptions than the new NASA study.

The basis for the new model of Kappa 1 Ceti is the Alfvén Wave Solar Model, which is within the Space Weather Modelling Framework, that works by inputting known information about a star, including its magnetic field and ultraviolet emission line data, to predict stellar wind activity.

When the model has been tested on our Sun, it has been validated and checked against observed data to verify that its predictions are accurate.

'It's capable of modelling our star's winds and corona with high fidelity,' Jin said.

'And it's a model we can use on other stars, too, to predict their stellar wind and thereby investigate habitability. That's what we did here.'

Previous studies have drawn on data gathered by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) and Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to identify Kappa 1 Ceti as a young solar proxy, and to gather the necessary inputs for the model, such as magnetic field and ultraviolet emission line data.

'Every model needs input to get output,' Airapetian said, adding that to get useful output the input needs to be from a solid data source, or multiple sources.

'We have all that data from Kappa 1 Ceti, but we really synthesised it in this predictive model to move past previous purely observational studies of the star.'

The team is now working on a project looking more closely at the particles that may have emerged from early solar flares, as well as prebiotic chemistry on Earth.

The researchers hope to use their model to map the environments of other Sun-like stars at various life stages.

Specifically, they have eyes on the infant star EK Dra – 111 light-years away and only 100 million years old – which is likely rotating three times faster and shooting off more flares and plasma than Kappa 1 Ceti.

Documenting how these similar stars of various ages differ from one another will help characterise the typical trajectory of a star's life.

Their work, Airapetian said, is all about 'looking at our own Sun, its past and its possible future, through the lens of other stars.'

The findings have been published in the Astrophysical Journal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The European Space Agency (ESA) probe 'Solar Orbiter' had a chance encounter with the exploded Comet ATLAS, flying through its dusty tail.

Doing so provided astronomers with a unique opportunity to study the remnants of a frozen object formed in the most distant regions of the solar system.

ATLAS was discovered in December 2019 and initially it was suggested it would become one of the brightest comets visible to the naked eye, but it began to disintegrate in March 2020 as it made its closest approach to the sun.

It left its tail behind when it disintegrated, and in June 2020 the ESA Solar Orbiter passed through the tail of the comet while travelling to the sun to begin its mission.

Studying data from the probe's instruments, Imperial College London experts found the sun's background magnetic field 'drapes' over the comet, carried by solar winds.

They hope that as the probe, and the NASA Parker Solar Probe also studying the sun, will be able to explore the remnants of the comet in more detail in the coming years.

Hubble space telescope observations from April 2020 captured the ATLAS comet breaking apart as it became closer to the sun

The encounter with ATLAS, pictured, was not planned — the Solar Orbiter probe was launched in February to study the sun up-close, with a focus on the star's polar regions

ESA's Solar Orbiter 'accidentally' passes through the tails of Comet ATLAS ESA's Solar Orbiter probe will 'accidentally' passed through the tails of Comet ATLAS at the end of May. Scientists switched on four of the spacecraft's instruments especially to take advantage of this rare opportunity in order to conduct 'bonus science'. The encounter with ATLAS was not planned — the Solar Orbiter probe was launched in February to study the sun up-close, with a focus on the star's polar regions. Solar Orbiter mission scientists were altered to the window for data gathering by planetary scientist Geraint Jones of Britain's Mullard Space Science Laboratory. The probe collected data on the separate trails of dust and charged particles released from the comet as it is slowly vaporised by the solar radiation from the Sun. The craft passed within 27.3 million miles (44 million km) of the comet's core, or 'nucleus' — passing through the ion tail on May 31–June 1 and the dust tail on June 6. Advertisement

Comet tails are made up of dust and charged particles that interact with the solar winds as they enter the inner solar system and feel the influence of the sun.

Sometimes, as was the case with ATLAS, they break apart due to the solar radiation and the Hubble Space Telescope observed this moment of destruction in April 2020.

Soon after launching, the Solar Probe team realised that its path would go through the tail of the comet, something it hadn't been designed to handle.

In fact the instruments on board weren't due to be switched on until much later in the mission, but they decided to see if they could 'make it work'.

After the comet broke apart the team wasn't sure if there would be anything to detect but they went ahead with plans to switch the instruments on early and rendezvous with the cometary tail.

As it passed through the remnants of the tail, astronomers switched on all of the in-situ instruments on the Solar Probe to get as broad of a picture as possible.

They discovered that the 'ambient interplanetary magnetic field,' a field of particles carried by solar winds, 'drapes' around the comet.

It then surrounds a central tail region with a weaker magnetic field, they found.

Comets are typically characterised by two separate tails; one is the well-known bright and curved dust tail, the other - typically fainter - is the ion tail.

The ion tail originates from the interaction between the cometary gas and the surrounding solar wind, the hot gas of charged particles that constantly blows from the Sun and permeates the whole Solar System.

When the solar wind interacts with a solid obstacle, like a comet, its magnetic field is thought to bend and 'drape' around it.

Researchers 'recreated' the encounter with the comet, and in this diagram, lines identify interplanetary magnetic field lines in the solar wind that are draped around the comet

The Hubble Space Telescope captured the breakup of Comet C/2019 Y4 (ATLAS). On the left is an image from April 20 showing 30 fragments and on the right is a April 23 image with another 25 pieces

The simultaneous presence of magnetic field draping and cometary ions released by the melting of the icy nucleus then produces the characteristic second ion tail, which can extend for large distances downstream from the comet's nucleus.

Lorenzo Matteini, a solar physicist at Imperial College London and leader of the work, described it as a 'unique event'.

Adding it is also an 'exciting opportunity for us to study the makeup and structure of comet tails in unprecedented detail.'

'Hopefully with the Parker Solar Probe and Solar Orbiter now orbiting the Sun closer than ever before, these events may become much more common in future!'

ATLAS was discovered in December 2019 and initially it was suggested it would become one of the brightest comets visible to the naked eye, but it began to disintegrate in March 2020. The Solar Orbiter (artist impression pictured) passed through the tail in June 2020

ESA says the instruments on the spacecraft are 'working beautifully' and providing a holistic view of the Sun and solar wind in a way never before seen

It was one of the very few cases where scientists have been able to make direct measurements from a fragmented comet.

Data from this encounter is expected to contribute greatly to scientists understanding of the interaction of comets with the solar wind and the structure and formation of their ion tails.

This in turn could help work out why they disintegrate as they get closer to the inner solar system.

The findings were presented at the Royal Astronomical Society National Astronomy Meeting.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Men like to eat more meat than women because they feel it helps to 'to enact and affirm their masculine identity', a study has concluded.

Researchers from the University of of California, Los Angeles polled more than 1,700 US adults set out to see if the 'real men eat meat' stereotype plays out in reality.

They found that — unlike among women — the more men feel like they have to follow traditional notions of masculinity, the more beef and chicken they tended to eat.

The findings, the team said, may help inform future efforts to encourage consumers to switch to more sustainable and environmentally friendly meat-free diets.

Men like to eat more meat than women because they feel it helps to 'to enact and affirm their masculine identity', a study has concluded (stock image)

Researchers from the University of of California, Los Angeles polled more than 1,700 US adults set out to see if the 'real men eat meat' stereotype plays out in reality. They found that — unlike among women — the more men feel like they have to follow traditional notions of masculinity, the more beef (left) and chicken (right) they tended to eat

The study was conducted by psychologists Daniel Rosenfeld and Janet Tomiyama of the University of California, Los Angeles.

'Our findings suggest that shifting men's perceptions of ideal gender roles away from traditional masculinity could lead to their reduced consumption of beef and chicken,' Mr Rosenfeld said.

'This is particularly promising in the case of beef, given that beef production poses a much greater environmental threat than other forms of meat production.'

In their study, the duo surveyed 1,706 US adults between the ages of 18–88 about both their meat consumption levels and openness to becoming vegan or vegetarian, as well as their sense of gender identify and conformity to traditional gender roles.

'First, compared to women, men reported that they eat all types of meat more frequently, including beef, pork, fish and chicken — with the effect sizes of these differences descending in that order,' the researchers explained.

Responses also indicated that, among men, a greater conformity to traditional gender stereotypes was associated with both more frequent consumption of two types of meat — beef and chicken — and lower levels of openness to vegetarianism.

Similar effects on meat consumption were not observed for fish or pork.

However, the same trends were not seen among women — suggesting that men may eat more meat in order to validate and perform their sense of traditional masculine identity.

Responses indicated that, among men, a greater conformity to traditional gender stereotypes was associated with both more frequent consumption of two types of meat — beef (pictured) and chicken — and lower levels of openness to vegetarianism (stock image)

'A deeper understanding of gender roles may be useful to reducing public meat consumption for improved human health and environmental sustainability,' the researchers concluded

'Within-gender differences in self-ascribed masculinity/femininity among men offer insights into these phenomena,' the researchers wrote in their paper.

'A deeper understanding of gender roles may be useful to reducing public meat consumption for improved human health and environmental sustainability.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Appetite.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Variants in a gene called GIGYF1 can increase the risk of developing Type 2 diabetes six-fold, a new study reveals.

Variants in the gene – which is thought to control insulin and cell signalling for growth – are found in only one out of 3,000 people, the study authors say.

However, they have a larger impact on the risk of developing type 2 diabetes than any previously identified genetic effect.

Type 2 diabetes is a common condition that causes the level of sugar in the blood to become too high, and is often linked with being overweight or inactive.

It's thought to be driven in part by inherited genetic factors, but many of these genes are yet unknown, the study authors add.

Type 2 diabetes is a serious condition where the insulin your pancreas makes can’t work properly, or your pancreas can’t make enough insulin. This means your blood glucose (sugar) levels keep rising

TYPE 1 AND TYPE 2 DIABETES Diabetes is a lifelong condition that causes a person's blood sugar level to become too high. There are two main types of diabetes: - Type 1, where the body's immune system attacks and destroys the cells that produce insulin. - Type 2, where the body does not produce enough insulin, or the body's cells do not react to insulin. Type 2 diabetes is far more common than Type 1. In the UK, around 90% of all adults with diabetes have Type 2. Advertisement

The research has been carried out by a team at the University of Cambridge's MRC Epidemiology Unit.

As it stands, they aren't sure why variants in GIGYF1 lead to such a substantial increase in the risk of developing type 2 diabetes, but this will be the subject of future research.

'For complex diseases such as type 2 diabetes, many [genetic] variants play a role,' said study author Dr John Perry.

'But often only increasing our risk by a tiny amount. This particular variant, while rare, has a big impact on an individual's risk.

'Both men and women can carry these variants.'

Type 2 diabetes is where the body does not produce enough insulin, or the body's cells do not react to insulin. It's much more common than type 1, where the body's immune system attacks and destroys the cells that produce insulin.

However, scientists can find out more about the genetic factors that may cause type 2 by looking for genetic variations across the genome – the complete set of genetic information in an organism, stored in long molecules of DNA called chromosomes.

Recent technical advances have allowed more comprehensive genetic measurement by reading the complete DNA sequences of more than 20,000 humans genes that code for proteins, which are essential for our bodies to function.

'Reading an individual's DNA is a powerful way of identifying genetic variants that increase our risk of developing certain diseases,' said Dr Perry.

For the study, researchers looked at data from more than 80,000 men in the UK Biobank study to identify genetic variants associated with the loss of the Y chromosome.

Y chromosome loss is a known biomarker of biological ageing that occurs in a small proportion of circulating white blood cells in men and indicates a weakening in the body's cellular repair systems.

This biomarker has been previously linked to age-related diseases such as cancer, as well as type 2 diabetes.

The team identified rare variants in the gene GIGYF1 that substantially increase susceptibility to loss of the Y chromosome.

Variants in this gene can also be carried by women (who don't have the Y chromosome), and were additionally found to increase risk of developing type 2 diabetes six-fold in both sexes.

For the one in 3,000 people with a GIGYF1 genetic variant, their risk of developing type 2 diabetes is around 30 per cent, compared to about 5 per cent in the wider population.

An organism's genome is written in a chemical code called DNA. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is a complex chemical in almost all organisms that carries genetic information. Pictured, artistic 3D rendering of a DNA double helix

Common genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes result in much more 'modest' increases in risk – typically much lower than two-fold.

The study also found that people who carried the GIGYF1 genetic variants had other signs of more widespread ageing, including weaker muscle strength and more body fat.

'Our findings highlight the exciting scientific potential of sequencing the genomes of very large numbers of people,' said Professor Nick Wareham, director of the MRC Epidemiology Unit.

'We are confident that this approach will bring a rich new era of informative genetic discoveries that will help us better understand common diseases such as type 2 diabetes.

'By doing this, we can potentially offer better ways to treat – or even to prevent – the condition.'

Diabetes affects more than 460 million adults across the world, and is the seventh leading cause of disability.

It accounts for more than $320 billion (£250 million) in health care costs in the US alone.

More than four million people in the UK have diabetes, with 90 per cent of these cases classified as type 2. The figure is set to rise to 5 million by 2025 because of the obesity epidemic.

Full results from the Cambridge study have been published today in the journal Nature Communications.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ford is using two robotic test drivers – affectionately named Shelby and Miles – to trial its vehicles in extreme temperatures.

The robots are conducting tests in environmental conditions that are too treacherous for any human worker to endure.

Shelby and Miles can operate at temperatures ranging from -40°F to 176°F (-40°C to 80°C) as well as at extreme altitudes, Ford says.

Their robotic legs extend to the accelerator, brake and clutch pedals, with one arm positioned to change gear and the other used to start and stop the engine.

The tests are taking place at Ford's secretive 'weather factory' in Cologne, Germany – a building the size of a football pitch that's dedicated to R&D work.

The facility includes massive 1.2-megawatt wind turbines, air pressure containers, snow machines and a wind tunnel with wind speeds of up to 155mph.

Ford’s has created two state-of-the-art robot test drivers to ensure its vehicles can withstand the toughest conditions on the planet. The robots have been created to help take the strain of adverse environmental conditions

Ford's weather factory helps ensure drivers can rely on vehicles that have endured conditions that are found in the Sahara Desert, in Siberia, and atop the tallest Alpine peaks.

But the simulated conditions are so realistic that even the most experienced human test drivers may become tired or unwell, for example when undertaking altitude testing.

For human test drivers, extreme testing requires numerous safety protocols to monitor the driver’s health.

The robot test driver’s legs extend to the accelerator, brake and clutch pedals, with one arm positioned to change gear and the other used to start and stop the engine

Pictured is the exterior of the company's secretive 'weather factory' in Cologne, Germany - a building the size of a football pitch that's dedicated to R&D work.

Feeling cold yet? One of Ford's vehicles undergoes testing in freezing cold temperatures inside the weather factory

Wind tunnel testing, for example – in particular at high altitude – requires numerous safety protocols, such as having oxygen bottles, medical equipment and a paramedic on-site, while driver health is constantly monitored.

In comparison, Shelby and Miles can be set up and programmed for different driving styles.

'These two new drivers are fantastic additions to the team, as they can take on the challenging endurance tests at high altitudes and in hot temperatures,' said Frank Seelig, supervisor for wind tunnel testing, Ford of Europe.

'Once the robot is in the driver’s seat, we can run tests through the night without ever having to worry that the driver will need a sandwich or a bathroom break.'

Pictured is one of the robotic arms working the circular gear shift dial inside one of Ford's cars

The robotic 'legs' are seen here operating the brake and acceleration pedals during testing

Ford continues to conduct real-world testing in European locations and across the world, including the Grossglockner mountain in Austria and the snowy Arjeplog region in Sweden.

Ford is currently working on launching its self-driving business next year after setbacks from the Covid pandemic.

The autonomous vehicles will be based on the Ford Escape Hybrid crossover and developed in partnership with Argo AI, a Pittsburgh-based start-up.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A stunning photo showing a spiral of jack fish has won the 2021 BMC Ecology and Evolution annual image competition.

Snapped by Kristen Brown from the University of Pennsylvania, the winning entry depicts the jack fish school at Heron Island in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.

BMC calls it a 'visual metaphor for the spiralling crisis unfolding within our oceans' due to the climate crisis, which is a particular threat to the famous reef on the Australian east coast.

Among the other commended entries in this year's competition are a shot of a wasp and its spider prey in Ecuador, a giant gladiator frog moments before being attacked by a snake, and a doomed crustacean sporting what looks like a 'fur coat' due to a parasitic infection.

Overall winner and best image for 'conservation biology': A school of jack fish in a spiral formation at Heron Island in the Great Barrier Reef

Eulimnogammarus verrucosus, a species of crustacean endemic to Russia's Lake Baikal, is pictured suffering from a parasitic ciliate infection - which makes it look as though it's sporting a 'fur coat'

Section editor Josef Settele at BMC, who recommended the winning entry, said: 'Marine biodiversity sustains life and the health of our planet, but human activities are threatening the well-being of the world’s oceans.

'Kristen Brown’s striking image is a symbol for the need for concentrated efforts to manage biodiversity loss and set conservation priorities.'

Brown herself said the image 'represents both the beauty and bounty of our oceans' as well as 'the spiralling crisis unfolding within the marine environment'.

'Coral reefs with high coral cover and plentiful fish populations like this one at Heron Island on the Great Barrier Reef are sadly becoming rarer,' she said.

'Without a concentrated effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve water quality, coral reefs as we know them are at risk of disappearing within our lifetime.'

In addition to the winning image, the judges also selected an overall runner up, as well as winners in six categories – 'conservation biology'; 'evolutionary developmental biology and biodiversity'; 'behavioural ecology'; 'human evolution and ecology'; 'ecological developmental biology'; 'population ecology'; and 'the editor’s pick'.

The runner-up – which was also best image for ‘evolutionary developmental biology and biodiversity – was snapped by Kseniya Vereshchagina, a biologist at Irkutsk State University in Russia.

It shows Eulimnogammarus verrucosus, a species of crustacean endemic to Russia's Lake Baikal, suffering from a parasitic ciliate infection.

'Ciliates living on weakened crustaceans are capable of forming vast colonies resembling a "fur coat",' said Vereshchagina.

'Unfortunately, the crustaceans dressed in such a "fur coat" are sentenced, since the ciliates parasitising them lead endemics to rapid death.'

The 'population ecology' winner was captured by Roberto García-Roa from University of Valencia, Spain, who also submitted the winning images for the 'behavioural ecology' and 'human evolution and ecology' categories.

It shows soldier termites migrating along a length of abandoned rope in a Malaysian forest.

'Thousands of soldier termites are able to migrate in a complex social environment where each individual has its own mission framed altogether in a global objective: the survivorship and reproduction of the colony,' said García-Roa.

'In this case, these termites used meters of an abandoned rope to move across the Malaysian forest. Once humans disappear, nature recovers its space and uses what is needed to survive.'

Pictured, thousands of soldier termites migrating along a length of abandoned rope in a Malaysian forest. The shot was the winner in the 'population ecology' category

An 'epic scene' showing a battle between a wasp and its much larger spider prey in Tiputini, Ecuador. The shot won best image for 'behavioural ecology'

García-Roa's shot entitled 'The Hunter' (the best image for 'behavioural ecology') depicts a wasp and its much larger spider prey in Tiputini, Ecuador.

'Spiders are one of the most sophisticated hunters on earth,' he said. 'Nevertheless, they cannot escape from what evolution has provided to other species.

'In particular, some groups of wasps are specialised in hunting spiders and use them as a trophic resource for their larvae. I found this epic scene in a wall of a biological station in Tiputini, Ecuador.'

García-Roa's third image (the best image for 'human evolution and ecology') entitled 'Learning to Be Human' shows a researcher using a baboon to study the evolution of human locomotion.

The curious photo of the baboon on a treadmill was captured at the Station of Primatology in the south of France during research into the evolution of bipedalism – walking on two limbs.

Meanwhile, the best image for 'ecological developmental biology' was entered by Chey Chapman, a PhD student studying the mechanisms underlying zebrafsh tissue regeneration at the University of London's Royal Veterinary College.

It shows a zebrafish that regrew its tail fin only two weeks after the appendage was clipped.

'Editor’s pick': 'Eerie Stalker' shows a giant gladiator frog prior to its escape from a snake. Seconds after this photo was taken, the snake struck out at the frog, which managed to get away

Best image for 'human evolution and ecology': 'Learning to Be Human' captures a researcher using a baboon to study the evolution of human locomotion

Many primitive vertebrates such as zebrafsh have a spectacular ability to regenerate various tissues after traumatic injury.

'This image shows the blood vessels in a regenerated zebrafsh tail fin,' Chapman said. 'The cells forming the blood vessels are labelled with a red fluorescent reporter.

'Whether regeneration is a primitive or adaptive trait to environmental conditions is the subject of much debate, and the mechanisms underlying the regeneration process are not yet fully understood.'

Lastly, the editor’s pick is entitled 'Eerie Stalker' and was taken by Dimitri Ouboter from the Institute for Neotropical Wildlife and Environmental Studies in Suriname, South America.

It shows a giant gladiator frog seconds before escaping from an attempted snake attack. Giant gladiator frogs have been previously observed escaping from the jaws of snakes by emitting distress calls, jumping and inflating their lungs, making it harder for small snakes to hold on to them.

Best image for 'ecological developmental biology': A zebrafish regrew its tail fin only two weeks after the appendage was clipped at the white horizontal dotted line

'It isn’t often you come upon the behavioural interaction of two species so I was ecstatic to be able to capture part of it,' said Ouboter.

'I was walking at night surveying some pools when I saw this snake sneak up on a frog. Seconds after this photo was taken, the snake (Helicops angulatus) struck out at this giant gladiator frog (Boana boans).

'The frog got away – all the better as it may have been a meal too big to handle for the snake. If it had succeeded in biting the frog, the fight would have been far from over.

'This species of frog has been observed to escape from the jaws of snakes on at least two occasions, employing multiple defensive techniques such as emitting distress calls, jumping and lung infation, making it harder for small snakes to hold on to them. Excellent survival strategies.'

All the successful entries are detailed in BMC Ecology and Evolution, which is an open access, peer-reviewed journal dedicated to all aspects of ecological and evolutionary biology.

2021 marks the first year of the BMC Ecology and Evolution image competition and follows on from the BMC Ecology competition, which ran for seven years until BMC Ecology merged with BMC Evolutionary Biology to form BMC Ecology and Evolution.

Last year, the winner of the 2020 BMC Ecology image competition was a shot of a magnificent frigatebird chick dying of a viral infection in French Guiana.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A British artificial intelligence (AI) company has recreated Hollywood actor Val Kilmer's voice – with amazingly realistic results.

London-based firm Sonantic used the actor's voice recordings from throughout his career, which were fed to their AI to create the lifelike yet artificial mock-up.

Film producers could potentially use the tool – described as 'Photoshop for voice' – for voiceovers if they have a role in mind that would be suited to Kilmer's tones.

Kilmer, whose career has spanned nearly four decades, has starred in blockbusters such as Top Gun, Willow, The Doors, Tombstone and Batman Forever.

But after undergoing a tracheotomy in 2014 as part of his treatment for throat cancer, Kilmer's voice is now barely recognisable.

Luckily, Kilmer himself is also able to use the AI tool in his personal life, to help him communicate, rather than relying on a voice box to speak.

Val Kilmer, pictured here in 2019, underwent a tracheotomy in 2014 as part of his treatment for throat cancer and now speaks with a voice box

The artificial voice, which speaks in the first person as Kilmer in Sonantic's video, could easily be mistaken for the real thing.

Praising the results, the real Val Kilmer said: 'I’m grateful to the entire team at Sonantic who masterfully restored my voice in a way I’ve never imagined possible.

HOW WAS AI VAL KILMER MADE ? For the project, Sonantic gathered audio recordings of the actor from his films, which were digitally 'cleaned' to remove background noise. Next, the experts generated transcripts from the audio before pairing the audio and text together in short chunks that could be fed to the AI during its training. The firm generated more than 40 different voice models and selected the 'most expressive one', said CTO John Flynn. Kilmer can use the tool in his personal life, to help him communicate, by inputting new sentences for the AI to say. Advertisement

'As human beings, the ability to communicate is the core of our existence and the effects from throat cancer have made it difficult for others to understand me.

'The chance to tell my story, in a voice that feels authentic and familiar, is an incredibly special gift.'

Sonantic CTO and co-founder John Flynn described the ambitious project in a blog post on his company's website.

The firm is mostly used to working with video game studios like Obsidian, Embark, Sumo Digital to record dialogue for their characters.

Flynn told MailOnline his firm were approached by Kilmer's team late last year as they were creating the Amazon Prime documentary, Val.

'We all came together – Val as someone who’d lost their voice and Sonantic as a company who creates best in class quality voices,' he said.

'There was lots of brainstorming around how we could work together and what we could do – poetry, interactive games, other promotional material for films he might be involved with.

'But it always came back to the fact we wanted to give him something for his craft, something that had flexibility to enable him to create moving forward, so we ended up creating a voice model for him.'

Val Kilmer (right) starred alongside Kurt Russell (left) in the 1993 movie 'Tombstone' directed by George P. Cosmatos

For the project, Sonantic gathered audio recordings of the actor from his films, which were digitally 'cleaned' to remove background noise.

Next, the experts generated transcripts from the audio before pairing the audio and text together in short chunks that could be fed to the AI during its training.

The firm generated more than 40 different voice models and selected the 'best, highest-quality and most expressive one'. The results left Kilmer’s son, Jack, close to tears.

'We’d worked on the voice model and heard it so many times, but when we played it for Val and his team it was incredibly emotional for us,' Flynn told MailOnline.

'I remember talking to Jack after presenting the voice model, and him telling us how powerful it was, like it was the first time he’d heard his dad’s voice in years, so he was quite moved.'

Kilmer will be able to use the AI model in both his professional and personal life, according to Flynn.

'Kilmer can take part in TV or film productions that require voice overs or replacement dialogue that will be created by Sonantic’s easy-to-use computer app,' he told MailOnline. 'He can license that audio to different productions and studios.

Val Kilmer as Jim Morrison and Meg Ryan as Pamela Courson in the 1991 movie 'The Doors' - a film about musician and Doors frontman Jim Morrison

'The voice model can be used as a personalised replacement to robotic speech generating devices and help him communicate in his day-to-day life.'

The CTO wouldn't reveal to MailOnline whether his firm is working with any other actors in a similar way.

'We believe actors will always work real-life jobs but this gives them the opportunity to earn money doing virtual work too,' he said.

'For example, they can turn up for an important audition while their voice model works on an advertisement or other work.'

Amazon Prime Videos' autobiographical documentary of Val Kilmer's life, 'Val', was released on August 6.

The film contains thousands of hours of footage ranging from home videos to test shots for his iconic films such as Top Gun.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When it comes to smart displays, Google is slightly late to the game.

First, it was beaten to the market by rivals like Amazon’s Echo Show. Then, its own voice assistant appeared in touchscreen devices made by third parties such as Lenovo and JBL.

But Google has finally put a stake in the ground with the Home Hub - its first branded smart display that functions as part photo frame, part control center for all your smart home devices.

Scroll down for video

Google has finally put a stake in the ground with the Home Hub - its first on-brand smart display that functions as part photo frame, part control center for all your smart home devices

GOOGLE HOME HUB SPECS 7in LCD screen Google Assistant built-in Runs on Google's Cast platform WiFi and Bluetooth connectivity Comes in Sand, Aqua, Chalk and Charcoal Advertisement

It’s easy to use and, with a price tag of $149, is likely the right price for a lot of people looking to introduce a smart display into their household.

The Home Hub is pretty compact, sporting a 7in screen, but that makes it easier to fit into small spaces on your bedside table, or kitchen countertop.

As with other Google Home devices, it’s nice to look at, too - the screen has rounded corners and is on top of a fabric-covered base, making it appear less harsh and plasticy.

Despite its size, you can’t really miss the screen from far away, given its crisp colors and sharp display.

The device is also equipped with an ambient light sensor, called Ambient EQ, which automatically adjusts the screen’s brightness based on the time of day.

That means it’s easier on the eyes if you’ve got the Home Hub next to your bed - no glaring blue screen here.

Google gives you plenty of options to customize your Home Hub.

One of the standout features is the ability to connect it with your Google Photos account, so that it can show a rotating slideshow of your favorite pictures.

As with other Google devices, Home Hub is nice to look at - the screen has rounded corners and it’s situated on top of a fabric-covered base, making it appear less harsh and plasticy

Google put its AI smarts to work for this feature.

It’s trained to recognize faces so that users can ask their Home Hub to display photos of a particular person, or from a certain place and time.

You can also ask the Home Hub when or where a photo was taken and it will tell you.

I found myself less intrigued by the Home Hub’s digital photo frame capabilities and more excited by the ability to connect it to my existing Google Home account. This allows the device to quickly ingest everything it needs to know about me - like my search history, services I use, and more.

Just like other Google Assistant devices, it can learn to distinguish your voice from someone else’s.

One note on voice recognition, however - make sure your Home Hub is located far away enough from your other Google Home devices, to prevent several devices from talking to you at once.

Another feature lets users set up personalized routines.

For example, the Home Hub can be trained in such a way that if users say ‘Hey Google, good morning,’ it will trigger a whole set of skills, like bringing up your calendar events for the day, news stories, the weather forecast and commute times, which is pretty handy.

Google's new range: The firm unveiled the Home Hub, Pixel Slate and Pixel 3 at a New York event. It boasted AI technology is the core of each device, and hopes to gain ground in the hardware market on rivals like Apple, Samsung, Amazon and others

Some info is easier to digest when you’re able to see it visually, like a map of suggested routes to get to the office, as well as recipe instructions, which Google Assistant will read aloud

Users can already do this with Google Home devices, but the addition of a screen definitely helps.

I found that some information is much easier to digest when you’re able to see it visually, like a map of suggested routes to get to the office, as well as recipe instructions, which Google Assistant will read aloud and scroll through for you.

While the Home Hub is a great hands-free device to help you get through your day, an entertainment center it is not.

It can play content from Google’s own video platform, YouTube, but it doesn’t have access to streaming platforms like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video or Hulu. The Home Hub also plays live TV broadcasts, but that requires a YouTube TV subscription.

That said, the device is conveniently integrated with Spotify.

HOW DOES THE HOME HUB'S AMBIENT EQ SENSOR WORK? Google has equipped its Home Hub smart display with a high-tech sensor that helps the display detect when day turns into night. Called Ambient EQ, it may look like a camera at the top of the device, but it's not. The sensor automatically adjusts the screen’s brightness based on the time of day. That means it’s easier on the eyes if you’ve got the Home Hub next to your bed - no glaring blue screen here. Google has equipped its Home Hub smart display with a high-tech sensor, called Ambient EQ, that helps the display detect when day turns into night 'When it's time for bed, Hub knows to dim the screen for a good night’s sleep,' Google explained. And in the morning, the screen will automatically brighten to help wake you up. The Google Home Hub is the first Google device to feature this sensor. Users can turn it off or adjust it any time in the device's settings. Advertisement

However, I wouldn’t recommend using the Home Hub as your main speaker system.

The single speaker on the back of the device is sufficiently loud, but definitely made better if you have other Google Home speakers to sync it with.

Google recently introduced a new smart home control center that lets users manage all their smart home devices on a single screen - that means your lights, thermostats, security cameras and smart locks. Users just swipe down from the top of the Home Hub to access it.

With so many smart devices throughout the home, it can be annoying to manage them all using separate apps.

The Home Hub aims to simplify that with the control center, which I found to be one of its best features.

It can’t control all your devices, such as Apple TVs or Sonos smart speakers, but I’m sure it will get smarter with future software updates.

With so many smart devices, it can be annoying to manage them all using separate apps. The Home Hub aims to simplify that with the control center, which is one of its best features

You probably aren’t too concerned about your privacy if you’ve already introduced a Google Home or Amazon Echo into your home.

Still, Google seems to have made the Home Hub with privacy in mind, opting to leave a camera (and video calls, by extension) off the device entirely.

This is a nice change from devices like the Echo Show or the recently launched Facebook Portal, which feature high-quality cameras and feel a tad intrusive as a result.

While there are certainly ways it can improve, the Home Hub is a solid stab at a Google-branded smart display.

It’s thoughtfully designed and does almost everything a device that’s essentially a voice-activated tablet should do.

That’s probably enough for average users and tecchies alike to want to introduce the device to their home.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A tiny, rocky exoplanet that orbits a star 35 light years away from Earth is half the mass of Venus, a new study reveals.

The planet, called L 98-59b, is the closest planet to its star, called L 98-59, astronomers at the European Southern Observatory (ESO) in Germany announced.

There are now four planets that are confirmed to orbit the star in total, including L 98-59b, and a further possible fifth planet – the existence of which is as yet unconfirmed, they reveal.

This fifth planet may reside in the habitable 'Goldilocks zone' – the area where it is neither too hot nor too cold for liquid water to exist on the surface, meaning it may harbor alien life.

Astronomers used Very Large Telescope (VLT), located in the Atacama Desert of northern Chile to shed light on the neighbouring planetary system, which is relatively close despite being 210 trillion miles away.

The results are an important step in the quest to find life on planets outside the Solar System, known as exoplanets.

Scroll down for video

This artist's impression shows L 98-59B (left) orbiting its star (right). Astronomers used the Very Large Telescope (VLT) to measure the mass of L 98-59B, finding it to be half that of Venus

This infographic shows a comparison between the L 98-59 exoplanet system (top) and part of our inner Solar System (Mercury, Venus and Earth). The planet closest to the star (L 98-59b) is around half the mass of Venus. The existence of the fourth planet has been confirmed, but scientists don't yet know its mass and radius (its possible size is indicated by a dashed line). The team also found hints of a potential fifth planet (also circled with a dashed line), the furthest from the star, though the team knows little about it

The study, published today in Astronomy & Astrophysics, represents a technical breakthrough, according to ESO.

Astronomers were able to determine, using the radial velocity method, that the innermost planet in the system (L 98-59b) has just half the mass of Venus.

This makes it the lightest exoplanet ever measured using this technique, which calculates the wobble of the star caused by the tiny gravitational tug of its orbiting planets.

The fifth unconfirmed planet (called L 98-59f) would sit in the system's habitable zone where liquid water could exist on its surface.

The Earth and L 98-59f likely receive similar amounts of light and heat from their respective stars, according to the experts

Assuming their atmospheres are similar, this fifth planet would have a similar average surface temperature to Earth and would support liquid water at its surface.

PLANETARY SYSTEM L 98-59 The planetary system and its star - which are only around 35 light years away - are both called L 98-59. The planets in this system are the following, from closest to the star to further away: - L 98-59b (confirmed): This rocky planet has half the mass of Venus (4.868×1024 kg). it's likely dry, but might have small amounts of water. It's smaller than the Earth but still bigger than Mars. - L 98-59c (confirmed): Likely dry, but might have small amounts of water - L 98-59d (confirmed): About 30 per cent of the mass of this planet could be water (but note that this would not be liquid water at the planet's surface) - L 98-59e (confirmed): Exact mass, size and composition unknown. Has a 'year' of 12.8 days and is at least three times more massive than the Earth (a 'super-Earth'). Its temperature is thought to be only a few ten degrees warmer than that of the Earth. - L 98-59f (planet candidate; detection not confirmed): In the habitable zone of the star, meaning liquid water may exist at the surface of this planet L 98-59b is smaller than Earth but larger than Mars. NASA has previously described L 98-59b as the 'tiniest exoplanet'. Meanwhile, L 98-59c and L 98-59d are larger than both Earth and Mars Data correct as of August 2021 Advertisement

'The planet in the habitable zone may have an atmosphere that could protect and support life,' said study author María Rosa Zapatero Osorio, an astronomer at the Centre for Astrobiology in Madrid, Spain.

With the contribution of VLT, the team was able to infer that three of the planets may contain water in their interiors or atmospheres.

The two planets closest to the star (L 98-59b and L 98-59c) are probably dry, but might have small amounts of water.

Meanwhile, up to 30 per cent of the third planet's mass (L 98-59d) could be water, making it an ocean world.

The incredible discoveries were made using the Echelle SPectrograph for Rocky Exoplanets and Stable Spectroscopic Observations (ESPRESSO) instrument on VLT.

Bird's eye view of the Very Large Telescope in the remote, sparsely populated Atacama Desert in northern Chile

'Without the precision and stability provided by ESPRESSO this measurement would have not been possible,' said Zapatero Osorio.

'This is a step forward in our ability to measure the masses of the smallest planets beyond the Solar System.'

Back in 2019, NASA announced the discovery of three planets (L 98-59b, L 98-59c and L 98-59d), none of which are in the habitable zone of their host star.

The astronomers first spotted the trio using NASA's Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS).

The 'tiniest exoplanet': The discovery of L 98-59b, as well as L 98-59c and L 98-59d, was announced back in 2019

This satellite relies on a technique called the transit method – where the dip in the light coming from the star caused by a planet passing in front of it is used to infer the properties of the planet – to find the planets and measure their sizes.

However, it was only with the addition of radial velocity measurements made with ESPRESSO and its predecessor, the High Accuracy Radial velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS) at the ESO La Silla 3.6-metre telescope, that Demangeon and his team were able to find extra planets and measure the masses and radii of the first three.

'If we want to know what a planet is made of, the minimum that we need is its mass and its radius,' Demangeon said.

The team hopes to continue to study the system with the forthcoming James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) and ESO's Extremely Large Telescope (ELT).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A swarm of more than 1,000 earthquakes ripped through Yellowstone National Park in July, which officials are calling a 'doozy' of a month.

This was the most seismic activity in the region since the Maple Creek swarm of more than 1,100 quakes shook the park in June 2017.

Although some may fear this increase in activity may mean 'the big one [earthquake] is near,' the US Geological Survey (USGS) says the earthquakes were not caused by magma, but rather groundwater moving through pre-existing faults.

The University of Utah Seismograph Stations, responsible for the operation and analysis of the Yellowstone Seismic Network, located 1,008 earthquakes in the park, with a whopping 764 beneath Yellowstone Lake.

The largest event was a 'quake with a 3.6 magnitude, located 11 miles below the lake's surface.

Scroll down for video

A swarm of more than 1,000 earthquakes ripped through Yellowstone National Park in July, which officials are calling a 'doozy' of a month.

'While above average, this level of seismicity is not unprecedented, and it does not reflect magmatic activity,' the USGS wrote in its report.

'If magmatic activity were the cause of the quakes, we would expect to see other indicators, like changes in deformation style or thermal/gas emissions, but no such variations were detected.'

Yellowstone National Park sits in the northwest region of Wyoming and is home to bursting geysers, steam vents and bubbling pools.

At 3,472 square miles, the park is larger than the states of Rhode Island and Delaware combined.

Yellowstone National Park sits in the northwest region of Wyoming and is home to bursting geysers, steam vents and bubbling pools. At 3,472 square miles, the park is larger than the states of Rhode Island and Delaware combined

Most of the land is in Wyoming, but some of the park spills into Montana and Idaho.

Earthquakes that strike the park usually happen in swarms and are a result of volcanic fluids flowing along 'small fractures in the shallow rocks over the magma, a pattern that has been noted in volcanoes around the world,' according to the park.

However, some of the swarms are associated with water that lubricates the faults, causing them to shake, or tectonic forces that trigger numerous earthquakes at once – which is what occurred in July.

July seismicity in Yellowstone was marked by seven earthquake swarms, which began on July 16.

Along with those in the Yellowstone Lake, the University of Utah also found the other earthquakes hit in groups of 12, 14, 20, 24 and 20.

Michael Poland, USGS geophysicist and Scientist-in-Charge at the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory, told Accuweather: 'Yellowstone also has a tremendous amount of groundwater, and that's from all the snow that falls in that area. That's the highest area in the Rockies on average, and it's absolutely full of preexisting faults.'

As the underground pore space soaks up the snowmelt-turned-groundwater, it increases pressure on those nearby faults and can even cause them to fail.

'We typically see lots and lots of earthquakes when the snow melts or it gets into the ground and interacts with these faults,' Poland said.

'That's what caused earthquakes the last real big month for earthquakes back in June of 2017.'

Poland also explained magma fueled earthquakes leave behind different features and frequencies of shaking.

'Yellowstone is one of the most seismically active areas in the United States,' according to Yellowstone National Park's website.

'Approximately 700 to 3,000 earthquakes occur each year in the Yellowstone area; most are not felt.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Men who ejaculate more often have a lower risk of developing prostate cancer, a new study finds.

Researchers from Harvard University analyzed data from nearly 32,000 men and found that ejaculating at least 21 times a month cut the risk of developing the cancer by one-third.

The links between ejaculation and prostate cancer are not fully known.

However, some believe ejaculation could rid the prostate of carcinogens, lower inflammation and also lead to less stress and better sleep, all of which can reduce risk of the cancer.

Men who ejaculate at least 21 times a month are at a decreased risk of developing prostate cancer, a study finds

The American Cancer Society says prostate cancer is the most common cancer in US men aside from skin cancer.

An estimated one in eight men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during the course of his lifetime.

In 2021, it is estimated that more than 248,500 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer and more than 34,000 will die from the disease.

However, prostate cancer typically grows slowly and, if detected early while it's still confined to the prostate gland, there is a successful chance of treatment.

Researchers, who published their findings in European Urology, analyzed self-reported data on ejaculation from men who participated in the study.

The study was conducted from 1992 to 2010, with men completing surveys monthly.

Frequency of ejaculation was analyzed when the men started the study, in the men's 20s and in their 40s.

After adjusting for outside factors like body mass index, physical activity, consumption of food and alcohol and life stressors like divorce, they determined that men who frequently ejaculated - at least 21 times a month - were one-third less likely to develop the cancer than those who ejaculated four to seven times a month.

'These findings provide additional evidence of a beneficial role of more frequent ejaculation throughout adult life in the aetiology of prostate cancer, particularly for low-risk disease,' the authors wrote.

The link between ejaculation and prostate cancer has been controversial among researchers.

A 2004 Harvard study found no links between ejaculation and prostate cancer.

An Australian study published in 2003 found that men who ejaculated often in young adulthood would grow up to have a decreased risk of the cancer.

A 2008 study conducted by the University of Cambridge actually found that rates of prostate cancer increased alongside frequent masturbation.

'There have been other contradicting studies. But most of them agree that there's a decrease in the incidence of the low-risk cancer,' said Dr Odion Aire, a South African urology expert, told Mashable.

'There's no clear verdict for the high-risk cancer, from the study,'

Men most likely to develop prostate cancer are over the age of 50, and have African ancestry.

Eating a lot of dairy products, smoking or being obese also seem to increase risk of the condition.

Some believe there are also genetic factors that make men more vulnerable to the disease.

Experts recommend that men at risk for prostate cancer conduct semi-regular tests for the condition, as discovering it early could make it easier to treat.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Invasive species have cost the UK economy more than £5 billion ($6.98 billion) over the past 50 years, a new study has estimated.

Species such as the grey squirrel, European rabbit and Japanese knotweed are considered invasive as they have been introduced into a new environment by humans, where they cause ecological or economic damage.

In Britain alone, there are more than 3,000 non-native species, according to the RSPB.

Scientists from Queen's University Belfast said their findings represent one of the highest totals in Europe for managing these types of species.

Scroll down for video

Species such as the grey squirrel (pictured), European rabbit and Japanese knotweed are considered invasive as they have been introduced into a new environment by humans, where they cause ecological or economic damage

What is an invasive species? An invasive species is one that has been introduced to a region it is not native to. Typically, human activity is to blame for their transport, be it accidental or intentional. Hammerhead flatworms have become invasive in many parts of the world. They feast on native earthworms, as shown Sometimes species hitch a ride around the world with cargo shipments and other means of travel. And, others escape or are released into the wild after being held as pets. A prime example of this is the Burmese python in the Florida Everglades. Plants such as Japanese knotweed have seen a similar fate; first propagated for the beauty in Europe and the US, their rapid spread has quickly turned them into a threat to native plant species. Climate change is also helping to drive non-local species into new areas, as plants begin to thrive in regions they previously may not have, and insects such as the mountain pine beetle take advantage of drought-weakened plants. Advertisement

Invasive species are known to cause a range of damage to an existing ecosystem, including changing habitats and starving native animals of food and resources.

The Natural History Museum explained: 'They may eat or parasitise native species, which sometimes have no defences against them.

'They can also outcompete native species for food, light or nesting sites. Sometimes they even bring new diseases with them.

'Often, an introduced species can breed very quickly - if left unchecked they dominate habitats and smother native wildlife.'

While previous research has shown that invasive species can have a large economic impact, researchers from Queen's University Belfast set out to understand just how much damage they have had in the UK.

Dr Ross Cuthbert, a research associate from the School of Biological Sciences at Queen's University Belfast, said: 'We have found the majority of costs were caused by direct damages, such as reductions in agricultural productivity and infrastructure repair costs, whereas very little was spent on the actual management of invasive species, and especially prevention of future invasions.

'Worryingly, we also found that invasion costs are increasing rapidly over time and are likely to continue rising in future as more invasive species arrive in the UK.

'These costs are also severely underestimated, as very few of the known invasive species in the UK have reported economic costs (less than 10 per cent), indicating a lack of research effort and reporting of their detrimental impacts.'

For the study, the researchers analysed how costs in the UK were distributed across different invasive species and environments.

Plants such as Japanese knotweed were first propagated for the beauty in Europe and the US, but their rapid spread has quickly turned them into a threat to native plant species

Invasive species are known to cause a range of damage to an existing ecosystem, including changing habitats and starving native animals of food and resources. Pictured: European rabbits

They also looked at different types of costs and how these changed over time.

The team found that over the past 40 to 50 years, invasive species have cost the UK economy over £5 billion, predominantly through agricultural or property impacts.

Japanese knotweed, for example, could cause structural damage to property that was expensive to rectify and could reduce the value of a house substantially, they said.

Meanwhile, invasive rabbits could destroy agricultural areas by overgrazing, while their burrowing could also impact the quality of pastures.

The researchers said they hoped their work would raise awareness of 'the huge economic burden invasive species have on the UK economy for policymakers' and in turn 'promote greater management spending to prevent their damage'.

Dr Cuthbert said: 'Investing in better biosecurity to prevent invasive species from arriving in the first place could reduce future economic impacts and be much cheaper than future damages or long-term control.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk's aerospace firm SpaceX has been awarded a $178 million (£129 million) contract for NASA's first mission to Europa, Jupiter's fourth largest moon.

SpaceX will provide 'launch services' for the Europa Clipper mission, which is due to blast off in October 2024 to study Europa through a series of fly-bys, NASA said.

The spacecraft will launch on a Falcon Heavy rocket owned by Musk's company from NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida, the space agency added.

The mission aims to find out if the natural satellite hosts conditions suitable for life using 'a sophisticated suite of science instruments'.

Europa, an icy moon with a hidden subsurface ocean, has a diameter of 1,940 miles (3,100 kilometres) – about 90 per cent the diameter of Earth's moon.

The announcement comes amid an ongoing battle between SpaceX and rival company Blue Origin, owned by fellow billionaire and Amazon founder Jeff Bezos.

Bezos published an open letter to NASA Administrator Bill Nelson on Monday, offering NASA $2 billion for a contract to build a lunar lander for the upcoming Artemis missions.

There is evidence of recent geological formations within the 15 mile thick frozen crust, including small, dark and dome-like features about a mile below the surface

EUROPA: QUICK FACTS Europa is 90 per cent the size of Earth’s moon. It orbits Jupiter at a distance of about 484 million miles (778 million kilometers). It completes one orbit of Jupiter every 3.5 Earth days. Europa's surface is mostly solid water ice, crisscrossed by fractures. But its subsurface ocean might contain more than twice as much water as Earth. The moon has a very thin oxygen atmosphere - too thin for humans to breathe. Advertisement

But SpaceX – which made the announcement on its Twitter page – has the contract for the Europa Clipper mission safe.

'NASA has selected Space Exploration Technologies Corp. (SpaceX) of Hawthorne, California, to provide launch services for Earth’s first mission to conduct detailed investigations of Jupiter's moon Europa,' the agency said in a statement.

'The total contract award amount for launch services is approximately $178 million.'

Key mission objectives are producing high-resolution images of Europa's surface, determine its composition and look for signs of recent or ongoing geological activity.

The mission will also measure the thickness of the moon’s icy shell, search for subsurface lakes and determine the depth and salinity of Europa's ocean.

Europa is one of few locations in the Solar System with liquid water, along with Earth and Saturn's moon Enceladus, making it a target of interest for NASA.

Thanks to ground-based telescopes, scientists already know Europa's surface is mostly water ice.

Scientists have also found evidence that beneath the ice crust is an ocean of liquid water or slushy ice.

According to NASA, Europa's subsurface ocean might contain more than twice as much water as Earth.

Last year, Monica Grady, Chancellor at Liverpool Hope University, said it's 'almost a racing certain' that Europa is home to alien life, which she thinks is 'similar to the intelligence of an octopus'.

A 3D model of Europa Clipper

NASA will aim to find out if she's correct with the launch of Europa Clipper, which will 'send a highly capable, radiation-tolerant spacecraft into a long, looping orbit around Jupiter to perform repeated close flybys of the icy moon'.

NASA did not reveal whether other companies had bid on the Europa Clipper launch contract, which marks NASA's latest vote of confidence in Musk's firm.

SpaceX has already carried several cargo payloads and astronauts to the International Space Station (ISS) for the space agency in recent years.

In April, SpaceX was awarded a $2.9 billion contract to build the lunar lander spacecraft for the planned Artemis program that would carry NASA astronauts back to the moon for the first time since 1972.

But the contract was halted after two rival space companies, Jeff Bezos's Blue Origin and defence contractor Dynetics Inc, protested against SpaceX's selection.

SpaceX chief and renowned billionaire Elon Musk (pictured) also owns car maker Tesla and neurotechnology firm Neuralink

Now Bezos is claiming NASA is 'putting an end to meaningful competition for years to come' if it doesn't consider Blue Origin for contracts in the future.

'It is not too late to remedy,' Bezos says in the letter to NASA published on Monday (July 26).

'We stand ready to help NASA moderate its technical risks and solve its budgetary constraints and put the Artemis Program back on a more competitive, credible, and sustainable path.'

Jeff Bezos (pictured), founder of Amazon and space tourism company Blue Origin, flew into space on July 20, 2021

SpaceX's partly reusable 23-story Falcon Heavy, currently the most powerful operational space launch vehicle in the world, flew its first commercial payload into orbit in 2019.

In May 2020, SpaceX successfully transported NASA astronauts Robert Behnken and Douglas Hurley on a 19-hour journey to the ISS – marking the first crewed test flight of the firm's Crew Dragon spacecraft.

In the process it became be the first crewed launch from the US into orbit since NASA's space shuttle program ended in 2011.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Extinct flying reptiles called pterosaurs were likely able to fly out of the nest straight after hatching, a new study claims.

A team of researchers led by a University of Southampton expert performed computer modelling based on the fossils of several pterosaur species.

They conclude that pterosaur hatchlings were agile and 'flightworthy from the moment of hatching' – known in biology as precociality.

The hatchlings had wingspans of almost 10 inches (25cm) attached to bodies that 'could neatly fit in your hand'.

Amazingly, the humerus bone in the hatchlings' wings were stronger than those of many adult pterosaurs, indicating that they were well primed for flight.

Newly-born pterosaurs were also more nimble flyers compared with adults, but less adept at travelling long distances, the team say.

Pterosaurs weren't dinosaurs, but a group of flying reptiles that lived during the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods (228 to 66 million years ago).

Artist's impression of a flock of adult and hatchling flamingo-like pterosaurs, Pterodaustro guinazui, take flight in Early Cretaceous Argentina

They were the earliest reptiles to evolve powered flight, dominating the skies for 150 million years before their extinction some 66 million years ago.

The less well-known cousins of dinosaurs, the 'flamingo-like' reptiles had an adept flying ability, some as large as a fighter jet and others small like a model aeroplane.

The study has been led by Darren Naish, a British vertebrate palaeontologist at the University of Southampton.

'Juvenile pterosaurs were capable of powered fight early in life, plausibly within days or hours of hatching,' they say in their paper.

'It seems reasonable to interpret juvenile pterosaurs as neither nest-bound, nor helpless and dependent upon their parents.

Visual summary of how basic, size-dependent fight parameters (wing loading, wingspan and aspect ratio) could have influenced pterosaur flight throughout their life

Pterosaurs were a group of flying reptiles that lived during the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods (228 to 66 million years ago)

Pterosaurs were most likely bald, study finds Pterosaurs — flying reptiles from the time of the dinosaurs — were most likely bald and did not have feathers as had been previously suggested, a study has claimed. In 2018, researchers from China's Nanjing University reported having found evidence for branching 'protofeathers' in three fossil pterosaur specimens. British palaeobiologists David Unwin and Dave Martill re-evaluated this evidence, however, and came to the conclusion that the flying reptiles had no feathers at all. Instead, they say, the branching structures actually represent parts of the pterosaurs' wing membranes that had begun to decay and unravel before being preserved. 'The idea of feathered pterosaurs goes back to the nineteenth century but the fossil evidence was then, and still is, very weak,' said Dr Unwin, who is a pterosaur expert at the University of Leicester’s Centre for Palaeobiology Research. Advertisement

Study author Dr Mark Witton from the University of Portsmouth said scientists have only had fossils of their embryos and hatchlings to study since 2004.

'We’re still trying to understand the early stages of life in these animals,' he said. 'One discussion has centred around whether pterosaurs could fly as hatchlings or, like the vast majority of birds and bats, they had to grow a little before they could take wing.

'We found that these tiny animals – with 25 cm wingspans and bodies that could neatly fit in your hand – were very strong, capable fliers.

'Their bones were strong enough to sustain flapping and take-off, and their wings were ideally shaped for powered – as opposed to gliding – flight.'

However, the hatchlings would not have flown exactly like their parents simply because they were so much smaller.

'Flight capabilities are strongly influenced by size and mass,' Dr Witton said.

'So pterosaur hatchlings, being hundreds of times smaller than their parents, were likely slower, more agile fliers than the wide-ranging (but less manoeuvrable) adults.'

Competing views exist on the behaviour and lifestyle of pterosaurs during their first moments after birth, according to the team.

A ‘flap-early’ view proposes that hatchlings were capable of independent life and fapping fight – a theory this study supports.

Meanwhile, a ‘fly-late’ model suggests juveniles were not fight capable until 50 per cent of adult size, and a 'glide-early' model says young juveniles were fight-capable but only able to glide.

Due to the rarity of fossilised pterosaur eggs and embryos, and difficulties distinguishing between hatchlings and small adults, it has been unclear if newly-hatched pterosaurs were able to fly.

Skeletal restorations of pterosaurs (hatchlings and adults) used in the study. (A) Sinopterus dongi hatchling; (B) S. dongi hatchling compared to adult; (C) Pterodaustro guinazui hatchling; (D) P. guinazui hatchling compared with adult

So the researchers modelled hatchling flying abilities using previously obtained wing measurements from four established hatchling and embryo fossils from two pterosaur species, Pterodaustro guinazui and Sinopterus dongi.

The authors also compared these wing measurements with those of adults from the same species and compared the strength of the humerus bone – which forms part of the wing – of three hatchlings with those of 22 adult pterosaurs.

Not only were the hatchlings' humerus bones stronger than those of many adult pterosaurs, but the hatchlings had long, narrow wings suited to long-distance flight.

However, their wings were shorter and broader than those of adult pterosaurs, meaning they weren't as adept at flying long distances as their parents.

Hatchlings also had a larger wing area relative to mass and body size, compared with the pterosaur adults.

These wing dimensions may have may also have made hatchlings less efficient than adult pterosaurs at long-distance travel, but may have resulted in them being more agile fliers, enabling them to suddenly change direction and speed.

The authors speculate that the agile flying style of hatchling pterosaurs may have let them rapidly escape predators and made them better suited to chasing nimbler prey and flying amongst dense vegetation than adult pterosaurs.

This could indicate that pterosaurs occupied dense habitats as hatchlings and open environments as adults, according to the authors.

The study has been published in Scientific Reports.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British hedgehogs need legal protection from being plucked from back gardens and being sold for hundreds of pounds, the government has heard this week.

MPs have argued in parliament that the British hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) is facing an increasing problem of being traded as pets.

The species is known as one of the UK's best loved mammals and a 'gardener’s friend', but the creatures have seen a whopping 97 per cent decline since 1950.

Hedgehogs are badly threatened by road traffic, destruction of habitat with heavy machinery and the use of chemicals for intensive farming, which not only poisons insects that the hedgehog feeds on but kills the hedgehogs directly.

British MPs have warned in parliament this week that the iconic British hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus, pictured) is being sold 'for £300 a pop'

BRITISH HEDGEHOG: QUICK FACTS Hedgehogs are one of only three animals to hibernate in the UK, along with dormice and bats. Hedgehogs are lactose intolerant, so milk should never be left out for them. Water is fine to leave them. They don't use their eyes to hunt due to poor eyesight, but rather their hearing and sense of smell. Hedgehogs have around 5000 to 7000 spines on their back. Source: Love The Garden/Hedgehog Preservation Society Advertisement

They were listed as vulnerable to extinction in the UK by the Red List for British Mammals last year, prompting a petition for the government to give them greater legal protection.

The petition received more than 100,000 signatures for hedgehog protection to be increased to schedule 5 under the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981, and the issue was debated in Parliament earlier this week.

If made, the amendment would prohibit members of the public from selling the creatures.

'There is a problem of hedgehogs being sold,' said Matthew Vickers, a Conservative MP for Stockton South, during the debate on July 5.

'The problem arises when people start to snatch the hedgehogs they find at the bottom of their garden and sell them on for £300 a pop.

'That threatens population numbers and creates biosecurity risks. Moving hedgehogs to schedule 5 would prevent it.'

Vickers said that there's also an issue with the trading of a non-native hedgehog species, the African pygmy hedgehog, which is 'not as cute as the great British hedgehog'.

Schedule 5 protection would offer the dwindling species protection from all intentional killing, injuring or taking, as well as prohibiting them from being sold.

'Government’s response to the petition states that they have not previously moved hedgehogs into schedule 5 because they have no evidence that hedgehogs are being intentionally killed,' Vickers added.

'I am sure we are all grateful for that and I hope that people would not do something as cruel.'

A recent report from Hedgehog Preservation Society indicates there may be as few as one million hedgehogs in the UK today – a decrease of more than 50 per cent in the last 20 years.

And in the 1950s it was estimated there were 36.5 million hedgehogs in Britain – a staggering decline of 97 per cent.

'The numbers we have also heard are truly shocking,' said Duncan Baker, a Conservative MP for North Norfolk.

'None of us could fail to be extremely worried that we are down to potentially our last million hedgehogs.

'To read that they are vulnerable to extinction would have been unheard of when I was growing up.

'A decrease of over 50 per cent in the last 20 years is something that we should all sit up and notice.'

Fay Vass, chief executive of the British Hedgehog Preservation Society, said the charity had been sent screenshots by members of the public highlighting the sale of native hedgehogs, and had asked the RSPCA to investigate.

One seller in West Bromwich was found to be offering a hedgehog for sale at £110 on an online pet marketplace, while others were listed on second-hand marketplace Shpock.

'We don’t know how big the problem is,' Vass said. 'There are so many online sites such as Facebook selling pages, that it is very likely to be a bigger problem than we realise.'

Pictured, hedgehogs being listed on the online marketplace Shpock for £150. Hedgehogs were listed as vulnerable to extinction in the UK by the Red List for British Mammals last year

'Will sell two for £150': Baby hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus) listed online that have 'all been hand-reared' despite being wild animals

Minister Rebecca Pow said she is 'a great fan of hedgehogs, not least from reading all my children Mrs Tiggy-Winkle, the amazing Beatrix Potter book'.

'I was interested to hear about the potential collecting and selling of hedgehogs,' she said.

'If there is evidence of that from the British Hedgehog Preservation Society, I would certainly like to see it, because that has not been flagged to me and it would concern me.'

But she added that it 'was not clear' adding hedgehogs to Schedule 5, protecting it from ‘deliberate harm', would help to protect hedgehogs as 'it is not clear the species is being threatened in that way'.

'The Environment Bill will strengthen our commitment to such species as hedgehogs,' Pow said.

Pictured, female Erinaceus europaeus hedgehog with its adorable offspring. Hedgehogs are mostly insect eaters, but leaving them fresh water and food - like cat food, dog food or specialist hedgehog food from wildlife food suppliers - will encourage hedgehogs to return to your garden

'We have amended it to require a new, holistic, legally binding target to be set for species abundance by 2030.

'The aim of that is to halt the decline in nature. That is a really strong commitment, the like of which we have never seen before.’

Erinaceus europaeus, the hedgehog species that's native to the UK, is also found throughout Europe.

Currently, the IUCN Red List, which lists the global conservation status of different species, only has it listed as 'least concern' as populations are stable in much of its range across the continent.

If government gives the species' greater protection under the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981, this current minor level of protection may be upgraded.

The hedgehog is known as the 'gardener’s friend' because it eats caterpillars, beetles and other critters, Baker also points out in a piece for Politics Home.

'Combined, our gardens provide a space for wildlife larger than all our national nature reserves and so by gardening in a wildlife-friendly way we can help our prickly little friends and help protect them in our own backyards,' he says.

According to 2018 research, the hedgehog has disappeared from almost 80 per cent of the British countryside.

The prickly mammal is increasingly moving to urban areas, which act as refuges for the small woodland creatures, University of Reading scientists said at the time.

Hedgehogs are mostly insect eaters, but leaving them fresh water and food – like cat food, dog food or specialist hedgehog food from wildlife food suppliers – will encourage them to return to residential gardens.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Artificial intelligence has been employed in the fight against dementia by scientists who say it can diagnose the condition from a single scan of the brain.

Currently in pre-clinical trials, the system has been able to diagnose dementia years before the first symptoms develop, even with no signs of damage on the scan.

It currently takes multiple scans and tests to diagnose dementia, and by the time they are complete it may be too late to enact some of the remedies that can offset the condition, researchers from the Alan Turing Institute in Cambridge explained.

The new system compares brain scans of those worried they might have dementia with scans from thousands of dementia patients to identify patterns.

Being able to diagnose the condition early, even before any signs are visible on scans, will allow for lifestyle and medical interventions to delay the onset, according to the team.

Artificial intelligence has been employed in the fight against dementia by scientists who say it can diagnose the condition from a single scan of the brain. Stock image

HOW TO DETECT ALZHEIMER'S Signs and symptoms: Difficulty remembering newly learned information

Disorientation

Mood and behavioural changes

Suspicion about family, friends and professional caregivers

More serious memory loss

Difficulty with speaking, swallowing and walking Stages of Alzheimer's: Mild Alzheimer's (early-stage) - A person may be able to function independently but is having memory lapses

Moderate Alzheimer's (middle-stage) - Typically the longest stage, the person may confuse words, get frustrated or angry, or have sudden behavioural changes

Severe Alzheimer's disease (late-stage) - In the final stage, individuals lose the ability to respond to their environment, carry on a conversation and, eventually, control movement Advertisement

To find out how effective the new system is on actual patients, a trial of about 500 people suspected to have the condition or at fear of developing it will be carried out at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge and other memory clinics in the UK.

Zoe Kourtzi, professor of cognitive computational neuroscience at the Alan Turing Institute and professor of experimental psychology at the University of Cambridge, said results from individuals in the study will be sent to their doctors if necessary.

She told the BBC: 'If we intervene early, the treatments can kick in early and slow down the progression of the disease and at the same time avoid more damage.

'And it's likely that symptoms occur much later in life or may never occur.'

Consultant neurologist Dr Timothy Rittman, from the University of Cambridge, told the BBC the artificial-intelligence system was a 'fantastic development'.

He said: 'These set of diseases are really devastating for people,' adding that when delivering information to a patient being confident in the diagnosis is important.

It is important to 'give them more information about the likely progression of the disease to help them plan their lives,' he said.

More than 850,000 people in the UK are thought to have dementia, according to the NHS, with the condition affecting one in 14 people over the age of 65, and one in six people aged over 80.

Mark Thompson, 57, a patient of Dr Rittman, started having memory lapses nearly a year ago and said early intervention would have made a big difference to him.

'I had test after test after test and at least four scans before I was diagnosed,' he told the BBC, adding the team did everything they could to understand his issues.

Alzheimer's Research UK has said predictions from 2014 estimated that one million people here will have dementia by 2025, doubling to two million by 2050.

Dr Laura Phipps, from the charity, said this work will help doctors have more confidence in scans when making a diagnosis of dementia in the future.

'To diagnose dementia today, doctors need to rely on the interpretation of brain scans and cognitive tests, often over a period of time,' she explained.

To find out how effective the new system is on actual patients, a trial of about 500 people suspected to have the condition or at fear of developing it will be carried out at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge and other memory clinics in the UK. Stock image

'Machine learning models such as those being developed by Prof Kourtzi could give doctors greater confidence in interpreting scans, leading to a more accurate diagnosis for patients.'

'It is hope that in the future these approaches will not only improve how current diagnostic techniques are implemented but open the door to revolutionary new approaches to detect the diseases that cause dementia much earlier.

'This would have a huge impact on people with dementia and their families.'

She said Prof Kourtzi is also leading a project funded by Alzheimer's Research UK looking at data on fine motor skills, sleep, cognition and brain activity from a range of sources to predict Alzheimer's up to 20 years earlier than is possible now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have identified nearly 300 gene variations that influence women's age of menopause.

The team from the University of Exeter found that these genetic variants are able to roughly predict the age at which some women will stop having periods, and identify those at risk of early menopause.

The findings could lead to improved infertility treatments in the future and increase the natural reproductive lifespan of women, according to the experts.

They could also lay the groundwork for future research on preventing certain types of cancer associated with hormones, such as ovarian and breast cancer, as well as type 2 diabetes.

Scroll down for video

Scientists have identified nearly 300 gene variations that influence women's age of menopause (stock image)

WHAT IS THE MENOPAUSE? Menopause is defined as the changes a woman goes through just before and after she stops her periods and is no longer able to get pregnant naturally. Some women go through this time with few, if any, symptoms, around 60 percent experience symptoms resulting in behavioral changes and one in four will suffer severely. Common symptoms include hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness leading to discomfort during sex, disrupted sleep, decreased sex drive, problems with memory and concentration and mood swings. Menopause happens when your ovaries stop producing as much of the hormone oestrogen and no longer release an egg each month. In the UK, the average age for a woman to reach the menopause is 51, according to the NHS. Advertisement

Menopause is defined as the changes a woman goes through just before and after she stops her periods and is no longer able to get pregnant naturally.

Study co-author Dr Katherine Ruth, of the University of Exeter, said: 'We hope our work will help provide new possibilities to help women plan for the future.

'By finding many more of the genetic causes of variability in the timing of menopause, we have shown that we can start to predict which women might have earlier menopause and therefore struggle to get pregnant naturally.

'And because we are born with our genetic variations, we could offer this advice to young women.'

For the study, the researchers looked at genetic data gathered from 201,323 women of European ancestry and an additional 80,000 women of East Asian ancestry from the UK Biobank, which has health and genetic information on around half a million people, as well as 23andMe, a consumer DNA testing company.

They also designed mouse models to examine the effects of some of the genes on the reproductive lifespan of the rodents.

In mice, the researchers found two particular genes, Chek1 and Chek2, to affect fertility and reproductive lifespan.

The team found that inactivating Chek2 so that it no longer functions while over-expressing Chek1 to enhance its activity increased reproductive lifespan in mice by around 25 per cent.

In mice, the researchers found two particular genes, Chek1 and Chek2, to affect fertility and reproductive lifespan (stock image)

Going vegan can relieve hot flushes Women who switch to a vegan diet rich in soy during menopause could reduce the number of hot flushes they experience by up to 84 per cent without using drugs. This is the conclusion of a study by researchers led from the George Washington University following tests of the diet involving 38 women over 12 week period. Not only did the average number of moderate-to-severe hot flushes fall from five to one per day on the diet, but they were totally eliminated in 59 per cent of subjects. The tested diet featured no hormone medications or extracts, the team explained — but instead combined a low-fat plant-based diet with cooked soy beans. Advertisement

Meanwhile, in women who naturally lack an active Chek2 gene, the scientists found they reach menopause on average 3.5 years later than women with a normally active gene.

Professor Eva Hoffmann, of the University of Copenhagen, who is also a co-author on the study, said their findings 'provide potential new direction for therapeutic approaches that might seek to treat infertility, particularly, in IVF treatment'.

She said: 'IVF relies on hormone stimulation of women.

'We found that in one of our mouse models, Chek2, the female mice there had an improved response to hormone stimulation, which means that more eggs were obtained for actual IVF treatment.

'There are, of course, a number of scientific questions and safety concerns that have to be addressed before this is attempted in humans.

'But what our studies show is that it is possible that targeted short-term inhibition of these pathways during IVF treatment could help some women respond better.'

The researchers also examined certain health impacts of having an earlier or later menopause.

They found genetically that earlier menopause increased the risk of type 2 diabetes and was linked to poorer bone health and increased risk of fractures.

But they found earlier menopause to decrease the risk of some types of cancer, such as ovarian and breast cancer.

Dr Ruth added: 'We found that earlier menopause was causally associated with a lower risk of hormone-sensitive cancers.

'We think this is probably due to having a shorter lifetime exposure to high levels of sex hormones (which are at higher levels while a woman is still menstruating).'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taking statins after being diagnosed with aggressive breast cancer raises the survival rate by 58 per cent, a study has found.

Researchers have found a 'significant association' between taking the common cholesterol-lowering drugs and survival rates of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).

TNBC makes up 10 to 20 per cent of breast cancer diagnoses, with about 8,000 patients found to have it in the UK each year.

It has a poor prognosis and limited treatment options.

Researchers have found a 'significant association' between taking the common cholesterol-lowering drugs and survival rates of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)

A team from Texas University analysed data on more than 23,000 women over the age of 66 with TNBC. Some 2,281 had been taking statins within a year of their diagnosis.

The results, published in the journal Cancer, found this group were 58 per cent more likely to be alive three years later.

Lab experiments have shown statins stop cancer cells growing and dividing, and boost the immune system.

Lead author Dr Kevin Nead said: 'There is already a body of literature on statins and breast cancer and the results have been inconsistent.

'Previous research has looked at breast cancer as only one disease, but we know there are many subtypes of breast cancer.

'We wanted to focus our research on this particularly aggressive form of breast cancer that has limited effective treatment options.'

TNBC makes up 10 to 20 per cent of breast cancer diagnoses, with about 8,000 patients found to have it in the UK each year

Statins, which cost only a few pence each, are used by six million Britons to reduce the risk of heart disease.

They could have an important impact on outcomes for women with triple negative breast cancer, said Dr Nead.

'We know statins decrease breast cancer cell division and increase cell death,' he added.

'Our study shows there is an association between statins and improved outcomes in triple negative breast cancer, and it is time to pursue this idea further in a prospective trial.'

TNBC claims the lives of around 1,650 women in Britain every year - the equivalent of one in ten breast cancer deaths.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At the November 1 Super Smash Bros Ultimate Direct announcement, the creators of the highly-anticipated fighting game revealed a new story mode, World of Light, that would give Avengers: Infinity War’s Thanos a run for his money.

The intro of the trailer for the new story mode revealed all of the Super Smash Bros Ultimate fighters corralling to take on Master Hands.

However, heroes including Mario, Zelda, Sonic and Fox McCloud prove to be no match for the Boss, whose bursts of rainbow light turn all of the fighters into dust.

Almost all of them.

In a reveal that set Twitter alight, just one character was shown left standing after the cataclysmic event—Kirby, the cherubic, pink fan-favourite character who was originally designed as a placeholder.

A new story mode, World of Light, was revealed at the Super Smash Bros Ultimate Direct event

The trailer then shows replicas of all the Super Smash Bros Ultimate fighters being imbued with their corresponding spirits, only for the reanimated versions having sinister, glowing red eyes.

Footage of the gameplay reveals just how important Kirby is to the series and to the story mode. Not only is he the only one to have survived, which led to one Twitter user to describe it as ‘canon’, but he is also the key to freeing all the other 73 fighters, though not before fighting them.

Features hinted at include puzzle tasks, different maps and even skill trees.

The game’s creator, Masahiro Sakurai said that World of Light is ‘nothing like what we came up with for the Subspace Emissary mode’. The main distinction is how World of Light explains Super Smash Bros Ultimate’s other new mode: Spirits.

Spirits Mode replaces the Trophies and allows fighters to power up their abilities using characteristics and features of other Super Smash Bros Ultimate characters. Spirits feature simultaneously in their own mode and features in the story campaign.

World of Light explains how the characters ended up being spirits in the first place.

In Spirits Mode, spirits can interact with the fighter and each other to create different fighting conditions that shift depending on the enemy.

There are primary spirits and support spirits that can mix in numerous combinations. Spirits are won through Spirit Battles that involve a roulette in which players have to snatch them for the fighters.

The trailer for World of Light also featured a new version of the Super Smash Bros Ultimate theme song that has lyrics.

Super Smash Bros Ultimate is out on Nintendo Switch on December 7, 2018.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rockstar Games' Red Dead Redemption 2 is so big it’s even coming up in Pornhub searches.

After a long, eight-year wait, the sequel to 2010 Red Dead Redemption was released at the end of October.

The game is set 12 years prior to the original and follows Arthur Morgan, an outlaw who is part of the notorious Dutch van der Linde gang, as he tries to survive and thrive in the unforgiving West.

Red Dead Redemption 2 immediately made a huge impact, receiving rave reviews and making over $725 million in its opening weekend, becoming the most pre-ordered full game ever on PlayStation Network in the process.

The highly anticipated Rockstar game Red Dead Redemption 2 came out on Friday October 26

The game even came up as a term in the searches over at Pornhub, where the adult site’s statisticians started to notice mentions of the game days before its October 26 release.

A graph of October shows searches for Red Dead Redemption remain low until October 18, when the first spike occurred after the release of the final trailer and last few details.

Around October 25, searches for Red Dead Redemption skyrocketed faster than Arthur Morgan fleeing from marshals on horseback. Searches increased by a maximum of 731 per cent by Sunday, October 28.

Where it gets really interesting is the knock-on effect the Western videogame had on other Pornhub searches.

‘RDR2’s western setting and subject matter seems to have gotten players all hot and bothered,’ the site wrote in a blog post.

Search terms such as ‘western’, ‘cowboy’ and ‘wild west’ all saw huge spikes over the weekend of the game’s release.

‘Wild West’ saw the biggest spike, jumping by a staggering 745 per cent; ‘Western’ searches rose by 489 per cent; ‘Cowboy’ increased by a comparatively mild 189 per cent.

Along the male-female divide, the game appeared to be much more popular with men.

‘Our statisticians found that men were proportionately 1165 per cent more likely to search for “red dead” when compared to women.’

Unsurprisingly, searches for Red Dead Redemption appear to be a young man’s game as millennials between the ages of 18 and 34 were 93 per cent more likely to search for Red Dead Redemption than those over the age of 35.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The US Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) announced Wednesday that more than half of white-tailed deer living in Michigan have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.

The findings, according to experts, suggests that wild animals in the US could serve as a reservoir for the virus even if it becomes under control in the human population.

APHIS collected 481 samples from deer in Illinois, Michigan, New York and Pennsylvania from January 2020 through 2021 for the research.

Antibodies for SARS-CoV-2 were detect in 33 percent of the total specimens, but 60 percent of deer in Michigan were found to have been exposed.

Illinois had the lowest with just seven percent, then New York with 18 percent and Pennsylvania with 34 percent.

'There is no evidence that animals, including deer, are playing a significant role in the spread of SARS-CoV-2 to people. Based on the available information, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is low,' APHIS shared in a statement.

Scroll down for video

The US Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) announced Wednesday that more than half of white-tailed deer living in Michigan have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the coronavirus

APHIS is studying a variety of mammals 'to identify species that may serve as reservoirs or hosts for the virus, as well as understand the origin of the virus, and predict its impacts on wildlife and the risks of cross-species transmission.'

This is the same organization that confirmed SARS-CoV-2 was spreading to wild mink last year, which resulted in millions of these animals being killed worldwide – with Denmark eradicating 17 million alone.

Now, in the US, experts are investigating certain animals across the nation to see if the pandemic has reached the wild.

Samples were obtained opportunistically as part of wildlife damage management activities conducted by APHIS Wildlife Services across 32 counties in the 4 states. These samples were tested at APHIS' National Wildlife Research Center and National Veterinary Services Laboratories.

This is the same organization that found SARS-CoV-2 was spreading to wild mink last year, which resulted in millions of these animals being killed worldwide – will Denmark eradicating 17 million alone

Although antibodies were detected, APHIS notes that 'none of the deer populations surveyed showed signs of clinical illness associated with SARS-CoV-2.'

'Widespread human infections with SARS-CoV-2 combined with human-wildlife interactions create the potential for spillover between people and animals,' APHIS shared in the announcement.

'Studying the susceptibility of certain mammals, such as deer, to SARS-CoV-2 helps to identify species that may serve as reservoirs or hosts for the virus, as well as understand the origin of the virus, and predict its impacts on wildlife and the risks of cross-species transmission.'

Officials have not yet revealed how they will tackle the exposed wild animal issue, but Denmark did not waste anytime putting an end to its exposed minks.

In October 2020, 12 people reported being infected with a mutated version of the coronavirus that they caught from minks - which led to the giant cull.

Shortly after, the World Health Organization (WHO) confirmed five other countries had coronavirus cases linked to mink farms - the US, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and Sweden.

When SARS-CoV-2 jumped from humans into minks on fur farms, its spike proteins - which allows the virus to invade cells - mutated to infect the animals more easily.

But when the virus was transmitted back into humans, it carried this mutation with it, making COVID-19 antibodies less effective, according to scientists.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Loved ones who behave badly are easier to forgive than strangers, a new study has found, but we still feel shame for their sins.

Researchers discovered that people experience less anger, contempt and disgust when it is their family or friends who have committed transgressions.

This is because they believe them to be more moral and want to punish them less than strangers, according to the study.

Scroll down for video

Loved ones who behave badly are easier to forgive than strangers, a new study has found, but we still feel shame for their sins (stock image)

WHY HUMANS ARE GENETICALLY HARDWIRED TO FORGIVE OTHERS Separate research has previously found that people are reluctant to believe others are inherently bad, even when they have behaved immorally. When someone who has behaved badly then does something nice, people will be inclined to forgive any previous misgivings. This inbuilt forgiveness evolved because dismissing someone entirely based on one bad deed could cause someone to miss out on a slew of benefits from any given social connection, scientists explained. The 2018 research was conducted by Yale University, the University of Oxford and University College London. The study found that it is human nature to see the best in someone – and we are predisposed to believe a person who behaves morally is a truly good person. Advertisement

However, people felt more shame, guilt and embarrassment when someone close to them behaved unethically, and found themselves doubting their own morality.

'Our findings suggest that having a close relationship with the transgressor heavily affects responses to their bad behaviour,' said lead author Rachel Forbes, from the University of Toronto.

'When someone close to us behaves unethically, we face a conflict between upholding our moral values and maintaining our relationship.'

More than 1,100 people took part in the research, which involved four experiments by the American Psychological Association.

In one experiment, participants read about a hypothetical situation in which a romantic partner, a close friend or a stranger committed an unethical or immoral act, such as stealing money from a charity collection jar.

In another participants were asked to recall a moment when they had witnessed a partner, friend or stranger commit an unethical or immoral act.

The third experiment saw people keep a log of moral transgressions they witnessed each day for 15 days.

In each case participants answered a series of questions about the person who committed the act, the severity of it and how harshly the transgressor should be punished.

They were also asked how they felt about themselves, including any negative emotions they experienced and their own sense of morality.

Forgiveness: Researchers discovered that people experience less anger, contempt and disgust when it is their family or friends who have committed transgressions (stock image)

In all three experiments, researchers found participants felt less anger, contempt and disgust toward family and close friends who behaved badly.

The final experiment saw people paired with a romantic partner, a close friend or a stranger. They were then taken to separate rooms and asked to respond in writing to a series of questions about themselves.

The pairs then swapped answers and were told to transcribe them into a book.

In the first instance, participants received genuine answers, but in the second they were given fake responses indicating their partner had behaved unethically by lying, plagiarising or acting selfishly.

Again they answered questions about their partner, the transgression, how harsh the punishment should be and their feelings about themselves.

The results were similar to the first three experiments, but the effect was not as strong.

Researchers think this may be because the unethical information was unknown to the participants prior to the experiment and was first shared with them in a brazen way by a stranger.

'It's possible that participants were upset with their close others because they did not tell the participant about the unethical acts beforehand and instead chose to tell the researcher,' Forbes said.

'Hearing about an unethical behaviour by someone you care about from a stranger is likely to be a bit more jarring than hearing about it directly from your friend or loved one.'

She added: 'One important limitation in our work is that we did not examine responses to extremely severe immoral actions.

'Highly immoral acts would certainly place a greater strain on the relationship and therefore could show different effects.'

The study was published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Experts have found evidence of a Roman road in the Venice lagoon — indicating that large settlements existed in the area centuries before the city's foundation in 697 AD.

In the Roman era, much of what is now submerged under the lagoon was land — and many artefacts from the time have been found in Venice's islands and waterways.

These have included various amphorae and Roman flagstones called 'basoli'. However, the extent of Roman occupation of the lagoon area had not been clear.

Researchers led from Venice's Institute of Marine Sciences (ISMAR) sonar scanned the lagoon bed, revealing the remains of structures lined up as if along a road.

The team believe that the road may have run down from the northern Venice lagoon southwards — to what is today the city of Chioggia, or 'Little Venice'.

Furthermore, the route was most likely linked to a larger network of thoroughfares that ran across much of the wider Italian Veneto region.

Experts have found evidence of a Roman road in the Venice lagoon — indicating that large settlements existed in the area centuries before the city's foundation in 697 AD. Pictured: an artist's impression of the road, showing the layers that would have made up its foundation

Researchers led from Venice's Institute of Marine Sciences (ISMAR) sonar scanned the lagoon bed along the Treporti Channel (left), revealing the remains of structures lined up as if along a road (as depicted in red, right, along what was once a sandy ridge above the sea level, yellow)

In their study, the researchers used sonar to map the bottom of the Venice lagoon, revealing the precense of 12 ancient structures running in a north-easterly direction up the Treporti Channel over a distance of 3,740 feet (1,140 metres). Pictured: bathymetry of the channel

'The submerged road represents, probably, one of the last route segments in the maritime landscape of Altinum [the Roman city that overlooked the Venice lagoon], within a wider network of roads,' the team wrote in their paper. Pictured: an artist's impression of the road

The study of the lagoon was undertaken by geophysicist Fantina Madricardo of ISMAR and colleagues.

'The submerged road represents, probably, one of the last route segments in the maritime landscape of Altinum [the Roman city that overlooked the Venice lagoon], within a wider network of roads,' the team wrote in their paper.

'Its contiguity with other structures and infrastructures — such as for instance defensive towers, levees-walkways, port, and private structures — confirms the capillary permanent settlement in the [Venice area].'

'This area was crossed by travellers and sailors,' they added.

In their study, the researchers used sonar to map the bottom of the Venice lagoon, revealing the precense of 12 ancient structures running in a north-easterly direction up the Treporti Channel over a distance of 3,740 feet (1,140 metres).

Each structure was up to 8.9 feet (2.7 metres) tall and 172.9 feet (52.7 metres) long — and team believe that they were likely aligned along a Roman road.

This notion is supported by previous surveys of the Treporti Channel, which have uncovered stones similar to the paving stones known to have been used by the Romans for road constructions.

In the Roman era , much of what is now submerged under the lagoon was land — and many artefacts from the time have been found in Venice's islands and waterways. Pictured: photographs of amphorae found along the Treporti Channel by archaeologists in 1985

Artefacts recovered from the Treporti Channel included Roman flagstones called basoli, as pictured. Until now, however, the extent of Roman occupation of the lagoon had been unclear

Previous surveys of the Treporti Channel uncovered stones similar to the paving stones known to have been used by the Romans for road constructions. Pictured, 'basoli' found in 2020

Four larger structures were also identified by the team's scans — ones that were up to 13.1 feet (4 metres) in height and 442.3 feet (134.8 metres) long.

Based on its dimensions and other similarities to structures unearthed in other locations, the researchers believe that the largest of these four buildings belonged to some kind of harbour structure — perhaps, for example, a dock.

According to the researchers, geological and modelling data suggest that the road and the harbour building lie on a sandy ridge that, while now submerged, protruded above the surface of the lagoon during the Roman era.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Scientific Reports.

According to the researchers, geological and modelling data suggest that the road and the harbour building lie on a sandy ridge that, while now submerged, protruded above the surface of the lagoon during the Roman era. Pictured: the lagoon as seen in the present day

The team believe that the road may have run down from the northern Venice lagoon southwards — to what is today the city of Chioggia, or 'Little Venice' (as shown on the right-hand map). Furthermore, the route was most likely linked to a larger network of thoroughfares that ran across much of the wider Italian Veneto region (depicted in green on the left side map)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mercury's iron core is roughly the same size as Earth's moon, taking up three-quarters of the planet's diameter. And now researchers say this is likely due to the sun's magnetism and not collisions with other celestial bodies as previously believed, a new study suggests.

The findings theorize that during the early days of the solar system's formation, iron grains were drawn in by the sun's magnetic field.

Scientists believe Mercury - the planet closest to the sun in our solar system - picked up the largest amount of iron filings, explaining its dense metal core.

As the planets started to form from the dust and gas that make up space, those that were closer to the sun had more iron than those further away.

Scientists have noted that other planets outside the solar system, such as K2-229 b, have a similar iron composition to Mercury, which is in contrast to the composition of its star.

Other iron-rich planets have been identified in deep space, orbiting a star that is similar in composition to the sun, leading the researchers to believe it's the evolving magnetic field of the star that results in nearby planets having an iron-rich core.

'The four inner planets of our solar system—Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars—are made up of different proportions of metal and rock,' the study's lead author, William McDonough, a professor of geology at the University of Maryland, said in a statement.

Mercury's iron core is roughly the same size as Earth's moon, taking up three-quarters of the planet's diameter. This is likely due to the sun's magnetism and not collisions with other celestial bodies, according to a new study

Mercury's iron core is roughly the same size as Earth's moon, taking up three-quarters of the planet's diameter

In contrast, the Earth's core is made of an iron-nickel alloy and is roughly one-third of its mass, as is the core of Venus. Mars' core is slightly less than one-quarter of its mass.

The density and percentage of iron in a rocky planet's core is highly correlated to the strength of the magnetic field, the researchers found

'There is a gradient in which the metal content in the core drops off as the planets get farther from the sun.

MERCURY: THE MYSTERY PLANET For all its bland 'dead' appearance, Mercury is a very interesting place It is the smallest planet in our solar system - only slightly larger than the Earth's moon. On its sunward half, the planet sizzles at a temperature of 510°C (950°CF while its night side maintains –210°C (–346°F). It is the closest planet to the sun at a distance of about 36 million miles (58 million km) or 0.39 AU. Mercury has a solid iron core that measures more than half the planet's diameter. Earth, by contrast, has a solid core that's just 9.5 per cent of its overall girth. One day on Mercury takes 59 Earth days. Mercury makes a complete orbit around the sun (a year in Mercury time) in just 88 Earth days. Advertisement

'Our paper explains how this happened by showing that the distribution of raw materials in the early forming solar system was controlled by the sun's magnetic field.'

In contrast, the Earth's core is made of an iron-nickel alloy and is roughly one-third of its mass, as is the core of Venus. Mars' core is slightly less than one-quarter of its mass.

The density and percentage of iron in a rocky planet's core is highly correlated to the strength of the magnetic field, the researchers found.

As such, future studies of exoplanets should take into account of the magnetism of distant stars to figure out if the exoplanets are rocky, which could be an indicator they may be habitable.

'The potential for a habitable zone in an exoplanetary systems may be influenced by physical and chemical processes controlling the distribution of metal and silicate in an evolving protoplanetary disk,' McDonough and the other researchers wrote in the study.

These processes can control the size and composition of a planet's core and the chemical percentage during the planet formation, along with the different types of metals can influence the amount of light elements that go into the core.

'These factors, plus the distribution of some critical life supporting elements (e.g., 90% of the Earth's phosphorus budget is in the core), are critical in establishing a planet's prospects for habitability,' they added.

McDonough and the researchers used existing models for how planets are formed to come up with the speed at which gas and dust was pulled into the center of the solar system.

When taking into account the magnetic field from the sun as it began, the field would draw iron through the dust and gas, forming the core of the inner planets.

'You can no longer just say, ''Oh, the composition of a star looks like this, so the planets around it must look like this,'' McDonough added.

'Now you have to say, ''Each planet could have more or less iron based on the magnetic properties of the star in the early growth of the solar system.'''

The experts will need to find another planet system like ours - one that has rocky planets spread throughout wide distances- to see if the density drops as the planets get further from the star, proving their theory.

McDonough and the researchers used existing models for how planets are formed to come up with the speed at which gas and dust was pulled into the center of the solar system.

When taking into account the magnetic field from the sun as it began, the field would draw iron through the dust and gas, forming the core of the inner planets.

The research was recently published in the journal Progress in Earth and Planetary Science.

In 2016, researchers used data from the Messenger mission to discover that Mercury's crust was once made of molten magma that was eventually buried by volcanoes and impacts.

In 2018, the European Space Agency announced it would send the BepiColombo mission to study Mercury.

It flew from Earth in late 2018 and is slated to reach Mercury's orbit in 2025.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A flexible battery that runs off of perspiration and can discharge 20 hours' worth of electricity for low-powered wearables from just 2ml of sweat has been developed.

The device measures just 0.8 square inches and is as flat as a bandage, and was designed by engineers from the Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.

It is attached to a stretchy and sweat-absorbent textile that can be worn around the wrist or upper arm and also attached to wearables like smartwatches.

The absorbent properties of the textile mean that it can retain sweat, providing the battery with a constant supply even when the wearer's perspiration rate varies.

This is essential, as the rate at which human skin sweats varies depending not only on bodily location and environmental conditions but also on the time of day.

Unlike conventional batteries, the sweat-powered battery design does not contain heavy metals or toxic chemicals which can harm both health and the environment.

A similar device that wraps around your fingers to charge your phone while you sleep was unveiled by experts at the University of California, San Diego last month.

Scroll down for video

A tiny, flexible battery (pictured) that runs off of sweat and can discharge 20 hours worth of electricity for low-powered wearable devices has been developed by scientists

The researchers first demonstrated the potential of their device by spraying it with artificial human sweat (as pictured), revealing that it could generate a voltage of 3.57 V

HOW WAS THE BATTERY MADE? Professor Lee and her colleagues produced their battery by printing electrodes onto a stretchable textile. The special ink they used contained both flakes of silver as well as hydrophilic poly(urethane-acrylate). When the silver flakes are exposed to sweat they are driven to clump together by both their acidity and chloride ions — increasing their ability to conduct electricity. At the same time, the chemical reaction produces an electric current which flows between the electrodes. In addition, the team explained, the the battery's resistance is further lowered when the device is stretched. This means that it can be used when wearers are, for example, moving about or exercising. Advertisement

'Our technology heralds a previously unreachable milestone in the design of wearable devices,' said paper author and materials scientist Pooi See Lee of the Nanyang Technological University.

'By capitalising on a ubiquitous product, perspiration, we could be looking at a more environmentally friendly way of powering wearable devices that does not rely on conventional batteries.

'It is a near-guaranteed source of energy produced by our bodies. We expect the battery to be capable of powering all sorts of wearable devices.'

The researchers first demonstrated the potential of their device by spraying it with artificial human sweat, revealing that it could generate a voltage of 3.57 V.

Next, they tested it on a real person, who wore the battery around their wrist while cycling on an exercise bicycle for 30 minutes.

The volunteer was able to generate a voltage of 4.2 V and an output power of 3.9 mW — enough to power a commercially-sold temperature sensor device and send the collected data continuously to a smartphone via a Bluetooth connection.

'Our device could be more durable than current technology, as we showed it could withstand strain from a wearer’s daily activities, and repeated exposure to stress or sweat,' said Professor Lee.

'The slim size of our battery also solves two problems in wearable tech: traditional button batteries are a problem for achieving the sort of sleek aesthetics that are attractive to consumers.'

He continued: 'Thinner batteries reduce the item’s ability to carry enough charge to last throughout the day.'

The new battery design, the team explained, has the potential to cut down on harmful electronic waste, the disposal of which is a growing problem.

'Conventional batteries are cheaper and more common than ever, but they are often built using unsustainable materials which are harmful to the environment,' said paper author and material scientist Lyu Jian of Nanyang Technological University.

'They are also potentially harmful in wearable devices, where a broken battery could spill toxic fluids onto human skin.

'Our device could provide a real opportunity to do away with those toxic materials entirely.'

The device measures just 0.8 square inches and is as flat as a bandage, and was designed by engineers from the Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.

'[Sweat] is a near-guaranteed source of energy produced by our bodies. We expect the battery to be capable of powering all sorts of wearable devices,' said paper author and materials scientist Pooi See Lee of the Nanyang Technological University. Pictured, left-to-right: researchers Gurunathan Thangavel, Pooi See Lee and Jian Lv

'It is well known that electronics do not like moisture and thus wearable devices are typically fully encapsulated to shield them from sweat,' commented Irene Goldthorpe, a University of Waterloo engineer who was not involved in the study.

'This work turns sweat from a hindrance into an asset, showing that it can improve the conductivity of printed interconnects and even using sweat as an electrolyte in a wearable, bendable battery.

'This may open a new paradigm in the design of wearable electronics.'

With their initial study complete, the researchers are now looking to explore how factors like body heat affect the battery's performance, alongside exploring the effects of other components of human sweat.

The team has filed a patent application for the new battery through NTUitive, Nanyang Technological University's enterprise and innovation company.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Science Advances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Germans have taken their love of beer to the next level with a new detailed study of the unique molecules in ales and lagers from around the world.

Scientists in Munich, in the beer-loving state of Bavaria, used advanced mass spectrometry techniques on 467 popular beers from Europe, the US and more.

Around 80 per cent of the 'tens of thousands' of molecules they discovered aren't yet described in chemical databases, they reveal.

Their analysis takes only 10 minutes to detect thousands of metabolites per beer, making it a powerful new method for quality control, they claim.

Scientists in Germany used mass spectrometry to quantify the chemical complexity in beer from around the world. From left, a stout, a red ale, a pale ale and a lager (stock image)

WHAT IS MASS SPECTROMETRY? Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical detection technique used to determine information about individual chemical molecules. MS is based on ionisation and fragmentation of molecules in the gas phase. Since molecules fragment in a unique manner, the resulting ion fragmentation pattern can be used to obtain structural information for a given molecule. In forensic science, MS has become the technique of choice for the definitive identification of a wide variety of evidence. Advertisement

'Beer is an example of enormous chemical complexity,' said study author Professor Philippe Schmitt-Kopplin at the Technical University of Munich.

'Thanks to recent improvements in in analytical chemistry, comparable in power to the ongoing revolution in the technology of video displays with ever-increasing resolution, we can reveal this complexity in unprecedented detail.'

For the analysis, published in Frontiers in Chemistry, the researchers used 467 beer types, which had been brewed in the US, Latin America, Europe, Africa and east Asia, including lagers, craft and abbey beers, top-fermented beers and Belgian gueuzes.

They used two powerful methods – direct infusion Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (DI-FTICR MS) and ultra-performance liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-ToF-MS).

DI-FTICR-MS can predict chemical formulas for the metabolite ions in beers, while UPLC-ToF-MS uses chromatography to predict their exact molecular structure.

They found about 7,700 ions with unique masses and formulas, including lipids, peptides, nucleotides, phenolics, organic acids, phosphates and carbohydrates – of which around 80 per cent aren't yet described in chemical databases.

Because each formula may in some cases cover up to 25 different molecular structures, this translates into tens of thousands of unique metabolites.

'Here we reveal an enormous chemical diversity across beers, with tens of thousands of unique molecules,' said first author Stefan Pieczonka, a PhD student at the Technical University of Munich.

'We show that this diversity originates in the variety of raw materials, processing, and fermentation.'

The beers' molecular complexity is amplified by the so-called 'Maillard reaction' between amino acids and sugars.

Stamp issued in 1983 celebrating the history of the Reinheitsgebot, commemorating its 450th anniversary. While no longer actual law, the Reinheitsgebot is still regarded as an important tradition and for many brewers a guideline on how German beer ought to be made

ALE OR LAGER? Beers are generally made out of four ingredients - grain, hops, water and yeast. All beers can be classified as an ale or a lager. Ales use top-fermenting yeasts - yeasts with cells that are carried to the top of the fermenting liquid. Lagers use bottom-fermenting yeasts - yeast cells collect at the bottom of the fermenting liquid. Bottom-fermenting yeasts work effectively at lower temperatures than top-fermenting yeasts. Advertisement

The Maillard reaction is what gives bread, steaks and toasted marshmallow their toasty or sweet malty flavor.

It's also responsible for turning sweetened condensed milk into Dulce de leche (the delicious South American spread) after just three hours in boiled water.

'This complex reaction network is an exciting focus of our research, given its importance for food quality, flavor, and also the development of novel bioactive molecules of interest for health, said Pieczonka.

Their state-of-the-art mass spectrometry method could be used for quality control in the food industry – such as identifying any dubious ingredients in beer that violate its Vorläufiges Biergesetz (Provisional Beer Law) of 1993.

Vorläufiges Biergesetz was a revision of Germany's hallowed, 500-year-old Purity Law, known as the Reinheitsgebot.

The decree, originally imposed by the southern state of Bavaria on April 23, 1516, stated 'no ingredients other than barley, hops and water are to be used' in making beer – although Germans later realised the importance of beer's fourth key ingredient, yeast.

Nowadays, beverages that are sold as beer are open to a large number of brewing types and raw materials, the researchers point out, which could lead to adulterations.

'Today it's easy to trace tiny variations in chemistry throughout the food production process, to safeguard quality or to detect hidden adulterations,' said Schmitt-Kopplin.

The German experts say advanced mass spectrometry techniques can identify ingredients in beer that shouldn't be there

Beer needs to include four key ingredients to be technically classified as such – water, yeast, hops and a certain type of grain.

Beers are either brewed from barley as the grain, or barley with the addition of either wheat, rice, and corn.

Wheat beers tend to be found throughout Germany, while rice beers are popular throughout Japan but are fairly rare in British supermarkets.

For centuries, brewers have been adding extras to their four ingredients like fruit, vegetables, chocolate or even oysters for extra flavour.

One Illinois-based brewer even added the ingredients of a pizza – tomato, oregano, basil and garlic – for its Mamma Mia! Pizza Beer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Often seen clinging to rocks, the hulls of ships or even whales, barnacles may not seem overly imaginative at first glance.

But it turns out the sticky substance that allows them to attach to almost anything has inspired scientists to develop a new surgical glue that stops bleeding in as little as 15 seconds.

The hope is that it could one day help save the lives of soldiers, stabbing victims and car crash survivors.

Scroll down for video

Scientists have developed new surgical glue which stops bleeding in just 15 seconds. It was inspired by the sticky substance that barnacles use to stick to rocks and ships. The graphic above shows how the rapid-sealing paste works to stop bleeding before clotting even begins

HOW DO BARNACLES STICK TO SHIP HULLS? Barnacles secrete an oily adhesive that allows them to clean a surface and repel moisture before latching onto it. Once they have done this, they follow it up with a protein that cross-links them with the molecules of the surface. The same two-step process is how a new type of surgical glue, developed by researchers at the Mayo Clinic and MIT, works to stop bleeding in as little as 15 seconds when applied to organs or tissues. The glue-like substance barnacles secrete binds together exactly the same way as human blood does when it clots. Barnacles are often seen attached to rocks, the hulls of ships and even whales. Advertisement

Researchers at the Mayo Clinic and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) created the rapid-sealing paste based on the oily adhesive barnacles secrete to clean a surface and repel moisture.

This glue-like substance binds together exactly the same way as human blood does when it clots.

Surgeons typically use synthetic agents to speed up coagulation and form a clot to stop the bleeding, but even in the fastest cases this still takes several minutes.

In preclinical studies, researchers found the paste stopped bleeding in as little as 15 seconds, even before clotting had begun.

Once barnacles have secreted the sticky substance they follow it up with a protein that cross-links them with the molecules of the surface.

That two-step process is what happens when the sealing paste is applied to organs or tissues.

'Our data show how the paste achieves rapid haemostasis in a coagulation-independent fashion. The resulting tissue seal can withstand even high arterial pressures,' said Christoph Nabzdyk, a Mayo Clinic cardiac anesthesiologist and co-author of the study.

'We think the paste may be useful in stemming severe bleeding, including in internal organs, and in patients with clotting disorders or on blood thinners.

'This might become useful for the care of military and civilian trauma victims.'

Sticky: Barnacles (pictured) are often seen clinging to rocks, the hulls of ships or even whales

The paste contains a water-repelling oil matrix and bioadhesive microparticles.

It's the microparticles that link to each other and the surface of the tissue after the oil has provided a clean place to connect.

The biomaterial then slowly resorbs over several weeks.

Scientists have previously suggested that slug slime could create stronger glue to prevent scarring and infection in surgery.

The defensive slime is produced by a common garden slug found in the UK, called the Dusky Arion, to foul the jaws of any would-be predator.

In 2019, undergraduate researcher Rebecca Falconer at Ithaca College in New York conducted the first study to explore possible medical uses of the slime.

She said: 'Typical sutures like staples and stitches often lead to scarring and create holes in the skin that could increase the chance of infection after surgery.

'Understanding the roles of adhesive proteins in the slug glue would aid in the creation of a medical adhesive that can move and stretch yet still retain its strength and adhesiveness.'

The new research is published in the journal Nature Biomedical Engineering.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Squirrels are like human parkour athletes when it comes to jumping from one place to another at speed, a new study shows.

Researchers in California filmed squirrel movements as the creatures worked their way around a homemade outdoor obstacle course.

The adorable critters invent 'parkour-like' maneuvers as they go to achieve particularly difficult landings, according to the findings.

They can expertly reorient their bodies to push off vertical surfaces during tricky jumps between branches in the quest for nuts, the study shows.

The athletic and dangerous art of parkour involves running, jumping, climbing and quadrupedalism (using all four limbs) while moving through various terrain.

Scroll down for video

Images from the study shows a squirrel during its quest for nuts as it leverages the wall in a parkour-like movement

THE ART OF PARKOUR Parkour derives from the French word Parcours meaning 'route' or 'course'. Originally termed Art du Deplacement, it was founded in France in the 1980s by a group of nine men. It involves running, jumping, climbing and quadrupedalism (using all four limbs) while moving through various terrain. According to professional parkour athlete Lorena Abreu, parkour is more functional and efficient than 'freerunning', which is more about creative flips and trips, although the two terms are used interchangeability. Source: Parkour.uk Advertisement

Understanding how squirrels learn the limits of their agility could help build robots with better control that can nimbly move through varied landscapes, according to the scientists.

This could help search the rubble of a collapsed building in search of survivors or to quickly access an environmental threat.

'As a model organism to understand the biological limits of balance and agility, I would argue that squirrels are second to none,' said study leader Nathaniel Hunt, a former doctoral student at the University of California, Berkeley.

'If we try to understand how squirrels do this, then we may discover general principles of high performance locomotion in the canopy and other complex terrains that apply to the movements of other animals and robots.'

Hunt and his team report a wide repertoire of agile landing maneuvers in the squirrels, as well as adaptive 'parkour' behaviours that allow the animals to perform challenging leaps.

In its quest to take a nut from a researcher's hand, one squirrel is seen springing onto a the wall in a parkour-like fashion before launching itself once more.

In a slow motion replay, the squirrel looks like it's defying gravity as it 'sticks' to the vertical surface for a split second.

Pictured is a nimble fox squirrel (Sciurus niger) with the apparatus on the UC Berkeley campus

Parkour involves running, jumping, climbing and quadrupedalism (using all four limbs) while moving through various terrain

The creatures can perform corrective adjustments 'on-the-fly' even if they've misjudged the situation, according to Hunt.

'If they leap into the air with too much speed or too little speed, they can use a variety of landing maneuvers to compensate,' he said.

'If they jump too far, they roll forward around the branch. If they jump short, they will land with their front legs and swing underneath before pulling themselves up on top of the perch.

'This combination of adaptive planning behaviours, learning control and reactive stabilising maneuvers helps them move quickly through the branches without falling.'

Squirrels spend most of their time high in the trees – an unpredictable environment that requires them to nimbly navigate a tangled maze of branches to travel, nest and avoid predators.

However, it isn't well understood how squirrels learn to gauge and adjust their movements in split-second timing, while making potentially life-threatening decisions.

To observe jumping behaviour, Hunt and colleagues designed their outdoor obstacle course on the UC Berkeley campus.

They watched as the wild squirrels jumped between simulated branches and across gaps of various distances while being enticed with nuts.

Fox squirrel, apparatus, and experimenters on the UC Berkeley campus - from left to right, Nate Hunt, Judy Jinn, Lucia Jacobs and Aaron Teixeira

WHAT IS COMPLIANCE? Compliance is a term used in physics and the science of motion. It refers to the property of a material of undergoing elastic deformation or change in volume when subjected to an applied force. Materials with low compliance have have good resistance. Advertisement

Over a series of experiments, the authors discovered that leaping squirrels quickly learned to modify their jumping behaviour over repeated jumps.

As expected, the flimsier or more compliant the branch from which squirrels had to leap, the more cautious they were.

'We found that free-ranging fox squirrels (Sciurus niger) leaping across unfamiliar, simulated branches decided where to launch by balancing a trade-off between gap distance and branch-bending compliance,' say the authors in their paper.

'Squirrels quickly learned to modify impulse generation upon repeated leaps from unfamiliar, compliant beams.

'A repertoire of agile landing maneuvers enabled targeted leaping without falling. Unanticipated adaptive landing and leaping "parkour" behaviour revealed an innovative solution for particularly challenging leaps.'

The compliance of the branch was six times more critical than the gap distance in deciding whether to jump, they found.

This may be because squirrels know that their sharp claws will save them if they miscalculate a jump.

Their claws are so failproof, Hunt said, that none of the squirrels ever fell, despite wobbly leaps and landings that went shy or too far of the mark.

'They're not always going to have their best performance – they just have to be good enough,' Hunt said.

For squirrels navigating their tree-tops, mistakes can result in fatal falls, so they have to constantly consider trade-offs between branch bendiness and the distance between branches

'They have redundancy, so, if they miss, they don't hit their center of mass right on the landing perch, they're amazing at being able to grab onto it.

'They'll swing underneath, they'll swing over the top. They just don't fall.'

Altogether, the findings demonstrate a 'synergy' between biomechanical energy management and trial-and-error learning that determines the animal's navigation through canopy.

'Just as movement in the real world requires flexibility and creativity, researchers studying natural locomotion must be as ingenious as their natural animal subjects,' write Karen Adolph and Jesse Young in a related Perspective.

'The trick is to capture movement in all its complexity while retaining sufficient experimental control and measurement fidelity. The study of Hunt et al. is a beautiful example.'

The study, entitled 'Acrobatic squirrels learn to leap and land on tree branches without falling', has been published in the journal Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There's some good news for all those chocolate lovers out there.

It turns out the sugary snack could help middle-aged people exercise because it gives the perfect pre-workout hit, according to a new study.

Researchers have found that a bioactive compound in cocoa increases blood flow and makes exercising easier due to a faster uptake of oxygen.

Because the rate at which oxygen consumption increases at the start of exercise slows with age, these compounds were found to be particularly helpful for middle-aged gym-goers.

Scroll down for video

There's some good news for all those chocolate lovers out there. It turns out the sugary snack could help middle-aged people exercise by giving them the ideal pre-workout hit (stock image)

COCOA CAN BOOST OXYGEN LEVELS IN THE BRAIN Drinking cocoa can increase your mental agility thanks to the presence of flavanols – chemicals that are abundant in cocoa beans. UK and US researchers found healthy adults performed better on difficult cognitive tasks if the participants had consumed a cocoa drink containing high levels of flavanols. After drinking flavanol-rich cocoa, participants produced a faster and greater increase in blood oxygenation in the frontal cortex – a brain region that plays a key role in cognition and decision-making – that helped them complete these tasks. Flavanols are antioxidants and are abundant in tea, red wine, blueberries, apples, pears, cherries, and peanuts, as well as in the seeds of the cacao tree – cocoa beans. By enriching supermarket cocoa with flavanols, food producers could help us increase the brain-boosting plant nutrient in our diet. Read more: Drinking cocoa could increase your mental agility Advertisement

Flavanols are found naturally in many plants, including tea, apples, various berries, and cocoa beans. The plant nutrient, which can be taken as a supplement, is also found in cocoa powder and to a lesser extent in dark chocolate.

It is known to have a beneficial effect on health, which is why a group of researchers from Liverpool John Moores University and Liverpool Hope University tested its impact on a group of 'sedentary' but healthy adults aged between 40 and 60.

During a series of trials over a five-week period the group was pushed to exhaustion using a lab-based exercise bike to establish each individual's power output and their VO2 peak — the maximum amount of oxygen the body can use during exercise.

They were then given either a daily 400mg cocoa flavanol supplement or a placebo over seven days before taking part in more tests to establish the time it takes for oxygen delivery to respond to exercise demands.

The shorter the response the better you are able to perform in a given exercise.

Those who were given the flavanol supplement reduced this response time from around 40 seconds to 34, which researchers said was key because it 'exceeds the minimum physiologically relevant change' of around 5 seconds.

However, the scientists said if you truly want to reap the rewards of cocoa flavanol then eating a chocolate bar before hitting the weights is not the best way to go about it.

Instead they recommend consuming a shake with one and a half tablespoons of cocoa because natural cocoa powder contains an average of 34.6mg per gram of flavanol.

By comparison, the average milk chocolate bar contains 0.73mg per gram and the dark chocolate around 1.156mg per gram.

Flavanols are a group of chemical compounds found in many different food products, including green tea, muscadine grapes, dark chocolate (pictured), blueberries and wine

Simon Marwood, associate professor in sport science at Liverpool Hope University, told the Times: 'It is preferable to take supplements over eating dark chocolate since potential beneficial effects of cocoa-flavanols occur during exercise when high doses are consumed — greater than 400mg flavanols — and because dark chocolate contains fat and sugar that may negate the beneficial potential of any bioactive constituents.'

He said that consuming cocoa flavanol supplements might also be a way to encourage people to stick to a new exercise regime.

'One barrier to starting an exercise plan is poor fitness in the first place, perhaps because of the discomfort associated with what might otherwise be light exercise,' Marwood said.

'Without frequent exercise, ageing results in a slowing in the rate at which our oxygen consumption increases at the onset of exercise.'

He said this slowing of the rate of increase of oxygen consumption has a negative effect on a person's ability to tolerate exercise.

Earlier this year researchers in the US found that cocoa flavanols can also boost memory abilities in older people aged between 50 and 75.

Previous research has already linked higher dietary intakes of flavonols with reduced risk of developing dementia – the ongoing decline of brain functioning.

Other studies have credited flavanols with cutting the inflammation linked to heart disease, and with reducing the odds of dangerous blood clots.

They are also said to help keep diabetes and high blood pressure under control.

The new research is published in the journal European Journal of Applied Physiology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twitter has officially scrapped Fleets just eight months after it launched, with the Snapchat-like feature proving unpopular with users.

The disappearing-tweet feature, designed to compete with Snapchat and Instagram Stories, was removed today after failing to take off in the way the company hoped.

Fleets' time on the platform was short-lived: Twitter began testing the feature last year, along with others such as Twitter Blue and super followers, and rolled it out globally in November 2020.

Announcing the news of the removal of Fleets last month, the official Twitter account joked: 'We're sorry or you're welcome.'

Scroll down for video

Killed off: Twitter has officially scrapped Fleets just eight months after it launched, with the Instagram Stories-like feature proving unpopular with users

Fleets allowed users to share tweets and pictures that stayed at the top of their feed in the Twitter app for 24 hours, similar to how Stories look on Instagram and Facebook.

The company announced its plans to end Fleets in a blog post last month.

Ilya Brown, Twitter's head of product, brand and video ads, said users hadn't taken to the option the way the company had predicted.

'We built Fleets as a lower-pressure, ephemeral way for people to share their fleeting thoughts,' Brown said.

'We hoped Fleets would help more people feel comfortable joining the conversation on Twitter. But, in the time since we introduced Fleets to everyone, we haven't seen an increase in the number of new people joining the conversation with Fleets like we hoped.'

Announcing the news of the removal of Fleets last month, the official Twitter account joked: 'We're sorry or you're welcome'

Brown said the company is always trying to improve and some updates 'are speculative and won't work out.'

'We're evolving what Twitter is, and trying bigger, bolder things to serve the public conversation,' he added.

'If we're not evolving our approach and winding down features every once in a while – we're not taking big enough chances.'

Available for iOS and Android devices, Fleets – a portmanteau of 'fleeting' and 'tweet' – couldn't be retweeted or receive public responses, but instead had to be interacted with through Direct Messages.

Fleets was Twitter's attempt at competing with Snapchat and Instagram Stories. It gave users the option to comment in a more private way, sharing casual thoughts, opinions, and feelings

Followers could reply to Fleets by sending a private Direct Message, but only if they followed each other or the account holder had their Direct Messages set to open.

The feature, which was successfully trialed in Brazil and other countries before going worldwide, gave users the option to tweet about things in a more private way, with the idea it would cut back on harassment by strangers on the platform.

In trials, Fleets seemed to make people feel more comfortable sharing personal and casual thoughts, opinions, and feelings.

Twitter users could choose to post photos, videos and reactions to Fleets

Twitter executives admitted at launch that the format 'may sound familiar', referring to Snapchat, which spearheaded the art of disappearing messages, and Instagram, which followed suit in with Stories 2016.

In November 2020, Facebook-owned WhatsApp also launched 'disappearing messages' that vanish from chats after seven days.

The section where Fleets were displayed at the top of the app is now being replaced with Spaces, a more popular feature which allows users to host rooms with one another and chat.

Last month Twitter also rolled out a new feature allowing users to choose who can reply to a tweet even after it's been sent.

The San Francisco-based media giant has been experimenting with its reply control function at least since May 2020.

Now all users can select who can reply to their live tweets—people specifically tagged in a tweet, the user's followers, or any Twitter user.

People who can't reply will still be able to view, retweet, retweet with Comment, and 'like' posts.

The company described the reply control settings as transforming Twitter threads into 'conversations' that would enable users to 'feel safer Tweeting and have more meaningful conversations.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Reducing air pollution could be the key to warding off dementia, according to a promising new analysis of scientific studies being presented today.

Researchers at Chicago-based non-profit Alzheimer's Association are detailing three papers that put pressure on governments to clean our air and help reduce rates of the debilitating condition.

The study's authors looked at the effect of reducing nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 micrometers or less – about 3 per cent the diameter of a human hair – known as PM2.5.

In one study, cutting NO2 levels over time lowered the chance of developing dementia by more than a quarter – up to 26 per cent.

When breathed in, it's thought microscopic particles in air pollution enter the bloodstream and travel to the brain where they provoke inflammation – a problem that may be the trigger for dementia.

But more research is needed into how exactly air pollution exposure could cause different dementia conditions including Alzheimer's.

The new analysis is being reported today at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference (AAIC) 2021, which is being held in Denver and live-streamed online.

More research is needed into how air pollution - namely nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particulate matter - cause a decline in brain functioning. There are different diseases that can cause dementia. Many are associated with an abnormal build-up of proteins in the brain. This build-up causes nerve cells to function less well and ultimately die (stock image)

WHAT IS PARTICULATE MATTER (PM)? PM is a mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets found in the air. They are created from a variety of sources, including traffic, construction sites, unpaved roads, fields, smokestacks or fires. Most particles form in the atmosphere as a result of reactions of chemicals such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Some PM, such as dust, dirt, soot, or smoke, is large or dark enough to be seen with the naked eye. Other PM is so small it can only be detected using an electron microscope. PM2.5 - of diameters that are generally 2.5 micrometers and smaller - differ from PM10 - 10 micrometers and smaller. Source: US EPA Advertisement

'We've known for some time that air pollution is bad for our brains and overall health, including a connection to amyloid buildup in the brain,' said Claire Sexton, director of scientific programs & outreach at the Alzheimer’s Association.

'But what's exciting is we're now seeing data showing that improving air quality may actually reduce the risk of dementia.

'These data demonstrate the importance of policies and action by federal and local governments, and businesses, that address reducing air pollutants.'

PM2.5 can easily enter the lungs and then the bloodstream and mostly comes from burning coal, wood stoves, forest fires, smokestacks and other human processes that involve burning.

Meanwhile, NO2 – which mainly comes from road transport emissions – damages immune system cells in the lungs and causes increased susceptibility to respiratory infections. It can make asthmatics more sensitive to allergens.

Previous reports have linked long-term air pollution exposure with accumulation of amyloid beta plaques, which is a cause of Alzheimer's, a form of dementia.

But today's announcement marks the first accumulated evidence that reducing pollution is linked with lower risk of all-cause dementia and Alzheimer's disease.

STUDY ONE

The first study in the analysis was conducted by Xinhui Wang, assistant professor of research neurology at University of Southern California, and colleagues.

They investigated if older women living in locations with greater reduction in air pollution may have slower decline in their cognitive function and be less likely to develop dementia.

Particulate matter, or PM, comes from a variety of sources, including vehicle exhausts, construction sites, industrial activity or even domestic stoves and ovens. PM2.5 is particulate pollutant 2.5 micrometres or smaller in size

They looked at a group of women aged between 74 and 92 in the US from the National Institutes of Health-funded WHIMS-ECHO study – all of whom did not have dementia at the beginning.

Participants were followed between 2008 and 2018, with cognitive function tests performed every year to determine if they'd developed dementia.

Participants' home addresses were noted and mathematical models were used to estimate the air pollution levels at these locations over time.

The researchers found that, in general, air quality greatly improved over the 10 years before the study began.

During a median of six years of follow-up, cognitive functions tended to decline as women aged, as expected.

But for every 1.2 microgram per cubic metre (μg/m3) reduction in PM2.5 there was a 14 per cent reduced risk of getting dementia.

And for every 5.3 parts per billion (ppb) reduction in NO2 there was a 26 per cent reduced risk of getting dementia.

This was similar to the lower level of risk seen in women two to three years younger.

1.2 μg/m3 and 5.3 ppb are 10 per cent of the the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) current standard for both pollutants.

NO2 forms from emissions from cars, trucks and buses, power plants and off-road equipment

Other benefits were a slower decline in overall cognitive function and memory, similar to women one to two years younger.

Women with reduced pollution also had better results on specific tests of working memory, episodic memory and attention/executive function.

These 'cognitive domains' tend to decline for dementia patients at the pre-clinical stage, according to the team.

These benefits were seen regardless of age, level of education, the geographic region where they lived and whether they had cardiovascular disease.

'Our findings are important because they strengthen the evidence that high levels of outdoor air pollution in later life harm our brains, and also provide new evidence that by improving air quality we may be able to significantly reduce risk of cognitive decline and dementia,' Wang said.

'The possible benefits found in our studies extended across a variety of cognitive abilities, suggesting a positive impact on multiple underlying brain regions.'

Particulate matter (PM) is emitted during the combustion of solid and liquid fuels, such as for power generation, domestic heating and in vehicle engines. Pictured, London obscured by pollution

STUDY TWO

In a similar study, University of California, San Diego researchers worked with a large cohort of more than 7,000 participants aged 65 or older.

They found a 15 per cent reduced risk of all-cause dementia and a 17 per cent reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease for every decrease in PM2.5, measured as a microgram of gaseous pollutant per cubic meter of air (μg/m3).

This decrease was independent of socio-demographic and health behaviour factors, and APOE genotype – a genetic risk factor for dementia.

'These data, for the first time, highlight the beneficial effects of reduced air pollution on the incidence of dementia in older adults.' said study author Noemie Letellier.

'The findings have important implications to reinforce air quality standards to promote healthy ageing.

'In the context of climate change, massive urbanisation and worldwide population ageing, it is crucial to accurately evaluate the influence of air pollution change on incident dementia to identify and recommend effective prevention strategies.'

STUDY THREE

Alzheimer's disease – the most common cause of dementia – is thought to be caused by the abnormal build-up of proteins in and around brain cells.

One of the proteins involved is called beta amyloid plaques, deposits of which form plaques around brain cells. The other protein is called tau, deposits of which form tangles within brain cells.

Accumulation of beta amyloid plaques is one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.

While a link between air pollution and increased beta amyloid production has been found in animal and human studies, little is known about the effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on beta amyloid.

Artist's impression shows amyloid plaques forming between neurons, otherwise known as nerve cells (stock image)

The third study was led by Christina Park, doctoral student in the Department of Epidemiology at University of Washington.

Park and colleagues examined links between exposure to PM2.5, larger particles (PM10) and NO2, and levels of Aβ1-40 (one of the major protein components of plaques) in more than 3,000 individuals who were originally dementia-free.

The study evaluated and averaged air pollution levels at participants' addresses for time periods up to 20 years prior to taking blood tests to measure individuals' beta amyloid.

People who were in the study longer – up to eight years – showed a strong link between all three air pollutants and Aβ1-40.

This marks some of the first human data suggesting long-term exposure to air pollutants is associated with higher Aβ1-40 levels in the blood.

'Our findings suggest that air pollution may be an important factor in the development of dementia,' Park said.

'Many other factors that impact dementia are not changeable, but reductions in exposure to air pollution may be associated with a lower risk of dementia. More research is needed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People who regularly suffer from migraines are more likely to get dizzy or suffer motion sickness when they ride a rollercoaster, a new study has revealed.

A group of 40 people, half regularly suffering from migraines and half not, had their brains scanned while they watched videos of a virtual rollercoaster ride.

As well as revealing those struggling with migraines get more dizzy, the team from the University of Hamburg in Germany found they had more nerve cell activity in certain areas of the brain, and less activity in other areas.

The visual processing area of the brain was one of the main regions that experienced heightened activity in the migraine sufferers as they watched the roller coaster.

According to the NHS, around 10 million people aged 15-69 in the UK suffer from migraines, causing up to 16,500 emergency hospital admissions every year.

The team hope that by identifying and pinpointing these changes, future studies can better understand migraine and lead to the development of new treatments.

People who regularly suffer from migraines are more likely to get dizzy or suffer motion sickness when they ride a rollercoaster, a new study has revealed. Stock image

WHAT HELPS TO PREVENT MIGRAINES? Being open to new experiences reduces people's risk of migraines, research suggested in June 2017. A preference for variation over routine prevents crippling headaches among depression sufferers, a study found. Yet, neuroticism - a personality trait associated with nervousness and irritability - increases migraine's risk, the research adds. Study author Dr Máté Magyar from Semmelweis University in Budapest, said: 'An open character appears to offer protection from [migraine]. 'Our study results could help to provide a better understanding of the biopsychosocial background of migraine, and help to find novel strategies in the prevention of and interventions for [migraine].' The researchers analysed the relationship between personality traits, depression and migraines in more than 3,000 sufferers of the mental-health condition. Depression is associated with an increased risk of migraines. The participants were ranked according to their openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism. Advertisement

A migraine is a moderate to severe headache felt as a throbbing pain on one side of the head.

However, in some people it can also result in feeling sick, being sick, as well as light and sound sensitivity.

Migraine is a common health condition, according to the NHS, who say it affects around one in every five women and around one in every 15 men.

The condition usually starts to impact people in early adulthood.

'Millions of people regularly experience painful and debilitating migraine headaches that can reduce their quality of life,' said study author Arne May

'People with migraine often complain of dizziness, balance problems and misperception of their body's place in space during migraine.'

This prompted the virtual roller coaster study, that found some of these problems are not only magnified in people who experience migraine, but they are also associated with changes in various areas of the brain.

May and colleagues used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to take brain scans of each participant as they watched videos to experience the virtual roller coaster rides.

None of the volunteers experienced a migraine during the virtual rides.

After they finished watching videos of the virtual rollercoasters they completed a survey.

This asked them about their perceived levels of dizziness, motion sickness and other symptoms they may have experienced during the 'ride'.

They found 65 per cent of people who regularly experience migraines found that they experienced dizziness during the 'ride' compared to 30 per cent of people who don't experience migraines.

On a questionnaire about motion sickness, which scored symptom intensity on a scale of 1-180, those with a history of migraines had an average score of 47 compared to an average score of 24 for people without.

People with migraines also experienced symptoms longer, an average of one minute and 19 seconds compared to an average of 27 seconds.

From the brain scans, researchers were able to identify changes in nerve cell activity based on blood flow to certain areas of the brain.

A group of 40 people, half regularly suffering from migraines and half not, had their brains scanned while they watched videos of a virtual rollercoaster ride. Stock image

People with migraines had increased activity in five areas of the brain, including two areas in the occipital gyrus, the visual processing area of the brain, and decreased activity in two other areas including the middle frontal gyrus.

These brain changes correlated with migraine disability and motion sickness scores.

'One other area of the brain where we found pronounced nerve cell activity in people with migraine was within the pontine nuclei, which helps regulate movement and other motor activity,' said May.

'This increased activity could relate to abnormal transmission of visual, auditory and sensory information within the brain.

'Future research should now look at larger groups of people with migraine to see if our findings can be confirmed.'

The findings have been published in Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A rare first-generation Apple iPod from December 2001 is being offered for sale on a tech platform - but rather than buy it outright, bidders are being offered shares in it for just $5 each.

Rally Rd., a New York-based platform, is offering the iPod for $5 a share, selling 5,000 shares for an initial offering price of $25,000.

The platform is giving everyday people the chance to get a slice of the rare collectibles market, even if they don't have tens of thousands of dollars to spare.

When it went on sale nearly 20 years ago to the day, the white 5GB iPodretailed for $399.

This particular iPod was given as a Christmas gift and sat 'unopened on a closet shelf, where it would sit for almost two decades,' Rally wrote in a description on its app.

The iPod was introduced in October 2001, when former Apple CEO Steve Jobs said the device is 'putting 1,000 songs in your pocket.'

Originally seen as a flop, with some reviews saying it lacked features such as wireless capabilities or was one of the worst holiday gifts of 2001, the product ushered in a new wave of smart devices and changed Apple's fortunes forever.

To date, more than 400 million iPods have been sold by Apple, according to Benzinga, which first reported the news.

The company is now worth more than $2.4 trillion, an increase of roughly 144,000 percent since the iPod was introduced.

Rally Rd., a New York-based platform, is offering the 1st-generation iPod for $5 a share, selling 5,000 shares for an initial offering price of $25,000

When it went on sale nearly 20 years ago to the day, the white 5GB model retailed for $399

The iPod was introduced in October 2001, when former Apple CEO Steve Jobs said the device is 'putting 1,000 songs in your pocket'

The product ushered in a new wave of smart devices and changed Apple's fortunes forever

Originally seen as a flop, with some reviews saying it lacked features such as wireless capabilities

Others said the music-playing device was one of the worst holiday gifts of 2001. Apple has sold more than 400 million iPods to date

Apple discontinued this version of the iPod, which later became known as the iPod Classic, in September 2014.

It currently offers the iPod touch for sale, starting at $199 for a 32GB model, running up to $399 for a 256GB model, more than 50 times the storage of the original iPod.

The iPod is not the first Apple product Rally has offered in its near four-year existence.

In October 2020, it offered a 1986 Macintosh Plus signed by Steve Jobs and the Apple team for $50,000 that is now worth $110,000, according to secondary market prices on the Rally Rd. app.

Rally Rd., a New York-based platform, is offering fractional ownership in the 1st-generation device

Earlier this year, it offered an Apple I computer signed by Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak with an initial offering price of $825,000.

The company, which got its start selling fractional ownership in classic cars (an item which still attracts to this day), has raised $27 million in funding, according to TechCrunch.

With more than 200,000 users and transactions nearly tripling over the past 12 months, the company has expanded into sports memorabilia, rare books, watches, wines and other categories often seen as investments.

Rally Rd. Co-founder and chief product officer Rob Petrozzo told TechCrunch that the company manages, insures and the stores the products.

Once every three months, after the initial funding round is closed, they are placed into a secondary market to see what the marketplace values them at.

Other current collectibles available on the app include a 1989 Porsche 911 Speedster, Journals of the Continental Congress (1774-1775) and a First Edition of H.G. Wells: The Time Machine, among others.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The original patent for toilet paper confirms that the correct way to hang it is with the paper over the top, as hanging it under 'increases bacteria risk,' experts warn.

Half of people in the UK get annoyed when they see the toilet paper underneath, according to a study for London-based design company Bathroom Origins.

About 300 people were asked about their views on the positioning of the toilet roll, revealing that 42 per cent were annoyed if it was 'the wrong way'.

A patent created by the inventor of the toilet roll, Seth Wheeler, granted in 1883, reveals the correct way to hang toilet paper on the holder is over the top.

The original patent for toilet paper confirms that the correct way to hang it is with the paper over the top, as hanging it under 'increases bacteria risk,' experts warn

Half of people in the UK get annoyed when they see the toilet paper underneath, according to a study for London-based design company Bathroom Origins

Families, friends, housemates and colleagues have long argued over which direction the paper should flow over one of Wheeler's rolls, with 45 to 52 year olds the most upset if it isn't replaced on the holder the way they would expect.

A study in 2011 by the University of Colorado found 19 different types of bacteria on a range of surfaces in bathrooms, including the toilet roll holder and nearby walls.

Experts say when the roll is on the back of the bar so the paper hangs under, the risk of touching the wall around it to grab the paper, and the related bacteria, increases.

Of the 42 per cent concerned about the direction the paper is placed, 52 per cent were women, and 48 per cent were men.

People have been using paper for cleaning themselves since 6th century China, with mass production of paper for that purpose beginning in the 14th century, but it was more than another 400 years until Wheeler came upon the idea of putting on a roll.

Sofia Charalambous, co-founder at Bathroom Origins, said when you place the paper so it comes out under the roll it is normally closer to the wall.

This leads to increased risk of it coming into contact with bacteria and droplets, including from viruses like Covid-19, on the wall surface behind it.

'If you are unfortunate enough to go to the toilet after someone who has covid-19 and the toilet roll is under, not over, you are increasing your chances of coming into contact with the virus,' said Charalambous.

'There is also a reason why toilet roll bars that have flaps on have the flaps going over, not under.'

About 300 people were asked about their views on the positioning of the toilet roll, revealing that 42 per cent were annoyed if it was 'the wrong way'

The subject of which way the toilet roll should hang has been a light-hearted debate amongst couples and friends for many years, but it now holds a deeper meaning since the pandemic struck, with the virus able to live on surfaces for up to 72 hours.

There are plenty of debates and polls online arguing which way is right. Typically, those who believe under is correct say that it looks more aesthetic and is also more environmentally friendly.

They believe that putting the toilet roll under results in you using less toilet paper as the paper doesn't roll as easily.

In the original patent drawings, a roll of perforated toilet paper can be seen on a holder, with the paper over the top of the roll.

So it seems over wins when it comes to the official patent and cleanliness.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Although revenge is often thought of as a 'dish best served cold,' a new study from researchers at Virginia Commonwealth University found that more than 50 percent of people want action to be taken immediately.

In six experiments involving more than 1,500 participants, 58 percent said they would prefer immediate revenge to teach others a lesson, even if it resulted in lesser actions taken towards the offending person.

'[Our findings suggest] that people prefer a 'hot-and-ready' form of revenge, instead of a cold, calculated and delayed approach to vengeance,' said one of the study's co-authors, VCU associate professor Dr David Chester, in a statement.

While immediate revenge is the preference for the majority of participants across the spectrum, the researchers found it's possible to shift that preference towards delayed revenge.

A new study says 58% of people want to take revenge on someone immediately instead of later

They prefer immediate revenge, even if it resulted in lesser actions towards the offending person

When told to sit and think about a past incident, 42 percent of participants were willing to wait to get more vengeance, the study's lead author, Dr Samuel West, said.

'In other words, revenge held its value for a longer period of time than did money to these participants,' West explained. 'Across all of our studies we found that these preferences were highly divisive, such that 42% of participants were more willing to wait to enact more severe vengeance.

'Making this more complex is the fact that we also found that such individuals also had greater antagonistic traits like sadism (i.e., deriving enjoyment out of the suffering of others) and angry rumination.'

In one experiment, participants were asked to play a video game against what they believed was a real opponent. They were told they could inflict a lesser noise blast on their opponent that goes through the headphones or a louder blast the following day.

The researchers found it's possible to shift that preference towards delayed revenge, if the person sits and thinks about it 42% of participants were willing to wait to get more vengeance

In another, people were put in a virtual chat room with two other participants, but they were excluded from the conversation 80 percent of the time. The participant then had to choose how long one of the other chat participants would put their hand in 'painfully cold water.'

The researchers also found that quick revenge is more desirable than money

The researchers also found that quick revenge is more desirable than money.

'Participants in our studies who displayed a preference for delayed-but-greater revenge were more willing to wait for their desired revenge than they were monetary rewards,' West added.

The study seems to show that most people prefer immediate action towards someone they've been offended by, though their preferences can change depending upon when the situation took place and those who are more likely to inflict harm than others.

'Yet when provocations become so severe that we ruminate about them over and over again, or when people provoke the 'wrong person' (i.e., a person with antagonistic personality traits), revenge may just become a dish best served cold,' Chester said.

The researchers hope the findings could shed more light on aggression or antisocial behavior.

'Human life often entails one provocation after the other,' they wrote in the study.

'Across six studies, we found that people treated such intertemporal decisions about revenge like they do for other rewards — they preferred receiving some now to receiving more later. In line with major theories of aggression, these preferences were readily shifted by experimental provocation and those with greater antagonistic traits were more willing to wait to deliver a more severe blow.

'Yet our results did not paint those who bided their time for greater revenge as impulsive, uninhibited individuals,' they added. 'Instead, they exhibited the recruitment of greater self-regulation.'

The research has been published in the journal Motivation Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twitter relaunched its verification program in May, allowing users to apply for the coveted blue checkmark for the first time in four years, but on Friday the social media platform hit the pause button - again.

The move is due to Twitter verifying 'a small number' of fake accounts that were mostly part of a botnet.

The company wants to improve its application and review process before handing out more checkmarks.

For users who applied in the past few months, the Jack Dorsey-led company said it is still reviewing existing applications, but will prohibit new ones from flowing in until further notice.

Twitter proudly relaunched its verification program in May, allowing users to apply for the coveted blue checkmark for the first time in four years, but on Friday the social media platform hit the pause button, again

‘We’ve temporarily hit pause on rolling out access to apply for Verification so we can make improvements to the application and review process,’ Twitter Verified shard in a tweet Friday.

‘For those who have been waiting, we know this may be disappointing. We want to get things right, and appreciate your patience.’

Twitter stopped handing out the coveted blue check mark in 2017 after it came under scrutiny for verifying the account of a known white supremacist who organized racist rallies in Charlottesville, Virginia.

The firm had continued to verify accounts since it discontinued individual requests, but only those firmly in the public eye - namely politicians and in recent times, public health experts.

The move is due to Twitter verifying several fake accounts, in June it admitted this occurred with a ‘small number of fraudulent accounts, with most part of a botnet. The company wants to improve its application and review process before handing out more checkmarks

This past November, the platform announced the revival of its verification program last November, saying it would accept applications ‘early 2021’ – and that day came on May 20.

The program was open to users that fell into one of the six following categories:

Government

Companies, brands and organizations

News organizations and journalists

Entertainment

Sports and gaming

Activists, organizers, and other influential individuals

But since then, Twitter has mistakenly verified fake accounts, with the latest incident this month when it gave the blue check mark to an account claiming to be from author Cormac McCarthy – but it quickly acknowledged the mistake.

'The account referenced was verified by mistake and that has since been reversed,' a spokesperson told the AP. 'The account will also be required to adhere to Twitter's parody, newsfeed, commentary, and fan account policy.'

The account for the award-winning author, 88 - which was first created in September 2018 under the handle @CormacMcCrthy - had its blue check verification removed after it was determined to have been phony.

And this was just one of ‘several’ fake accounts, which has sparked Twitter to pause the program.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stories written by young children are much more likely to feature male characters, a study has revealed, and it happens regardless of the gender of the author.

More than 100,000 short stories written by British children aged five to 13 for a BBC competition were analysed by researchers from the University of Oxford.

The team wanted to see whether the gender of the author influenced the gender of the characters they give life on a page, and whether it changed with age.

Young boys were the most likely to feature a male protagonist in their story, and 75 per cent of all the characters were male in their short stories.

For girls age played a large part in whether they wrote about male characters, with 70 per cent of those under 13 writing about boys, and 50 per cent of 13-year-olds.

More than 100,000 short stories written by British children aged five to 13 for a BBC competition were analysed by researchers from the University of Oxford. Stock image

KEY FINDINGS: ALL CHILDREN WRITE ABOUT BOYS Researchers investigated personal name usage in a selection of 100,000 short stories written by children. They also looked at the gender of characters in a series of books written between 1813 and the modern dy. In this latter study, they found an overrepresentation of male names in children’s books, largely attributable to male authors. In stories written by over 100,000 children, they found an overall male bias that interacted with age. Younger children wrote more about their own gender. With age, girls, aged 13 and above, became more balanced yet boys continued to show a strong male bias. 'Our findings demonstrate a male-centered bias in both children’s books and their own writing,' the team wrote. 'We consider the power of written language to both shape and be shaped by cultural stereotypes via systematic biases in gender associations.' Advertisement

To determine the gender of the characters in the 100,000 stories, the team cross referenced them to names in the England and Wales birth register 2017.

They considered it 'traditionally male or female' if over 60 per cent of babies given that name recorded that gender at birth.

They found that regardless of age boys and girls were more likely to write about characters with a traditionally male name.

With only half of girls writing about boys in their stories, the researchers say it shows boys will continue to write about their gender as they grow up, but girls will still write as much about boys as they do their own gender.

While they didn't investigate cause directly, they say this could be because the books children read often have a central male character.

This led the authors to analyse character gender in the Oxford Children's Corpus, which is a huge sample of children's books published between 1813 and today.

They found that just 38 per cent of the characters in the books were female, saying it could be due to male writers more likely to write about male characters.

It wasn't just down to the older books in the sample, as the team then looked at books published since 2005 and found male writers had increased the rate at which they wrote about male characters.

'If all boys read is about boys, they may not be motivated as much to think about the female perspective,' study author Yaling Hsiao told New Scientist.

'Given these findings, it is reasonable to predict that boys encounter fewer female names when reading as they read less overall,' the authors wrote.

They explained that when the boys do read, they are more likely to be choosing material that contains a higher proportion of male names.

Boys might sample more male bias in their reading experience than girls, they discovered, adding that this might play out in their own writing.

'There are no quick fixes to the issues raised in this work,' Jennifer Rodd at University College London, not involved in the study, told New Scientist.

For girls age played a large part in whether they wrote about male characters, with 70 per cent of those under 13 writing about boys, and 50 per cent of 13-year-olds. Stock image

'It seems likely that children have learned, from the books that they read or from society more generally, that the actions of boys and men are more likely to be sufficiently exciting and interesting to be worth writing about.'

She says parents should ensure their children have a wide selection of books feature male and female characters and publishers should reflect on gender balance.

The findings have been published in the journal Society for Research in Child Development.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists are working on a pacemaker of the future that is battery-free and could be powered by the heart itself.

Typical pacemakers consist of a pulse generator, which has a battery and a tiny computer circuit, and one or more wires known as pacing leads, which attach to your heart.

The pulse generator emits electrical impulses through the wires to your heart and the rate at which they are sent out is called the pacing rate.

The devices are life-saving, but they don't last forever. Currently, most pacemaker batteries have to be replaced every five to 12 years, and doing so means invasive surgery each time.

However, researchers from Shanghai Jiao Tong University are trying to solve this problem by developing a device that piggybacks off the heart itself to generate energy – meaning a pacemaker battery would never have to be replaced.

Scroll down for video

Scientists are working on a pacemaker of the future that is battery-free and could be powered by the heart itself. At their device's centre are layers of piezoelectric material, which generate power whenever it is bent

How do traditional pacemakers work? A pacemaker is a small device about the size of a matchbox or smaller that weighs 20 to 50g. It consists of a pulse generator, which has a battery and a tiny computer circuit, and 1 or more wires known as pacing leads, which attach to your heart. The pulse generator emits electrical impulses through the wires to your heart. The rate at which the electrical impulses are sent out is called the pacing rate. Almost all modern pacemakers work on demand. This means they can be programmed to adjust the discharge rate in response to your body's needs. If the pacemaker senses that your heart has missed a beat or is beating too slowly, it sends signals at a steady rate. If it senses that your heart is beating normally by itself, it doesn't send out any signals. Most pacemakers have a special sensor that recognises body movement or your breathing rate. This allows them to speed up the discharge rate when you're active. Doctors describe this as rate responsive. Source: NHS Advertisement

Yi Zhiran and his team are investing batteryless powering and leadless pacing, but the challenge has been to obtain sufficient power by harvesting heart kinetic energy.

'If the practical force of the heart is 0.5 newtons, the output power should be about 192 microwatts,' Yi said.

'Therefore, for the commercial pacemaker, just about no less than 10 microwatts is sufficient for its normal work.'

A healthy heart can keep time for itself, by way of an internal pacemaker called the sinus node in the upper right chamber.

It fires off an electrical charge some 60 to 100 times a minute, and that electrical energy sets off a series of contractions of heart muscle which in turn pumps blood throughout the body.

But as the heart ages or once it becomes diseased, the sinus node takes a hit, too, and may fail to keep the heart beating in time or at all.

Fortunately, since the late 1950s, we've been able to substitute a small, implantable, battery-powered device to send these electrical signals once the heart can't any more.

Even 60 years later, however, we haven't figured out what to do about the device's power supply.

Surgery to place the pacemaker and wires that feed its electrical pulses to the heart is complex, requiring doctors to open the chest cavity.

The pacemaker itself is tucked away in a 'pocket' much closer to the skin surface.

Once the battery runs out, usually only a local anesthetic is required to remove the old device and put a new, fully charged one in.

Still, the procedure is an unpleasant hassle that comes with a risk of infection, and it's expensive to have done.

But Yi and his team now think they have an answer to the problem.

At their device's centre are layers of piezoelectric material, which generate power whenever they are bent.

Many materials acquire an electrical charge when force is applied to them, including natural ones in our bodies.

Typical pacemakers (pictured) consist of a pulse generator, which has a battery and a tiny computer circuit, and one or more wires known as pacing leads, which attach to your heart

Crystals, DNA and even bone are capable of capturing electrical energy.

The trick is to apply enough force to a piezoelectric material, then supercharge it, because, on their own, these materials don't work up much energy.

Scientists have long been looking to piezoelectricity as an elegant solution to recapturing otherwise wasted energy, and some have even applied it to the pacemaker before.

But, previously, other researchers have not been able to create a device that bends enough to generate sufficient power.

Yi said: 'A batteryless pacemaker is feasible through using implantable energy harvesting technology, which provides a sustainable power supply method.'

He and his team are now trying to overcome some drawbacks to the device, such as its long-term stability in the human body, the implanting method, and the integration between the rigid pacing chip and the flexible energy harvesting unit.

'The first research plan is to achieve the integration of the flexible pacing circuit and the energy harvesting unit. Then, we will carry out the verification of long-term stability in vivo,' he added.

The presentation 'Mechanism on Buckled Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting for Batteryless Heartworn Pacemaker' will be available during the three-day conference.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hitting global 'net zero' carbon targets by 2050 with tree planting alone would require land equivalent to five times the size of India, a new report has warned.

Oxfam said at least 1.6 billion hectares of new forests would be needed and reaching the goal was 'mathematically impossible' because there was not enough land.

More than 120 countries have pledged to be 'net zero' by the middle of this century, which involves offsetting unavoidable emissions by removing greenhouse gases from the atmosphere with new technologies and nature-based strategies.

Scroll down for video

Hitting 'net zero' carbon targets by 2050 would require tree planting on land equivalent to five times the size of India, a new report by Oxfam has warned. Pictured: Tree planting taking place at Hafod Garegog in North Wales

Oxfam's analysis calculated that the 'net-zero' targets of four of the world's largest oil and gas corporations – Shell, Eni, Total and BP – would require an area of land twice the size of the UK

What is 'net zero'? Net zero means achieving a balance between the greenhouse gases put into the atmosphere and those taken out. Think about it like a bath – turn on the taps and you add more water, pull out the plug and water flows out. The amount of water in the bath depends on both the input from the taps and the output via the plughole. To keep the amount of water in the bath at the same level, you need to make sure that the input and output are balanced. Reaching net zero applies the same principal, requiring us to balance the amount of greenhouse gases we emit with the amount we remove. When what we add is no more than what we take away we reach net zero. This state is also referred to as carbon neutral; although zero emissions and zero carbon are slightly different, as they usually mean that no emissions were produced in the first place. Source: National Grid Advertisement

But Oxfam has warned that global food prices could rise by 80 per cent by 2050 if countries and corporations over-rely on tree planting to meet 'net zero' targets.

The charity's report 'Tightening the Net' claims that too many governments and companies are 'hiding behind unreliable, unproven and unrealistic "carbon removal" schemes in order to claim their 2050 climate change plans will be "net zero".'

'We will be hoodwinked by "net zero" targets if all they amount to are smokescreens for dirty business-as-usual,' said Nafkote Dabi, climate change lead for Oxfam International.

'Net zero should be based on "real zero" targets that require drastic and genuine cuts in emissions, phasing out fossil fuels and investing in clean energy and supply chains.

'Instead, too many "net zero" commitments provide a fig leaf for climate inaction.

'They are a dangerous gamble with our planet's future.'

She added: 'Nature and land-based carbon removal schemes are an important part of the mix of efforts needed to stop global emissions, but they must be pursued in a much more cautious way.

'Under current plans, there is simply not enough land in the world to realise them all.

'They could instead spark even more hunger, land grabs and human rights abuses, while polluters use them as an alibi to keep polluting.'

Oxfam has warned that global food prices could rise by 80 per cent by 2050 if countries and corporations over-rely on tree planting to meet 'net zero' targets

Global CO2 emissions declined sharply in 2020, but with a rebound expected in 2021 efforts must be intensified if the world is to reach the targets of the Paris Climate Agreement

PARIS AGREEMENT: A GLOBAL ACCORD TO LIMIT AVERAGE TEMPERATURE RISES The Paris Agreement, which was first signed in 2015, is an international agreement to limit climate change. It hopes to hold the increase in the global average temperature to below 2°C (3.6ºF) 'and to pursue efforts to limit increases to 1.5°C (2.7°F)'. The Paris Agreement on Climate Change has four main goals with regards to reducing emissions: A long-term goal of keeping the increase in global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels To aim to limit the increase to 1.5°C, since this would significantly reduce risks and the impacts of climate change Governments agreed on the need for global emissions to peak as soon as possible, recognising that this will take longer for developing countries To undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with the best available science Source: European Commission Advertisement

Oxfam's analysis calculated that the 'net-zero' targets of four of the world's largest oil and gas corporations – Shell, Eni, Total and BP – would require an area of land twice the size of the UK.

Shell alone will need land the size of Honduras by 2030, the charity said, while the EU's land-based removals targets would require nearly four times the mass of the UK if they relied on tree planting.

'Net zero might sound like a good idea, but the oil majors' climate plans reveal just how much land these distant "net zero" targets are banking on,' Dabi said.

'Over-relying on planting trees and as-yet-unproven technology instead of genuinely shifting away from fossil fuel-dependent economies is a dangerous folly.'

She added: 'Land is a finite and precious resource. It is what millions of small-scale farmers and Indigenous people around the world depend upon for their livelihoods.

'We all depend upon the good stewardship of land and for our own food security.

'The whole world benefits from protecting forests and safeguarding the land rights of farmers and Indigenous peoples.'

It comes just days after Boris Johnson's climate change spokeswoman said Britain's target of reducing emissions to net zero by 2050 is 'too far away' and urgent action must be taken to stop global temperature increases by 2030.

Allegra Stratton said the 'science is clear' that the country must change its carbon emission output 'right now' and called for faster action as the UK prepares for the COP26 summit in Glasgow in November.

The UK was the first major industrialised country in the world to sign the 2050 target into law in 2019, and is aiming to persuade other nations to follow suit at the climate change summit which Mr Johnson is chairing.

Carbon Brief found that the UK produced 11% fewer emissions in 2020 as a result of lockdown

REPORTED AND CARBON BRIEF CARBON EMISSION CHANGES SINCE 2010 Year Reported Carbon Brief Difference 2010 2.40% 2.80% 0.40% 2011 -8.00% -7.70% 0.30% 2012 3.10% 3.20% 0.10% 2013 -2.40% -4.10% -1.60% 2014 -7.20% -7.10% 0.10% 2015 -3.50% -3.50% 0.00% 2016 -5.10% -5.40% -0.20% 2017 -2.40% -3.00% -0.60% 2018 -2.10% -1.30% 0.70% 2019 -3.60% -3.10% 0.50% 2020 N/A -10.70% N/A

A dramatic 11 per cent drop in greenhouse gas emissions during the first coronavirus lockdown put the UK halfway towards its target of becoming 'net zero' by 2050, climate and energy website Carbon Brief estimated earlier this year.

It said it was the biggest annual fall in at least 30 years.

However, emissions 'are likely to increase as the economy recovers,' the group behind the new study warned, suggesting the drop would be short lived.

Shell told Oxfam that its 2050 goal did not rely on extensive reforestation, while BP said it did not intend to rely on offsets to meet its 2030 emission reduction targets.

Total said it operated on the principle that 'natural carbon sinks must be connected to an agricultural or forestry value chain that is local and sustainable', and Eni told Oxfam that nature-based solutions were 'crucial' to achieve carbon neutrality goals in the long-term.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Great Barrier Reef's outlook remains 'very poor' despite coral recovery over the past year, Australian government scientists said Monday, just days before a UNESCO ruling on the site's world heritage status.

The United Nations cultural agency recommended last month that the world's largest reef system be placed on its endangered list because of damage to the corals largely caused by climate change.

The Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) said the corals were currently in a 'recovery window' after a reprieve that followed a decade of harmful heat stress and cyclones.

But such opportunities were becoming rarer due to the impact of climate change, the government agency, which has monitored the reef for 35 years, said in its annual report released today.

Scroll down for video

Australian scientists have said the Great Barrier Reef's outlook remains 'very poor' despite signs of coral recovery

Great Barrier Reef in numbers The Great Barrier Reef is home to: - 900 islands - 215 bird species - 2,900 coral reefs - 1,500 fish species - 400 kinds of coral - 130 varieties of sharks and rays - 30 species of whale, dolphin and porpoise Advertisement

'The increasing prominence of climate-related extreme weather events and crown-of-thorns starfish outbreaks is causing more severe and frequent pressures, giving the reef fewer opportunities like this to recover,' CEO Paul Hardisty said.

The scientists surveyed 127 reef sites in 2021 and found hard coral cover had increased at 69 of the 81 locations surveyed in the past two years, largely driven by fast-growing table and branching Acropora corals.

Separate scientific research released last October found the 2,300-kilometre (1,400 miles) system had lost half its corals since 1995, with a series of ocean heatwaves causing mass coral bleaching.

Britta Schaffelke, research program director at AIMS, said the latest findings provided a 'glimmer of hope... that the reef still has resilience'.

But she added that its 'outlook into the future is still very poor because of the dangers of climate change and other factors that are impacting on the organisms that make up the reef.'

Australia has launched a last-minute lobbying effort to avoid a World Heritage downgrade, sending the country's environment minister to Paris to meet with UNESCO officials and even taking key ambassadors on a reef snorkelling trip last week.

The scientists surveyed 127 reef sites in 2021 and found hard coral cover had increased at 69 of the 81 locations surveyed in the past two years, largely driven by fast-growing table and branching Acropora corals

UNESCO has urged Australia to take urgent climate action but Canberra has long resisted calls to commit to net zero emissions by 2050.

'We acknowledge very much the work which has been done in Australia, but our text in the draft decision ... is a proposal for putting the site on the list of world heritage in danger because of the threats which were identified,' said Mechtild Roessler, the UNESCO director of the World Heritage Committee.

The conservative government has said it hopes to meet the target 'as soon as possible' without harming its commodity-dependent economy, insisting tackling climate change requires a global effort.

The reef was worth an estimated US$4.8 billion a year in tourism revenue for the Australian economy before the coronavirus pandemic and there are fears an 'in danger' listing could weaken its tourist appeal.

A decision is expected around July 23.

Placed on the World Heritage list in 1981, the Great Barrier Reef is one of seven sites globally threatened with a downgrade due to ecological damage, overdevelopment, overtourism or security concerns.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Instagram has launched a new 'Security Checkup' feature that will guide people whose accounts may have been hacked through steps to secure their account.

The Facebook-owned image sharing website says the new feature includes checking login activity, reviewing profile information and updating recovery contact details.

The firm says it is another way to ensure accounts are as sure as possible, but also recommend people enable two-factor authentication to reduce hacking risk.

This is where a phone number or authenticator app such as Duo Mobile or Google Authentication is required when you login from a new device.

Instagram users will also be able to secure their account using two factor authentication via WhatsApp in certain countries in the coming weeks.

Instagram has launched a new 'Security Checkup' feature that will guide people whose accounts may have been hacked through steps to secure their account

The firm says it is another way to ensure accounts are as sure as possible, but also recommend people enable two-factor authentication to reduce hacking risk

STEPS TO PROTECT YOUR INSTAGRAM ACCOUNT Enable two factor authentication: Requires a code to login on a new device or for the first time. Update your phone number and email: Ensuring you can use those details to recover a hacked account. Instagram will never send you a DM: They will only contact you via the Emails from Instagram tab. Report content and accounts you find questionable: This enables Instagram to ban or suspend dangerous users. Advertisement

The social-media giant says the Security Checkup feature will help people keep their accounts secure if they are at risk of hacking, or have already been hacked.

To ensure this they encourage a certain amount of personal responsibility, including the two factor authentication measures and keeping contact details up to date.

They also provided advice on 'red flags' including if you get a direct message from the firm, saying that 'Instagram will never send you a DM'.

This is in response to a rise in malicious accounts DMing people to try and access sensitive information like account passwords.

These accounts may tell the user that their account is at risk of being banned, that they are violating policies around intellectual property, or that photos are being shared elsewhere in a bid to take control of the account.

'These messages are often scams and violate our policies. Instagram will never send you a DM. When we discover these kinds of scams, we take action against them,' the firm said.

'But we also encourage you to report the content and block the account.

Instagram users will also be able to secure their account using two factor authentication via WhatsApp in certain countries in the coming weeks

'We’ve sent notices at the top of people’s Inbox to warn them about these messages over the past 2 months.'

Instagram says if they want to reach you to talk about the account, they will use the 'Emails from Instagram' tab in settings.

They have encouraged people to report any content or account they find questionable, as while technology can spot new trends and techniques used by hackers and spammers, it doesn't work every time.

'You can also report individual pieces of content to us by tapping the three dots above a post, holding on a message, or by visiting an account and reporting directly from the profile,' Instagram wrote in a blog post.

The social-media giant says the Security Checkup feature will help people keep their accounts secure if they are at risk of hacking, or have already been hacked

Instagram says if they want to reach you to talk about the account, they will use the 'Emails from Instagram' tab in settings

Login request is the other feature the firm want users to enable, this is linked to two-factor authentication, alerting a user when someone tries to login to an account from a previously not used browser or device.

These alerts will say which device tried logging in and where it's located, allowing the user to approve or deny the request immediately from an already logged in device.

'You can also view the list of devices that have recently logged into your Instagram account at any time under “Settings,” “Security,” “Login Activity,”' Instagram said.

'If you don’t recognize a recent login, you can log out of that location or device and let us know that the login wasn’t you.'

Accounts that impersonate others, use their verification status to hack and target people, or generally conduct spammy behaviour with the hopes of misleading people on Instagram break the sites rules.

Login request is the other feature the firm want users to enable, this is linked to two-factor authentication, alerting a user when someone tries to login to an account from a previously not used browser or device

These alerts will say which device tried logging in and where it's located, allowing the user to approve or deny the request immediately from an already logged in device

'We are constantly improving our technology to find and stop this behaviour.'

To help people who report these issues, or have been hacked, Instagram says it is improving its support inbox so users can find what has happened to their reports.

'This includes being able to easily see the status of everything you’ve ever reported on Instagram, see what posts of yours may have broken our rules, and how to appeal those decisions,' according to the firm.

'From there you can find much more information on the status of what you’ve reported to us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A baby boy has been left with brain damage following a routine NHS procedure to check he was healthy, his family said.

Carson Murgatroyd, of Leeds, had an electrode clip fitted to his head during labour so doctors could measure his heart rate.

But his parents, Tiffany and Jordan, claim the procedure left him with a small mark on his forehead after he was born on May 13.

The lesion eventually turned green and the veins in his forehead became prominent, prompting his concerned family to take him to the GP.

Mr Murgatroyd, 29, said: 'We took him to the doctor and they referred us to a neurology unit straight away. We were admitted on July 9 and we have been here ever since.'

Doctors found Carson, now three-months-old had an abscess on his brain, leaving the family fearing their son might die.

The build-up of pus caused his head to swell, jumping 1.6in (4cm) in circumference at one point.

He has had four rounds of brain surgery to help drain the liquid building in his skull because of the infection.

The family believe the electrode clip — which can penetrate the baby’s scalp while in the womb — was to blame.

But medics are still unaware how the infection was caused and have been unable to tell his parents if and when he will recover.

Baby Carson Murgatroyd has been left with brain damage after doctors stuck an electrode clip on his head while in the womb to check he was healthy, his family claim

Doctors fixed an electrode clip to his head during labour to measure his heart rate and left a small mark on his forehead after he was born

Carson's father Jordan (pictured) says doctors found an infectious cyst on the baby's brain

Mr Murgatroyd said: 'We were told that he had an abscess on his brain. His head swelled and we didn't know if he was going to live or die.

'He has been on antibiotics for five weeks to try and treat it. But then we found out that he now has an infectious cyst on his brain that is causing him brain damage.

'We have no idea how bad it is or how it is going to affect his development going forward.

'We have complained to the hospital and they say that they are looking into it and the possible causes.

'Carson has now had to have four rounds of brain surgery to try and relieve some of the pressure in his head.'

The operations have included Carson having fluid and pus from the abscess being drained away. However, it keeps coming back.

Tiffany and Jordan Murgatroyd (pictured together) had their son Carson on May 13 at Leeds General Infirmary hospital

WHAT ARE ELECTRODE CLIPS USED IN PREGNANCY? Occasionally a foetal scalp electrode (sometimes called a scalp clip) may be applied to a baby’s head. It is a measure used to continually monitor a baby’s heartbeat throughout the entire labour process. The electrode picks up the baby’s heartbeat directly. It is attached to the baby’s scalp, during a vaginal examination, and the leads are then connected to the monitor. Being attached to the monitor will limit a mother's ability to move around. However, small movements from sitting to standing may be possible and are encouraged. Source: NHS Advertisement

Mr Murgatroyd said: 'At one point his head swelled from 42cm to 46cm which doesn't sound like a lot but it's a big change for his head circumference.

'You can really see the change when you look back at photos.

'But no matter how many times they drain it, it keeps coming back. But now there's the cyst as well but they're waiting a week at a time to scan him.

'And a lot can change in the space of a week.

'We just have no idea how severe his brain damage could be or any conditions that he could have to suffer from going forward.'

Carson's parents have now set up a Go Fund Me page to try and raise money for specialist help for him before any further damage is done.

It could cost anything up to £25,000 for the family.

Mr Murgatroyd added: 'We are now at the stage where the neurosurgeons are just wanting to see what will happen if they keep an eye on the cyst and abscess.

'So we now feel we have no other option but to try and explore other avenues on specialist care to help us with Carson before any further damage is done to our baby boy.

'We know that the specialist care can cost from £10,000 to £25,000 but we are just going to take it day by day and see what we can achieve.

'We want Carson to be in the best hands possible. We want a boy who can be as healthy as he possibly can from this point, we already feel like we have lost a massive part of Carson.

'We know we won't ever get this time back as a family and we know the road is long and tough.

'We hope we can reach out to get enough help to bring our boy back home and avoid him having more pain or just waiting around not knowing what's going to happen.

'It's the hardest thing for a parent to have to go through.'

Lisa Grant, chief nurse at Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust said: 'We are sorry to hear that Carson's family are unhappy with the care provided during his birth.

'We would welcome a discussion about their experience and ask that they contact our Patient Advice and Liaison Service (PALS) team so that we can respond to them directly.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Diamonds, which are the hardest known substance, are typically used to cut glass into different shapes, but a new type of glass made of carbon is twice as hard as the precious gem.

A team of Chinese scientists, led by those at Yanshan University, recently unveiled the transparent, yellow-tinted glass called AM-III, which is capable of leaving a deep scratch on a diamond.

The material, which is made entirely of carbon, reached 113 gigapascals (GPa) on the Vickers hardness test, while diamonds typically score somewhere between 50 and 70 on the GPa scale.

'Consequently, our measurements demonstrate that the AM-III material is comparable in strength to diamond and superior to the other known strongest materials,' Professor Tian Yongjun of Yanshan University, who led the research, and his team noted in the study published in the journal National Science Review.

AM-III, according to researchers, is not a diamond replacement, but could be used to develop stronger solar cells in solar panels and tougher bulletproof windows that would be 20 to 100 percent stronger than current models.

Scroll down for video

A team of Chinese scientists led by Yanshan University recently unveiled the transparent, yellow-tinted glass called AM-III (stop), which is capable of leaving a deep scratch on a diamond

Tian and his team developed the yellowish glass by increasing the pressure in an experimental chamber to 25 GPa and temperatures to 2,192 degrees Fahrenheit, the South China Morning Post reports.

The increases, however, were done slowly and gradually over a period of more than 12 hours, and the material spent just as much time cooling down afterwards.

They placed a material called fullerene, which is a football-shaped allotrope of carbon, inside the experimental chamber.

Under these conditions, this material could transform into a diamond, but due to the gradual ramp up of heat and slow cool down, the team created the extremely hard glass.

The material, which is made entirely of carbon, reached a 113 gigapascals (GPa) on the Vickers hardness test, while diamonds typically score somewhere between 50 and 70 on the GPa scale. Pictured are scratches on the diamond made by the glass

AM-III, according to researchers, is not a diamond replacement, but could be used to develop stronger solar cells and tougher bulletproof windows that would be 20 to 100 percent stronger than current models. Pictured are scratches on the diamond made by the glass

Technically speaking, AM-III is a glass with crystals inside, according to Tian.

'The emergence of this type of ultrahard, ultrastrong, semiconducting amorphous material offers excellent candidates to [the] most demanding practical applications,' the researchers wrote in the study.

Scientists have long been working to develop the strongest glass and in 2016, scientists at the University of Southern California created a form of metallic glass made from iron that is stronger than titanium.

Tests showed the material, which is called SAM2X5-630, is 588 times more resistant to damage than stainless steel and has twice the resistance of tungsten carbide ceramic used in body armor.

Professor Veronica Eliasson, an engineer at the University of Southern California, said the material's unusual chemical structure is what makes it so hard yet also elastic.

She said in a statement: 'It has almost no internal structure, like glass, but you see tiny regions of crystallization.

While the new material is not yet transparent enough to be used to make super-hard glass screens, it could be used to create protective casing for mobile devices that would bounce when dropped.

For example, using the material to replace the aluminum sides and back seen in many mobiles such as the iPhone could make the device far more resistant to smashing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Men who suffer erectile dysfunction after surgery for prostate cancer could benefit from a new shockwave therapy.

Participants are needed for a British trial that will establish whether the treatment has ‘life-changing benefits’.

More than 48,500 people are diagnosed with prostate cancer in the UK each year, making it the most common form of the disease in men. But surgery can damage nerves supplying the penis, leaving up to eight in ten patients with erectile dysfunction (ED).

Many will need lifelong medication, such as Viagra, but drugs fail to work in all cases.

Men who suffer erectile dysfunction after surgery for prostate cancer could benefit from a new shockwave therapy (stock image)

Treatment involves delivering a painless acoustic wave to the penis using a specialist probe for 10 to 15 minutes. Volunteers will receive up to ten weekly sessions.

Shockwave therapy has been proven to work in treating joint disorders and kidney stones. And studies have shown it can help regrow nerves and blood vessels.

Tet Yap, consultant urological surgeon and trial lead at Guy’s Hospital, London, said: ‘We are delighted to be able to offer this potentially life-changing treatment to patients with prostate cancer. Most patients who are in remission will lose their sexual function through nerve damage following surgery.

‘This new painless therapy has the potential to restore their erectile function by regenerating new blood vessels and nerves, hopefully helping patients to return to a normal healthy life.’

Surgery can damage nerves supplying the penis, leaving up to eight in ten patients with erectile dysfunction (ED). Many will need lifelong medication, such as Viagra, but drugs fail to work in all cases (stock image)

The trial is recruiting 100 men aged 40 to 65 who had good erectile function before surgery.

Anyone interested in taking part is encouraged to contact their GP, urologist or oncologist.

Guidance from Prostate Cancer UK says: ‘Unfortunately, even with nerve-sparing surgery techniques, ED continues to be a long-term problem for many men.

‘Men with ED after surgery may have difficulty in maintaining sexual and intimate relationships with their partners. Clinicians sometimes overlook the impact of ED on men and their partners.’

Cancer Research UK says prostate cancer survival has tripled in the UK over the past 40 years.

More than eight in ten patients are alive ten years after diagnosis – up from one in four in the 1970s.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Covid-19 and the ban on fans in stadiums almost halved the home advantage for teams in the English Premier League and other football leagues, a new study says.

Researchers at the University of Leeds looked at data from 15 European leagues that had to keep fans out of stadiums to stop the coronavirus from spreading.

The mix of data was comprised of more than 4,000 matches that took place in the 2019/2020 season both with and without crowds.

With fans present, teams won 0.39 points more per game at home than away on average, but with fans absent, they won only 0.22 points more at home than away – nearly half a reduction in terms of results.

Photo shows Manchester United fans at Old Trafford during a Premier League match against Manchester City on March 8, 2020. This was United's last Premier League match before the season was suspended due to Covid

Upon the outbreak of the virus in spring 2020, men and women's domestic football competitions around the world were either postponed (as in the case of the English Premier League) or completely abandoned (Eredivisie in Netherlands).

By the time Covid-19 infection and death rates curbed in the summer, however, many competitions resumed – with the proviso that fans had to stay out of the stadiums to comply with social distancing.

'Covid-19 forced football at all levels to an unexpected halt just a quarter of the way through the 2019/2020 season,' said study author Dane McCarrick at the University of Leeds' School of Psychology.

'When it returned, the remainder of the games took place behind closed doors with no fans present.

Brazilian football player Willian is pictured here scoring for Chelsea during the Premier League match against Watford at Stamford Bridge on July 4, 2020. This was Chelsea's fourth match after the league restarted due to Covid - with no fans in the stadium

'This provided an unintentional, and unique, opportunity to examine one of the most talked about and empirically studied phenomena in professional team sport – the home advantage.

'This new knowledge reveals that in the most basic sense, fans attendance matters.'

Home advantage describes the benefits a sports team playing at their own venue is said to enjoy over the visiting or 'away' team, but it's been unsure what causes it – or if the phenomenon even exists.

WHAT LEAGUES WERE INCLUDED? There were 15 leagues included in the analysis: - England: Premier League and Championship, - Germany: Bundesliga 1 and 2 - Spain: La Liga 1 and 2 - Italy: Serie A and B - Portugal: Primeira Liga - Greece: Greek Super League - Turkey: Turkish Super Lig - Austria: Austrian Bundesliga - Denmark: Danish Superligaen - Russia: Russian Premier League - Switzerland: Swiss Super League. Advertisement

Home advantage could be attributed to the effect of fans on the players or referee, who may 'unconsciously favour the home team', according to the experts.

This could be because the ref may feel greater retribution if he or she makes decisions that go against the home team.

Also, the home team is playing in familiar surroundings, which may positively affect performance, while the effects of travel could negatively impact the performance of the visiting team.

To learn more about the effects of home advantage, all European leagues that finished the 2019/20 season without an audience were included in the analysis.

The researchers used data from Football-Data.co.uk and the FiveThirtyEight online database to analyse 4,844 individual games from 15 different leagues spanning 11 different countries, including the Premier League and Championship and leagues in Germany, Italy and Spain.

In total, 3515 games (72.56 per cent) were played with the presence of the audience (pre-Covid) and 1,329 (27.44 per cent) in the 'during-Covid' period without an audience.

Researchers found that home teams accrued significantly fewer points and scored fewer goals when crowds were absent.

What's more, the lack of crowds affected how referees judged fouls against home and away sides.

DOES HOME ADVANTAGE EXIST? THE STUDY'S RESULTS Researchers found that home teams accrued significantly fewer points and scored fewer goals when crowds were absent. The researchers found, on average: - With fans present, teams won 0.39 points more per game at home than away - With fans absent, the advantage was almost halved when teams won only 0.22 points more at home than away - With fans present, home teams scored 0.29 goals more per game than away teams - With fans absent, home teams scored just 0.15 goals more than the visitors. What's more, the lack of crowds affected how referees judged fouls against home and away sides. The data showed: - Referees gave more fouls against the home team in empty stadiums - Referees gave a similar number of fouls against the away team in empty stadiums - Referees gave far fewer yellow cards against away teams in empty stadiums - Referees gave similar numbers of yellow cards against the home team in empty stadiums - even though they fouled more - Red cards followed a similar pattern which was less pronounced, yet still significant Advertisement

Previous studies into home advantage considered how goals scored and points awarded at home games compared with performance at away matches.

But this new study, which also involved experts at the Northumbria University, also considered whether home advantage affects a team's dominance over a game.

The researchers measured dominance by the number of corners, shots and shots on target a team's players had in any given match.

Home teams were less dominant without their supportive fans, with an average per game of 0.7 fewer corners won, 1.3 fewer shot attempts and 0.4 fewer shots on target, they found.

'You'll never walk alone': Liverpool's fans at Metropolitano Stadium in Madrid, Spain for the 2019 UEFA Champions League Final versus Tottenham Hotspur

A lack of crowds made a very slight difference to away teams’ attacking hold on games – they had only 0.10 more corners, 0.17 more shots and 0.20 more shots on target on average.

Interestingly, a team's dominance had a much greater influence over referees' decisions than the presence of home fans.

'When a team’s dominance over the game was included in the analysis, the associations were much weakened for fouls and yellow cards and, remarkably, become non-significant for red cards,' said McCarrick.

'This shows, for the first time, that the influence of home fans on referees mostly disappears when the style of play is taken into account.'

The bottom line is that home advantage is 'still very much a prominent factor of professional football', he said.

'As can be seen from the Covid data, it is very much reliant on the presence of fans in stadia,' he told MailOnline.

The study, published in the journal Psychology of Sport and Exercise, acknowledges other variables that might have influenced these results.

These included changes in teams training schedules, more fixtures to be played, or the impact of national lockdowns pausing play.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have developed an artificial intelligence (AI) system that can detect signs of psychopathy based on head movements.

Using head tracking algorithms, experts in New Mexico found evidence that male prison inmates with higher levels of psychopathy kept their head more stationary during police interviews.

Psychopathy is a personality disorder characterised by antisocial behaviour, remorselessness, deception, and interpersonal manipulation.

Automated techniques that analyse non-verbal behaviours may be useful to evaluate the presence of these nefarious tendencies, the experts believe.

Incarcerated men had their movements assessed by automated detection algorithms and were scored for psychopathy

Head movements that indicate psychopathy The study found that people with high levels of psychopathic traits: 1. Had more stationary head positions 2. Focused directly towards the camera/interviewer The results are interesting because excessive non-verbal cues like head movements, blinks and hand-gestures have been linked to deception. Advertisement

The study, published in the Journal of Research in Personality, represents an 'important first step' in demonstrating the feasibility of using computer vision in conjunction with psychology, the authors claim.

'I've been interviewing individuals high on psychopathic traits for more than 20 years,' study author Kent A. Kiehl, a psychology professor at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, told PsyPost.

'During these interviews, it is clear that the presentation style of such individuals is different from others.

'We wanted to apply advanced methods to quantify components of the videotaped interviews to see if we could identify qualities that differ between those high and low on psychopathy.

'Such a result might help people in other situations (i.e., law enforcement) understand the personality of the person being interviewed.'

Professor Kiehl and colleagues used an image processing and machine learning based approach to automatically extract head movement from recorded interviews.

Using head tracking algorithms, experts in New Mexico found evidence that male prison inmates with higher levels of psychopathy kept their head more stationary during police interviews

The Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) The Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R) is used as a diagnostic tool to determine where someone lies on the psychopathy spectrum, as not all psychopaths display all the traits. There are 20 items on the checklist, which score between zero and two points depending on whether someone matches a trait, to give a score out of 40. In the UK, users are deemed psychopathic if they score above 25, but in the US it is 30. Advertisement

The algorithms measured the head movements of 507 inmates during recorded conversations, varying in length from one to two hours.

To estimate the head pose, all the frames in the videos were extracted as individual images, allowing the algorithm to work with the face in each frame of the video stream.

To determine levels of psychopathy, the team used a common assessment called the Hare Psychopathy Checklist - Revised (PCL-R), originally developed in the 1970s by Canadian psychologist Robert D. Hare.

Using a 20-item checklist, PCL-R scores a person from one to 40. Anyone who scores 25 or over in the UK is deemed a psychopath.

The PCL-R is reliable across male offenders, male forensic psychiatric patients and female offenders, the team claim.

'As predicted, dwell times indicate that those with higher levels of psychopathic traits are characterised by more stationary head positions, focused directly towards the camera/interviewer, than were individuals low in psychopathic traits,' the experts say in their paper.

Inmates with 'severe and life-course persistent antisocial behaviour' had more rigid and focused orienting of their head during the session, they found.

The results are interesting because excessive non-verbal cues like head movements, blinks and hand-gestures have been linked to deception.

As far back as 900 BC, it was observed that deceitful people demonstrated excessive fidgeting, according to the study.

So it's possible that a more stationary stance is a deliberate tactic employed by psychopaths to counter these potential clues from appearing.

Professor Kiehl is the author of 'The Psychopath Whisperer: The Science of Those Without Conscience'.

The book tries to answer the question of why psychopaths behave the way they do – either due to genetic, nurtural or environmental factors.

'A lot of information is present in the body language and interpersonal dynamics that occur during clinical interviews,' he said.

'Decoding these interviews may provide useful details about the individual differences of the people being observed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rating:

It might not be a name familiar to the US market, but Naim is a legendary British brand hoping to make a splash with the American launch of its $1499 (£895) Mu:So speaker.

At first glance, it looks pretty much like any other speaker - clean lines, a bit of mood lighting while you listen, and the ability to wirelessly play music from your phone, and even Spotify.

However, switch it on, and the difference between this and pretty much every comparable speaker becomes obvious - as does the terrifying price tag.

Scroll down for video

The Mu:so boasts 450 watts of power from six 75 watt digital amplifiers to power the built-in speaker - and sounds stunning

Put simply, the sound is stunning.

Technically, it boasts 450 watts of power from six 75 watt digital amplifiers to power the built-in speaker.

What this equates to is jaw droppping good sound.

It's clear, with amazing stereo separation for a single speaker, while bass is also excellent in all but the biggest of rooms.

Design wise, it's extremely simple, with one large dial to control the volume (and its no ordinary dial, weighted to feel great).

There are also a couple of touchscreen buttons on the dial to switch sources, and a USB port to plug in a devices.

Underneath there's an ethernet port - and if you can, its well worth using this to squeeze every bit of quality out of music.

It'll also play pretty much any file you throw at it, can stream 24bit/192kHz high resolution ‘better than CD’ quality music, as well all audio formats from Apple Lossless CD imports from iTunes to HD formats such as WAV, FLAC and AIFF, all from Apple and Android smartphones and tablets, laptops and other storage devices.

It also includes AirPlay, UPnP (Universal Plug ‘n’ Play), Bluetooth (aptX), internet radio and native support for Spotify Connect.

Under the covers: The Mu-so boasts 450 watts of power from six 75 watt digital amplifiers to power the built-in speakers

Design wise, it's extremely simple, with one large dial to control the volume (and its no ordinary dial, weighted to feel great).

The only thing that really lets the system down is a rather ugly app - however, it reality you'll rarely need to use it.

It also took a few attempts to set the unit up initially, but it got there in the end.

There's also a basic remote control, which means you really do rarely need the app.

One problem you will encounter is actually a rather unusual one - the Naim is actually too good at times, making all but the best quality files sound a little lacking.

However, streaming services such as Spotify, and the latest downloads do sound great - while the higher quality lossless files sound absolutely stunning.

Overall, the price tag is a little intimidating, but after spending a bit of time you'll see that you really do get what you pay for - and the Naim mu:so is the best all in one speaker I've ever heard.

Additionally, it'll also give all but the very best separates systems a run for their money - and bodes well for the British firm's chances in the US.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Skateboarding made its debut at the Olympic Games this week, and it's clear from the medal winners that youngsters were the ones showing how it's done.

Twelve-year-old Japanese sensation Kokona Hiraki claimed a silver while three children aged 13, including Britain's youngest ever Olympic medal winner Sky Brown, also enjoyed success in Tokyo.

In total seven of the 12 skateboarding medals available went to teenagers or younger, with Brazil's Kelvin Hoefler the oldest prize winner at 28.

So just what is it that makes children so good at the sport?

MailOnline spoke to experts to find out the science behind their success, including what aspects of physiology, anatomy and psychology play a part.

Scroll down for video

Expert view: MailOnline spoke to scientists to find out why youngsters have enjoyed so much success at the Tokyo Olympics. The graphic above shows just some of the reasons, including size, mass, their fearless attitude and the sport's youth culture

Twelve-year-old Japanese sensation Kokona Hiraki claimed a silver while three children aged 13, including Britain's youngest ever Olympic medal winner Sky Brown (pictured), also enjoyed success in Tokyo

WHAT ARE THE AGES OF THE SKATEBOARD MEDALLISTS AT THE TOKYO OLYMPICS? Men's Street Gold: Yuto Horigome, Japan - 22 Silver: Kelvin Hoefler, Brazil - 28 Bronze: Jagger Eaton, USA - 20 Women's Street Gold: Momiji Nishiya, Japan - 13 Silver: Rayssa Leal, Brazil - 13 Bronze: Funa Nakayama, Japan - 16 Men's Park Gold: Keegan Palmer, Australia - 18 Silver: Pedro Barros, Brazil - 26 Bronze: Cory Juneau, USA - 22 Women's Park Gold: Sakura Yosozumi, Japan - 19 Silver: Kokona Hiraki, Japan - 12 Bronze: Sky Brown, Great Britain - 13 Advertisement

Lower centre of gravity

Speaking to MailOnline, Professor Craig Williams, director of the Children's Health & Exercise Research Centre (CHERC) at the University of Exeter, said being smaller, leaner and thus having a lower centre of gravity was certainly beneficial for youngsters.

'The lower your centre of gravity the easier it is to keep your balance. If you're smaller then you have a lower centre of gravity, so it is a bit of an advantage,' he said.

'These types of sport where tricks and flips happen, such as gymnastics and diving, tend to favour smaller individuals.

'Britain's Tom Daley for example is not particularly tall, but that helps when it comes to rotations and somersaults.'

American expert Bill Robertson, who goes by the self-titled name 'Dr Skateboard', agreed.

'Usually people with a compact centre of gravity are more prevalent in skateboarding,' he told MailOnline, 'although skateboarders come in all shapes and sizes.

'Typically, shorter skateboarders have an easier time of lowering their centre of gravity towards the board, which often translates into tricks being made.

'Taller skaters often extend the centre of gravity naturally, and this can cause them to miss tricks.'

Smaller feet

Professor Williams said having smaller feet may also be a possible advantage for children, but added that it was difficult to establish for certain because it all plays into the wider aspects of their anatomy.

'If you're taller you have bigger feet,' he said. 'For balance it wouldn't work if you didn't. And if you're a small person you have smaller feet because it's in proportion to the rest of your body.

'So I think it's more about body mass and the stature of a person than it is the size of their feet, but it could be this that is also giving them an advantage.'

Learning without realising

Having good eye, hand and feet coordination is crucial for skateboarders, according to Professor Williams, along with spatial awareness and the ability to process cognitive skills quickly.

Sometimes youngsters are honing these important skills without realising, he added, giving them an advantage from a young age when it comes to taking part in the sport competitively.

'Due to the culture of skateboarding, a lot of children aged seven, eight or nine will pick up a skateboard and start messing around with it, so they're training and practising without realising it,' he said.

'They're learning and developing before they even decide they want to compete.'

Sky Brown pictured as she returned to the UK today, having won a bronze medal in the skateboarding, despite being just 13 years old

Professor Craig Williams, director of the Children's Health & Exercise Research Centre (CHERC) at the University of Exeter, said being smaller, leaner and thus having a lower centre of gravity was certainly beneficial for youngsters

Professor Williams said having good eye, hand and feet coordination was crucial for skateboarders, along with spatial awareness and the ability to process cognitive skills quickly

Youth culture

Outside of physiology, the culture of skateboarding may also be behind the success of so many children at the Olympics.

Professor Williams said: 'There's probably a bit of pre-selection bias. Skateboarding attracts a young age group, and that was the intention of the IOC to include newer sports that appealed to a wider range of people.

'But compared to other sports it has more of a youth culture to it, so we're probably seeing some of that coming through.'

The youngest skateboarding medallist was 12-year-old Japanese sensation Kokona Hiraki (pictured)

Sky Brown (R) finished with a bronze medal, behind Japanese duo Sakura Yosozumi (C) and Kokona Hiraki (L) on Wednesday

HOW DID SKY BROWN BURST ONTO THE OLYMPIC STAGE? Olympic medallist: Britain's Sky Brown, 13 Sky Brown was born in Japan but lives in San Diego with her British father Stu, a skateboarder and marketing executive originally from Cornwall, and Japanese mother Miko, a housewife. She is understood to have never lived in the UK but her grandparents were watching her compete from the New Forest and she has visited the country to compete since she was nine, beating a Team GB selector at a trial in Bath aged just nine. The teenager could have represented Britain or Japan but chose the country of her father's birth in 2018 when she was ten. Sky already has 1million followers on Instagram and the YouTube channel she shares with her brother Ocean, nine, who is also a professional skateboarder, has had 20million views. Such is her high profile in America, Sky even won US TV talent show 'Dancing With The Stars: Juniors' in 2018. Sky also has a passion for surfing, and may choose to take part in that event at the Paris Olympics in 2024. She is already worth an estimated £3.5million ($5m) and could be offered up to £2million in new endorsements in 2021 after she became Britain's youngest ever Olympic medallist. The teenager showed extraordinary skill to finish third just over a year after fracturing her skull in a training crash that could have killed her, breaking down in tears of joy at the end of the final where she was beaten by two Japanese stars, including 12-year-old rival Kokona Hiraki. Advertisement

Fearlessness

As well as physiology, anatomy and the culture of the sport, there's also a mental aspect to skateboarding, as with any other Olympic event.

'It does take some guts to skateboard, as falling down on the ground (or concrete) is part of the sport that you have to deal with regularly,' said Dr Skateboard, who has a PhD in education and has been a skateboarder for over 35 years.

'I think about it in terms of those willing to take risks as being more successful, and this is where good mentoring or coaching can really play a part, to help channel the risk taking ability effectively to foster early success and minimise falling.'

Professor Williams agreed that fearlessness could well be a factor, not just in terms of going for tricks that could result in an injury but also in dealing with the stress and pressure of competing on the world stage.

He said: 'There's a risk to any sport kids take part in, and of course they'll hurt themselves if they fall, but because their bones are still developing the potential consequences are not as catastrophic as adults.

'Children's bones are still very malleable and not fully formed, so they might suffer a small fracture or a bruise and recover from it.

'However, if adults fall they're more likely to break a bone, and it might be that bone doesn't heal as well.'

This past experience and its severity may weigh on a person's mind, Professor Williams said, potentially impacting on how they approach tricks and flips.

'If you're a child you might not think about the consequences as much as an adult, you're more likely to be in the moment rather than having your long-term health in the back of your mind,' he explained.

Professor Williams was speaking in general terms, but it should also be stressed at this point that Sky would have missed these Olympics if they had been held in 2020 as scheduled, before the coronavirus pandemic hit.

Her father Stu Brown said she was 'lucky to be alive' after a training accident last May left her with a fractured skull, left arm and wrist, as well as lacerations to her heart and lungs.

But it didn't stop her becoming Britain's youngest Olympic medallist in history – less than a month after her 13th birthday – as she grabbed Tokyo 2020 bronze at the death after a perfect run following two big falls in the final.

She surpassed the summer British record of Margery Hinton, who was 13 years and 43 days when she competed in swimming at the 1928 Games. British figure skater Cecilia Colledge was 15 when she won figure skating silver in 1936.

Under less pressure to succeed

So what about pressure?

'For 13-year-olds like Sky Brown you're always going to feel stress. It doesn't matter how old you are. We know that from the comments she made,' Professor Williams said.

'Especially considering she fell on her first two runs and it was all on the last one. So children will have pressure on them but the way in which the consequences of success or failure impact on their ability to compete differs because they have many more Olympics to come.

'They also won't have a job or endorsements riding on it, although that's likely to come in the future.'

Professor Williams also highlighted the advantage of not having the pressure and stress of building up to the Olympics, as opposed to someone who has trained for a decade or more.

'If you're a 24-year-old going to the Olympics for the first time you've probably had 14 years to get there, starting your sport aged 10, realising you're good enough to compete seriously at 15 and then 10 years later you're at the Olympics,' he said.

'It all builds up the stress [as opposed to someone competing aged 13].'

He added: 'But ultimately pressure manifests itself in different ways depending on the individual.'

Creative mind

When asked whether any other factors might influence a child's skateboarding ability, Dr Skateboard said a 'creative mind' was vital, adding: 'Children inherently have this trait'.

'I also think that having good overall fitness is important, as skateboarding requires lots of energy, concentration and coordination,' he said.

Professor Williams said it was beneficial that children could easily pick up a skateboard and go down to a local skate park to practise.

Just over a year ago Sky was 'lucky to be alive' after fracturing her skull in a horror accident in training in California. Her father Stu said that doctors feared for her life when she was airlifted to hospital

Stu Brown raises his arms aloft next to his daughter. Sky's mother and brother are believed to be back home in California

'It's not a sport that needs a lot of organisation,' he said. 'You don't need a referee or ten other players to come together for a match.

'With skateboarding there's a lot of self-organisation, there's not adults trying to organise anything, so that is perhaps a factor, too.'

Tips for budding skateboarders

Professor Williams and Dr Skateboard also had several tips for any children thinking about taking up skateboarding after watching the success of Sky and others at the Olympics.

'It's good to be a multi-activity person because there's lots of crossover between different sports,' Professor Williams said.

'It will help with your athletic prowess. That's my advice to any young athlete.

'But also you want to be doing push-ups and handstands to build up your balance and core strength; really any exercises that can transfer over to skateboarding should be encouraged.'

Dr Skateboard added: 'First, take the time to connect with a local skate shop in your area, as they have good equipment and people there who can serve as teachers and mentors.

'I also think it's good to start in a smooth area away from traffic and free of rocks and debris. If there is a skatepark, that is also a plus, whether it is concrete or ramps made of wood or steel.

'The great thing about skateboarding is that you can do it everywhere, and once you have the basics down, and you can push, roll, turn and ollie, you are on your way to interacting with your world in ways you may never have imagined.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stonehenge may have lasted so long because of the unique geochemical composition of the standing stones, a new study suggests.

An international team of scientists analysed wafer-thin slices of a core sample from one of the great sandstone slabs, known as sarsens, under a microscope.

The 3.5-foot-long sample, called Philip's Core, was extracted more than 60 years ago and only returned to Britain two years ago after being kept souvenir in the US for decades.

Philip's Core has broken into six separate pieces since it was extracted – one of which, measuring just 2.6 inches (67mm) in length, the researchers borrowed for their analysis.

The analysis shows the sarsen is made up of mainly sand-sized quartz grains that are cemented tightly together by an interlocking mosaic of quartz crystals.

This explains the stone's resistance to weathering over the last 5,000 years and why it made an ideal material for building such a monument, according to the experts.

Geochemical analysis shows Stonehenge (pictured) may have survived so long due to sand-sized quartz grains that are cemented tightly together by an interlocking mosaic of crystals

Microscope image from the sarsen sample showing the tightly interlocking mosaic of quartz crystals that cement the rock together. The outlines of quartz sand grains are indicated by arrows

Pictured is the 2.6-inch (67mm) piece of Phillip's Core that the authors of this new study borrowed for analysis. It's the shortest piece of Phillip's Core that now remains

WHAT IS SARSEN? The word 'sarsen' is a shortening of 'Saracen stone' that arose in the Wiltshire dialect. By definition, it refers to any of numerous large sandstone blocks or fragments found in south-central England. Sarsens were used to construct Stonehenge and other prehistoric stone circles, such as those around the Wiltshire village of Avebury. Advertisement

Chemical data from the Phillip's Core were used last year to show that most of the large sarsen stones came from around 15 miles to the north, in West Woods on the edge of the Marlborough Downs, Wiltshire.

This new research provides further data that could be used to trace the sources of the remaining stones, according to the team.

The study was led by Professor David Nash at the University of Brighton and involved geologists, geomorphologists and archaeologists from institutions including British Geological Survey, English Heritage and the Natural History Museum.

'It is extremely rare as a scientist that you get the chance to work on samples of such national and international importance,' said Professor Nash.

'Thanks to help from organisations such as the British Geological Survey and the Natural History Museum we have been able apply a suite of state-of-the-art techniques to the Phillip's Core.

'We have CT-scanned the rock, zapped it with X-rays, looked at it under various microscopes and analysed its sedimentology and chemistry.

Aerial view of Stonehenge (pictured) - one of the world’s most famous prehistoric monuments

Photo shows the length of the longest piece that remains of Philip's Core. It once measured 3.5 feet in length

'This small sample is probably the most analysed piece of stone other than Moon rock!'

Sarsens were used to construct Stonehenge and other prehistoric stone circles, such as those around the Wiltshire village of Avebury.

Typically weighing 20 tonnes and standing up to 7 metres tall, sarsens form all 15 stones of Stonehenge's central horseshoe, the uprights and lintels of the outer circle, as well as outlying stones such as the Heel Stone, the Slaughter Stone and the Station Stones.

Drilling work at Stonehenge in 1958 during which cores of sarsen stone were extracted from Stone 58, part of the trilithon horseshoe at the centre of the monument. Robert Phillips, who returned one of the cores to Britain in 2018, is pictured left

The experts wanted to investigate how the stones originally formed before being moved into place at the monument during the Neolithic period.

Researchers were gifted a unique opportunity to analyse Philip's Core, the narrow cylindrical sample, which was drilled from Stone 58 at Stonehenge during conservation work by British firm Van Moppes in 1958.

The location of the core remained a mystery until 2018 when the late Robert Phillips, a representative of Van Moppes, returned it to Britain from his home in Florida.

Robert Phillips had been given permission to take the core in the 1950s after the drilling work was completed. It may have broken into pieces soon after it was extracted, according to Professor Nash.

'The core went right through the sarsen upright as there is dead lichen at either end,' he said.

After it was returned to Britain, Robert's sons, Lewis and Robin, were pictured at Stonehenge with the full length core in a perspex tube that hung in their father's office.

Left, Lewis Phillips, and right, Robin Phillips (the sons of Robert Phillips) holding the full 3.5-foot core in a perspex tube. Professor Nash says: 'If you look closely at the area just to the right of Lewis Phillips' left hand you can see one of the cracks.' In the middle is Heather Sebire from English Heritage

Jake Ciborowski (University of Brighton) analysing the whole of Philip's Core being analysed with a portable x-ray fluorescence spectrometer

Due to its protected status, taking samples directly from stones at Stonehenge would be almost impossible today.

Stone 58, from which Philip's Core was taken, is representative geochemically of 50 of the 52 sarsens remaining at Stonehenge, the study authors say.

Chemical isotopes in the sample indicate that the sand grains were originally eroded from pre-existing sedimentary rocks from the Mesozoic era.

David Nash (University of Brighton) analysing the sarsen core extracted from Stone 58 at Stonehenge.

The Mesozoic Era is a the name given to the period from 250 million to 65 million years ago and encompasses the lifetime of dinosaurs.

What's more, these Mesozoic rocks incorporated much older sediments from the Mesoproterozoic era – 1 billion to 1.6 billion years ago.

The experts used a technique called cathodoluminescence imaging, which collects and measures the light generated by an electron beam directed at a material.

Image from the interior of a sarsen stone using cathodoluminescence imaging. The outlines of sand grains (pale blue, black) and multiple layers of quartz cement (red) are clearly visible

It revealed the interlocking quartz cements developed through at least 16 cycles of mineral deposition, most likely as a result of wetting and drying while the sediment was buried underground.

According to the experts, no previous investigation has analysed a single sarsen boulder with such a range of complementary techniques.

Professor Nash said the data will support future research on sarsens at Stonehenge and other nearby Neolithic monuments.

The study has been published in the journal PLOS One.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Blue Origin founder Jeff Bezos has offered his congratulations to Virgin owner Sir Richard Branson on his maiden voyage into space.

The 70-year-old British billionaire flew to the edge of space aboard Virgin Galactic's first fully crewed flight on Sunday.

Branson and five crewmates reached an altitude of 53.5 miles (86 kilometres) over the New Mexico desert before gliding safely back to Earth.

The altitude was enough to experience three to four minutes of weightlessness and witness the curvature of the Earth – which Branson called an 'experience of a lifetime'.

The brief, up-and-down flight was intended as a confidence-boosting plug for Virgin Galactic, which plans to start taking paying customers on joyrides next year.

Tourists are expected to pay 250,000 US dollars (£180,000) for a spaceflight on Virgin Galactic, which includes four minutes of zero gravity.

Bezos, who was also the founder of Amazon, is due to make his own trip on July 20 – the 52nd anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing.

Scroll down for video

Blue Origin founder Jeff Bezos posted to Instagram: ''@richardbransonand crew, congratulations on the flight. Can't wait to join the club!'

In this photo provided by Virgin Galactic, the VSS Unity's rocket motor burns above the Earth on Sunday, July 11, 2021. Branson and five crewmates reached an altitude of 53.5 miles (86 kilometres) over the New Mexico desert before gliding safely back to Earth

Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity, borne by twin-fuselage carrier jet dubbed VMS Eve, takes off with billionaire entrepreneur Richard Branson and his crew for travel to the edge of space at Spaceport America

'@richardbransonand crew, congratulations on the flight. Can't wait to join the club!,' Bezos posted to Instagram on Monday.

Prior to the flight, Bezos had posted a photo of Branson with the caption: 'wishing you and the whole team a successful and safe flight tomorrow. Best of luck!'

Bezos will travel with his younger brother Mark, a charity auction winner who's shelling out $28 million and pioneering female astronaut Wally Funk, 82.

Jeff Bezos posts a message to Richard Branson (pictured) on July 10, 2021: @richardbranson wishing you and the whole team a successful and safe flight tomorrow. Best of luck!'

The Blue Origin passengers will spend at least 10 minutes floating in zero gravity inside the capsule during the suborbital sightseeing trip.

Blue Origin named the New Shepard program after astronaut Alan Shepard, who was the first American to fly into space 60 years ago.

The flight will mark a huge milestone in the mission to send paying customers to the edge of space – an industry known as 'space tourism'.

Branson flew into space aboard a Virgin Galactic vessel, a voyage he described as the 'experience of a lifetime' at the Spaceport America in New Mexico, US

Virgin Galactic SpaceShipTwo space plane Unity and mothership separate as they fly way above Spaceport America, near Truth and Consequences, New Mexico on July 11, 2021 on the way to the cosmos

Blue Origin founder Jeff Bezos (pictured), who also founded Amazon, has an estimated personal worth of $186.2 billion (£131.5 billion)

Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity, carrying Richard Branson and crew, begins its ascent to the edge of space

Blue Origin: Amazon founder Jeff Bezos' intergalactic dream Blue Origin was formed by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos in 2000. The firm's mission statement reads on its website: 'We're committed to building a road to space so our children can build the future.' It's believed the company is largely propped from the American billionaire's own back pocket, selling millions of pounds worth of Amazon stock each year to fund his aerospace company. Bezos outlined Blue Origin's intergalactic plans in a revealing interview in 2017, explaining his visions of colonies on the moon and harvesting resources from asteroids. He said: 'I want my grandchildren’s grandchildren to be in a world of pioneering, exploration and expansion throughout the solar system.' Advertisement

But Branson has arguably 'won the space race' by pipping Bezos to the post by just nine days, as well as SpaceX founder Elon Musk, who tweeted, 'Congratulations, beautiful flight!'

Sunday's launch was hailed a 'landmark moment' for Branson, as well as the whole commercial space industry.

Take-off had been delayed by about 90 minutes on Sunday due to the weather overnight at Spaceport America in New Mexico, in the US.

Once it reaches 50,000 feet the carrier plane releases Unity, a reusable, winged spacecraft designed to carry six passengers and two pilots into space.

Footage streamed live online showed the Virgin Galactic in the air at about 3.45pm UK time, and the aircraft had reached 40,000 feet by 4pm.

The spacecraft was carried up into the atmosphere by its mothership, the VSS Unity, before being released so it could power up to highs of 250,000 feet.

Sir Richard and his crew reached speeds of Mach 3 on their way to the edge of space.

After a short spell during which they experienced weightlessness, the craft then pointed downwards and made its way back to the ground, touching down around 4.40pm.

On the return flight, Sir Richard hailed the 'experience of a lifetime' and the 'hard, hard work' that went into the flight.

Speaking to a crowd of spectators afterwards, Branson said: 'Like most kids, I have dreamt of this moment since I was kid. But nothing can prepare you for the view of Earth from space, the whole thing was just magical.'

Sir Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Galactic, is hoping to finally get the nascent space tourism industry off the ground

In this shot, Branson floats in zero gravity on board Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity during the short flight

Sir Richard Branson floats in zero gravity on board Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity after reaching the edge of space above Spaceport America

Branson delivering a message from space aboard SpaceShip Two Unity 22 during their flight after take off from Spaceport America on Sunday

Branson looks out the window at Earth in zero gravity on board Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity after reaching the edge of space

Sir Richard Branson's message to 'the next generation of dreamers' I have dreamt about this moment since I was a child, but nothing could have prepared me for the view of Earth from space. It was magical. I was honoured to test the incredible customer experience onboard Virgin Galactic's spaceship VSS Unity as part of this remarkable crew of mission specialists - and now astronauts. How you feel when you look down on Earth is impossible to put into words, it's just indescribable beauty. I can't wait for you all to get up there. I want to say an enormous thank you to everyone who believed in Virgin Galactic and the team who have worked so hard to make this dream come true; our pilots; my fellow mission specialists Beth, Colin and Sirisha; to everyone who joined us at Spaceport America and to everyone who watched along on the livestream (and for the brilliant performance Khalid – we loved listening along on our beautiful glide to Earth). And thank you to my incredible family – my beautiful wife Joan, Holly and Sam, our grandchildren and all our friends for everything. I love you. My mission statement, which I wrote inside my spacesuit, is to turn the dream of space travel into a reality - for my grandchildren, for your grandchildren, for everyone. I said a message to all children while I was in space: I was once a child with a dream looking up to the stars. Now I'm an adult in a spaceship looking down to our beautiful Earth. To the next generation of dreamers: if we can do this, just imagine what you can do. Having flown to space, I can see even more clearly how Virgin Galactic is the spaceline for Earth. We are here to make space more accessible to all and turn the next generation of dreamers into the astronauts of today and tomorrow. Imagine a world where people of all ages and backgrounds, from anywhere, of any gender, of any ethnicity have equal access to space. They will in turn, inspire us all back here on Earth. If you've ever had a dream, now is the time to make it come true. Welcome to the dawn of a new space age. Advertisement

Sir Richard later posted a video of himself while onboard the Unity, saying: 'To all you kids down there, I was once a child with a dream, looking up to the stars.

'Now I'm an adult in a spaceship, with lots of other wonderful adults looking down at our beautiful, beautiful Earth.

'To the next generation of dreamers, if we can do this, just imagine what you can do.

'If you've ever had a dream, now is the time to make it come true. Welcome to the dawn of a new space age.'

He also paid tribute to the late scientist Stephen Hawking, who he said it was an 'honour' to know.

Michael Colglazier, chief executive of Virgin Galactic, added: 'This is a landmark moment for Virgin Galactic. It's a landmark moment for the new commercial space industry and it certainly is a landmark moment for our founder Richard Branson.'

He said the company's work was dedicated to 'opening up space to all'.

Sir Richard also confirmed plans to 'turn the next generation of dreamers into the astronauts of today', while announcing an Omaze sweepstake for the chance to win two seats aboard one of the first commercial Virgin Galactic flights.

The British billionaire launched on the first of the three test flights carrying a full complement of 'astronauts' in the cabin, before they begin flying the first of 600 'future astronaut' ticket holders in 2022.

Sir Richard is Astronaut 001 is travelling with Chief Astronaut Beth Moses (Astronaut 002), Lead Operations Engineer Colin Bennett (Astronaut 003) and VP of Government Affairs Sirisha Bandla (Astronaut 004) in the cabin.

Before climbing aboard, he signed the astronaut log book and wisecracked: 'The name's Branson. Sir Richard Branson. Astronaut 001. License to thrill.'

Sir Richard was not supposed to fly until later this summer, but he assigned himself to an earlier flight after Bezos announced plans to ride his own rocket ship into space from Texas on July 20.

More than 600 people have already made reservations for a £180,000 ride into space with Virgin Galactic, founded in 2004.

The flamboyant billionaire, who was pictured cycling to the facility on Sunday morning, is the second oldest person to travel to space after 77-year-old John Glenn in 1998.

Branson told the Times newspaper pre-flight that the view alone would be worth the £1billion he has spent on the project, and added: 'I think it's one of the reasons that people want to become astronauts. They want to look back at this beautiful Earth.

'Every astronaut I've known has come back determined that the rest of their lives will be spent working harder to protect the planet that we live on.'

Sir Richard Branson has revealed the uniforms were deliberately designed to reflect his love of the Star Trek series. He is pictured with fellow crew members Dave Mackay, Colin Bennett, Beth Moses, Sirisha Bandla and pilot Michael Masucci

Branson (centre) and other Unity 22 crew members at zero gravity, viewed as they flew into space aboard a Virgin Galactic vessel

Branson, left, sprays champagne over crew member Beth Moses post-landing while celebrating their flight to space from Spaceport America

Branson wears his astronaut's wings at a news conference, after flying with a crew in Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity

'It's a landmark moment for the new commercial space industry and it certainly is a landmark moment for our founder Richard Branson.'

He said the company's work on Sunday was dedicated to 'opening up space to all'.

Branson was also pictured ahead of his historic flight on Sunday with SpaceX's Musk.

Musk, 50, and Branson were snapped ahead of Sunday's journey to space alongside the message: 'Big day ahead. Great to start the morning with a friend.'

Both Musk, 50 and Sir Richard, 70, were snapped ahead of the British billionaire's ground-breaking journey to space alongside the message: 'Big day ahead. Great to start the morning with a friend.'

Branson, Bezos and Musk, who have a combined net worth exceeding $380 billion (£274 billion), have poured their near limitless resources into their respective space start-ups in the hopes of revolutionising aerospace journeys.

The group have all said that they were inspired by the first moon landing in 1969, when the US beat the Soviet Union in the space race, and had previously said how much it would mean for each to win the 'new space race'.

Although SpaceX and Tesla founder Musk has said he wants to go into space, and even 'die on Mars', he has not said when he might blast into orbit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two pilots over Canadian airspace reported seeing a 'bright green flying object' that flew into a cloud and 'disappeared' over the eastern part of the country last month.

The incident occurred on July 30, when a Canadian military plane - flying between CFB Trenton, a military base in Ontario and Cologne, Germany - and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines flight KLM618 - traveling from Boston to Amsterdam - saw the mysterious object.

Two pilots over Canadian airspace reported a 'bright green flying object' that flew into a cloud and 'disappeared'

A Canadian military plane and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines flight KLM618 saw the mysterious object on July 30. The military plane was flying between CFB Trenton, a base in Ontario and the passenger jet was traveling from Boston to Amsterdam

According to a post on the Canadian government's flight incident website, there was 'no impact to operations' on either plane.

According to the Canadian government, there was 'no impact to operations' on either plane

However, logistics expert and consultant Steffan Watkins looked at the flight data information and tweeted that the Canadian military plane, a CC-177 Globemaster III, 'made a change in course and had climbed 1,000 ft when they reported seeing the UFO.'

'So, I would like to know if the [Royal Canadian Air Force] pilot changed course to avoid it, changed course to see what it was, or if the swerve-like course correction was completely routine and just a coincidence,' Watkins added.

Logistics expert and consultant Steffan Watkins looked at the flight data information

Watkins saw that the military plane made a change in course and climbed 1,000 ft upon seeing the UFO

'So, I would like to know if the [Royal Canadian Air Force] pilot changed course to avoid it, changed course to see what it was, or if the swerve-like course correction was completely routine and just a coincidence,' Watkins added

Watkins added that the object could have been a meteor, given it took place at the early part of the Perseid meteor shower, which started July 14 and peaked earlier this week.

The government report is perhaps unsurprisingly, tagged 'weather balloon, meteor, rocket, CIRVIS/UFO.'

A spokesperson for the Royal Canadian Air Force confirmed the sighting to DailyMail.com.

'The crew saw something in the air, and reported it to NAV Canada as per standard procedure, before carrying on with their mission without further incident,' the spokesperson said in an email. 'While it is not known what they saw, there was nothing to indicate that it posed any kind of security concern or posed a safety risk to the aircraft.'

The RCAF spokesperson disputed Watkins' comments, adding that the craft did not take any evasive action and the 1,000ft climb was done 'simply for the aircraft to reach its oceanic entry point and altitude, which are a routine aspect of trans-oceanic flights.'

A spokesman for NAV Canada, the company that operates Canada's air traffic control, pointed DailyMail.com to the Civil Aviation Daily Occurrence Reporting System (CADORS) website.

'This Canadian incident case is fascinating, not least for the light it sheds on how sightings are categorized not as UFOs, but as aviation occurrences,' Nick Pope, a former employee and UFO investigator for Britain's Ministry of Defense, told DailyMail.com via email.

'Part of this stems from historical reluctance on the part of pilots - civil and military - to report UFOs,' Pope added.

'Instead, these objects are described in terms of unidentified aircraft or drones, as potential air safety issues. What this means is that one has to trawl through all sorts of aviation occurrence reports and then read between the lines to find details of possible UFO encounters.'

Vice News was first to report on the incident with unidentified aerial phenomena.

Though Canada's Department of National Defense does not track UFO sightings, a department spokesperson told Vice, the US's neighbor to the north is acutely aware of these incidents.

In April, Canada revealed dozens of UFO reports made by commercial airline pilots, kept in the CADORS database.

Two months later, DailyMail.com reported that the Canadian military has 'dozens' of UFO reports that date back 70 years, with some reports describing 'bright' objects moving at speeds twice the rate of an F-86.

In 2015, former Canadian defense minister Paul Hellyer made the wild and controversial claim that governments are hiding aliens, many of whom 'walk among us.'

The incident over Canadian airspace comes after the US government released its report on the subject earlier this year that did little to settle the matter of what these objects are, one way or another.

The long-awaited report from the Pentagon on the subject of 'unidentified aerial phenomenon' (UAPs) offered no explanation for 140 of the 144 observations dating back to 2004.

The declassified June 25 report, which came from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, added that it lacks sufficient data to determine the nature of mysterious flying objects.

'In 18 incidents, described in 21 reports, observers reported unusual UAP movement patterns or flight characteristics,' the report reads.

'Some UAP appeared to remain stationary in winds aloft, move against the wind, maneuver abruptly, or move at considerable speed, without discernable means of propulsion. In a small number of cases, military aircraft systems processed radio frequency (RF) energy associated with UAP sightings.

'The UAPTF holds a small amount of data that appear to show UAP demonstrating acceleration or a degree of signature management. Additional rigorous analysis are necessary by multiple teams or groups of technical experts to determine the nature and validity of these data.

'We are conducting further analysis to determine if breakthrough technologies were demonstrated.'

The term UFO has been more recently replaced by unidentified aerial phenomenon, especially in light of the U.S. Pentagon declassifying three videos in April 2020.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Skeletal remains of ten people found at the Sobibór death camp in occupied Poland have been identified as Ashkenazi Jews that may have been 'shot by guards'.

Between 1942 and 1943, up to 180,000 people are thought to have been killed by the Nazi's at the death camp in Sobibór operating in German-occupied Poland.

Ten skeletons at the camp unearthed in 2013 have been studied in more detail by researchers at the Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Poland.

As testimonies of guards and survivors suggested victims of the camp in Sobibór were cremated, the discovery of skeletal remains in this location was unexpected.

When they were first discovered, it was assumed the buried remains were from later, in the 1950s and belonged to Polish opponents of the Soviet Union.

However, the team from Pomeranian say their study of mitochondrial and Y chromosome DNA extracted from the remains suggested they were from Ashkenazi Jewish populations, and suggested they were killed by Nazi guards in WW2.

Ten skeletons at the camp unearthed in 2013 have been studied in more detail by researchers at the Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Poland

TEN PEOPLE OF ASHKENAZI JEWISH BACKGROUND FOUND IN CAMP GRAVES The remains were distributed across four graves at the camp location. One containing six people, along with a range of items suggesting they were clothed when they were killed. The remains of a seventh were discovered in a shallower, separate nearby grave. The authors speculate that this individual was killed after being made to bury the first six individuals. A third grave containing the remains of an eighth individual was found near a mass grave, along with buttons and remnants of shoes. The remains of the ninth and tenth individuals were found together in a fourth grave. The remains belonged to men aged 20 to 60 and 5ft 1 inch to 5ft 7in tall. Four had evidence of gunshots to the head and one to the chest. The other five weren't clear, but it could have been gunshots. They were all lying down with heads pointing down when they were shot in the head or neck. Advertisement

Sobibór was an extermination camp built and operated by Nazi Germany, located in the forest int he General Government region of German-occupied Poland.

It existed with the sole purchase of killing Jewish people and operated until it ceased operations after a prisoner revolt in October 1943.

Researchers from Pomeranian Medical University discovered the remains in 2013 after previous archaeological excavations had uncovered mass graves containing cremated remains and the walls of gas chambers.

As the remains did not show signs of cremation and because of historical reports of Polish state security activities in the area after the Second World War, the remains were initially assumed to have belonged to Polish opponents of the Soviet Union’s influence over Poland, who were killed in the 1950s.

This assumption was further supported by evidence that burial of the skeletal remains disturbed older cremated remains, indicating that burial took place after the end of mass killings in the death camp.

However, the authors conducted analyses of mitochondrial and Y chromosome DNA extracted from the remains and identified groups of genes commonly found in modern Ashkenazi Jewish populations but not non-Jewish populations.

This indicates that the individuals were likely Ashkenazi Jews, rather than Polish partisans protesting Soviet influence, the authors predicted.

The study has been led by the genetic results, in combination with the non-genetic findings, such as artefact analysis and anthropological assessment.

'In the light of these results, the prosecutor of the Institute of National Remembrance in Lublin, who incited the identification process, ordered the reburial of the remains.

'Following Jewish rite, the ceremony was led by a Rabbi and the victims were buried in separate graves at the places of their discovery.'

The remains were distributed across four graves, the Polish researchers said, with one containing six people, along with a range of items including buttons, knives, spoons, belt buckles and leather shoes.

The remains of a seventh were discovered in a shallower, separate nearby grave, with authors suggesting they were killed after being made to bury the first six.

A third grave containing the remains of an eighth individual was found near a mass grave, along with buttons and remnants of shoes that they were likely wearing at the time of burial.

The remains of the ninth and tenth individuals were found together in a fourth grave.

Between 1942 and 1943, up to 180,000 people are thought to have been killed by the Nazi's at the death camp in Sobibór operating in German-occupied Poland

Analysis of the shape, structure and length of the skeletons indicates that the remains belonged to men aged 20 to 60 years old and 5ft 1 inch to 5ft 7in tall.

The skeletons of four of the individuals showed evidence of injuries consistent with gunshots to the head and a fifth skeleton showed evidence of injuries consistent with a gunshot to the chest.

The skeletons of the other five individuals showed evidence of injuries that could have been caused by either gunshots or poor preservation conditions.

Due to the angles and locations of the injuries, the authors suggest that all ten individuals were kneeling or lying down with their heads pointing downwards at the time of their deaths, and that they were shot in the back of the head or neck.

Sobibór was an extermination camp built and operated by Nazi Germany, located in the forest int he General Government region of German-occupied Poland

A bullet and two pistol shells discovered during excavations were found to be similar to those commonly used by German guards in concentration and death camps.

This suggeests that the individuals may have been killed by guards, although the exact circumstances that led the deaths of these ten individuals are unknown.

The remains have now been reburied in separate graves in the presence of a Rabbi, at the location of their discovery.

The study has been published today in the open-access journal Genome Biology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Premier League has announced it is teaming up with EA Sports to introduce the ePremier League, an esports tournament kicking off next year.

It will give FIFA 19 players across the country a chance to represent actual Premier League clubs as they compete to reach the ePL Final in March, 2019.

The finals, one for Xbox and one for PlayStation, will take place in London and be broadcast live on Sky Sports and Premier League social media channels.

The ePremier League is an official esports collaboration between EA and the Premier League

EA Sports' new game FIFA 19 came out last week, and millions around the world are playing it

Premier League stars are no stranger to FIFA and esports. A lot of them play, and take pride in the ratings they have in the game.

Plus, several players, such as Christian Fuchs and Mesut Ozil, are getting into esports in a big way with their own teams.

The tournament will take place over three months, starting in January next year. However, hopeful players will be able to sign up for the ePL starting from December 3.

In January, the online qualification tournament begins. On each platform, players will compete in a cup format to find the top 16 finalists for Xbox and PlayStation.

From February to March, the top 16 players for both consoles will face each other in a half-day tournament to determine the club representative for each platform.

All 20 Premier League clubs will have a live playoff round, giving two competitors a final shot to advance to the ePL final.

The final will take place over two days, from March 28-29.

The tournament will take place over three months, with online qualifiers, playoffs and the final

FIFA has been growing as an esport over the past few years, with more ways to compete

'EA SPORTS is a fantastic partner for the Premier League and we are looking forward to launching ePremier League with them,' said Richard Masters, Premier League Managing Director.

'We know that millions of fans play FIFA and this new esports competition will provide our clubs with an exciting opportunity to engage with them. We can't wait to get started with the opening online rounds in January 2019.'

Existing FIFA esports professionals will be eyeing the ePL with particular interest, as the tournament will also grant FIFA 19 Global Series Points, which are used to qualify for the Global Series Playoffs on the way to the eWorld Cup.

This year, the winner of the eWorld Cup, Mosad 'Msdossary' Aldossary, took home £200,000 in prize money from the final, which was held at London's O2 Arena.

There's no word yet on what the prize money for the ePremier League will be.

The winner of this year's FIFA eWorld Cup, nicknamed Msdossary, won £200,000 in prizes

'The Premier League's global reach and intensely passionate fanbase pushes EA SPORTS FIFA competition to unprecedented heights as we accelerate esports growth through traditional sports,' said Todd Sitrin, SVP and GM of the EA Competitive Gaming Division.

'Through the ePL, this partnership carves a critical path forward in expanding competition not only for players, but for the hundreds of millions watching Premier League games who now can support their club on the virtual and the traditional pitch.'

Brent Koning, EA SPORTS FIFA Competitive Gaming Commissioner, said: 'The inclusion of the ePL will undoubtedly enhance the player and spectator experience.

'Having the most popular football league in the world commit to competitive gaming in this expansive fashion we believe only accelerates the community's enthusiasm for both FIFA Competitive Gaming and the Premier League.'

West Ham United are also getting in on the esports act with their own FIFA 19 tournament. Along with partner Basset & Gold, there will be a £25,000 prize pool for the tournament, the finals of which will be held at the London Stadium on October 28.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 'transformative' new blood test can identify brain tumours early and extend life expectancy for patients, scientists claim.

Glasgow-based health-tech firm Dxcover is behind the method, which uses a blood sample, infrared light and machine learning software to provide a quick diagnosis.

The test is able to detect brain tumours in their infancy, reduce harms from surgery and fast-track patients into brain-imaging scans for better survival outcomes, the company says.

Currently, brain tumour diagnosis can take more than eight weeks, requiring several GP visits, with delays common due to non-cancer diagnoses.

Scroll down for video

The Dxcover brain tumour test, involving a drop of blood serum that's placed onto a slide and dried, has been hailed as 'transformative

WHAT IS MACHINE LEARNING? Machine learning (ML) is a branch of AI based on the idea that systems can learn from data, identify patterns and make decisions. ML systems can learn to improve their ability to perform a task without being explicitly programmed to do so. Such systems can find patterns or trends in sets of data to come to conclusions or help humans make better decisions. Machine learning systems get more effective over time as they learn. Advertisement

Dxcover, a spin-off from the University of Strathclyde, calls its technology a 'brain cancer liquid biopsy'.

Its findings, published in the journal Cancers, show the test was effective at identifying patients with tumours as small as 0.07 of an inch (0.2cm).

It predicted the presence of glioblastoma, the most common and aggressive brain tumour, with 91 per cent sensitivity.

Glioblastoma begins in cells called astrocytes that support nerve cells. It can form in the brain or spinal cord.

Dr Matt Baker, Dxcover's chief technical officer, hailed the results as 'a watershed moment in the development of early cancer detection' that could 'increase treatment options and potentially extend life expectancy'.

'Clinical tests like this are a crucial part of Dxcover's journey to develop and commercialise a widely accepted multi-cancer early detection platform to help save lives', he said.

For the firm's study, blood samples from 177 patients with varying sizes of brain tumours were analysed using its patented technology.

The test method firstly involves a drop of blood serum – the clear, pale-yellow liquid that separates from the clot in the coagulation of blood – that's placed onto a disposable slide and dried.

The test involves dropping blood serum - the clear, pale-yellow liquid that separates from the clot in the coagulation of blood - onto a disposable slide

The slide is then analysed with spectroscopy – the absorption and emission of light and other radiation by matter – under infrared light before the Dxcover software platform detects the presence or absence of disease in minutes.

'Data is captured from all the vital components, including the body’s response to disease,' the firm says. 'The artificial intelligence algorithm provides a result in minutes.'

Some 12,000 people in Britain are diagnosed with brain tumours annually and survival rates are as low as 12 per cent five years after diagnosis, according to Cancer Research UK.

Dr Paul Brennan, a consultant neurosurgeon at the University of Edinburgh, said diagnosis is difficult 'because the most common symptoms are not specific to brain tumours'.

Dxcover says its platform 'combines novel hardware with artificial intelligence algorithms to analyse a patient's blood and detect the presence or absence of disease'

'A non-cancer diagnosis is more likely and this contributes to diagnostic delay,' he said.

'The Dxcover test will support primary care doctors to identify which of these patients are most likely to have a brain tumour and should be referred for rapid brain imaging.

'This will be transformative for both patients and doctors.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists in the Netherlands have determined that dozens of Roman coins found near a riverbank were actually spiritual ‘toll fees,’ left by ancient travelers hoping to ensure safe passage through the water.

A trove of 107 Roman coins were uncovered by metal detectorists Nico and Wim van Schaijk in 2017.

The brothers found the ancient specie, four silver denarii and 103 bronze sestertii and axes, by the Aa river near Berlicum in central Netherlands.

They presented their find to Leiden University historian Liesbeth Claes, who returned to the site with her colleagues and found two more coins and a bronze pendant from a horse harness, dating to between 120 and 300 AD.

The coins were also easy to date—the earliest came from the time of the Roman Republic, which fell in 27 BC, while the most recent ones were minted under the reign of Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who died in 180 AD.

But the money wasn’t part of some treasure buried for safe keeping, Claes said in a statement.

‘With finds like that, the coins would be in a chest or amphora, but that wasn't the case here. These coins were lying spread over a large area and were just loose in the earth.’

The fact that they spanned a time frame of more than 200 years, ‘indicates that the coins must have been deposited by different people over a long period,' she added, as superstitious offerings for safe passage across the river.

Scroll down for video

More than 100 Roman-era bronze and silver coins were found scattered across a field on the banks of the Aa river in the Netherlands. Researchers believe the coins were left individually as tokens to be offered to the gods in return for safe passage across a shallow crossing, or ford

Digging into local records, her team found an 1832 reference in the land registry to a path that once intersected with the Aa river.

‘Apparently there was a ford on this spot, where people could wade through the river,’ Claes said. ‘It may not have been a particularly rapidly flowing river, but for traders in particular it was important to be able to transport their goods safely to the other side.’

The coins weren't particularly valuable in their day—mostly bronze, with some silver and no gold pieces.

Since most of them had eroded so badly, they weren't worth much as antiquities either. 'All the bronze coins together are probably worth less than twenty Euros [about $23 US],' Claes said in January.

Many of the coins depicted military motifs, continuing a pre-Roman tradition of marital offerings. Pictured: A coin depicting Emperor Trajan (who ruled from 98 to 117 AD) on one side and Victoria, Roman goddess of conquest, on the other

The brothers found the trove of coins in this field on the shores of a narrow part of the Aa river, which was probably a shallow crossing, or ford, in Roman times

The four silver pieces, in much better condition, were worth about 100 Euros, or $120 each, she said. 'But don't forget that the scientific value of this find is many times greater than the financial one.'

One mystery continued to plague Claes for some time after figuring out the coins were offerings to the gods: Many of them depicted military imagery.

‘Initially, I thought that was odd, because what does a military image have to do with a safe crossing?’ she said.

A dupondius (brass coin) found at the site depicts Emperor Trajan in both sides. On the reverse (at right) Trajan is in military uniform between two trophies

‘But then I realized that this was also quite common before Roman times: we regularly find offerings of axes, swords and helmets in other rivers and stretches of water.’

She theorized the practice of leaving martial offerings evolved during the Roman period.

‘That was an important eureka moment in my academic career,' Claes said.

She thanked the van Schaijks for their field research and reporting the find, calling the whole endeavor ‘a good example of how amateur archaeologists and academics can complement one another.’

As a token of thanks, the brothers were given the first copy of Claes’ report on the coins, published by the Cultural Heritage Agency of the Netherlands.

Under Julius Caesar, Rome conquered the southern parts of the Netherlands in the mid-first century BC, during the Gallic Wars.

Historian Liesbeth Claes and Wim van Schaijk view some of the coins he found on the banks of the Aa river. Many were badly eroded but still held immense historical value

Along with Luxembourg, Belgium and portions of of Germany, the region was known as Germania Inferior and it was under Roman control until shortly after the empire fell.

A temple devoted to Hercules Magusannus, a composite Roman-Germanic deity worshipped during the early first millennium AD, was discovered in Kessel, North Brabant, about 40 miles from Berlicum.

Even Dutch tribes not under direct Roman rule would have been greatly influenced by the Empire and likely used their coins for goods, services and tributes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The brains of fish grow bigger when they have to think harder, then shrink back down when they can chill out, according to new research out of Canada.

Frederic Laberge, an integrative biologist at the University of Guelph in Canada, has focused on brain size in fish and how it benefits them, especially given how 'the brain is known to be one of the most energetically expensive tissues to maintain,' he told New Scientist.

In a study posted on the preprint server BioRXiv, LaBerge's team compared the brain sizes of rainbow trout living in a fish farm in Parry Sound, Ontario, to those who had slipped out of the hatchery and were living wild in a nearby lake.

After seven months, the brains of the wild trout were 15 percent heavier than the captive trout, relative to their body size.

The growth spurt was limited to their gray matter, LaBerge told New Scientist, and didn't affect their heart or other oFELrgans.

His theory is that more complex living environments force fish to literally increase their brain power.



Laberge says the brains of fish are 'elastic' and can literally grow larger when faced with more complex environments.

The brains of rainbow trout that escaped a fish farm in Ontario and were living in a lake were 15% heavier than their captive cousins. Frederic Laberge, an integrative biologist at the University of Guelph, says that's because fish have elastic brains that literally grow larger when faced with more complex environments

But the change isn't necessarily permanent: in another preprint study, posted on Authorea, Laberge studied trout in two Ontario lakes over the course of several years.

He found their brain size increased in the fall and winter, and then decreased in spring and summer.

Lake trout actually prefer cooler waters, so when the cold chills the lake, they can forage for food closer to the surface and shore.

That creates a more competitive and complex environment for them, Laberge says, requiring more gray matter.

Studies of lake trout over several years found their brains were larger in fall and winter, when they would swim closer to the shoreline, and smaller in spring in summer, when they stuck to to the cool lake bottom. Pictured: A lake trout (top) and lake trout brain

'That's the assumption,' he told New Scientist.

Earlier research by Laberge found the brains of sunfish living in shoreline habitats were larger than those of their counterparts in open water.

According to a 2018 study he published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B, all the fish were equally healthy with similar sized heads.

But the brains of sunfish in the littoral (shoreline) area were 8.3 percent bigger on average than the pelagic (open water) fish, though no one region of the brain was more outsized than another.

'Habitat indeed has an effect,' co-author Caleb Axelrod said in a university release. 'Overall it's just better cognition.'

Axelrod theorized the shoreline fish may be better at adapting to the growing issues of pollution and climate change 'because they already have more cognitive capacity.'

Scientists have proven fish in labs have smaller brains than their free-range cousins, but LeBarge's work is the first to show such variance in the wild.

Scientists in the Czech Republic said brown trout (pictured) became less active and disturbingly dependent when put in water containing amounts of meth equivalent to what's found in freshwater rivers

The cognitive abilities of our marine neighbors may be under attack, as separate research indicates lake trout are becoming addicted to meth, cocaine and other drugs.

Pharmaceuticals, both legal and illicit, are constantly introduced into waterways through discharge from wastewater treatment plants.

While they filter out sewage and other contaminants, the plants are not equipped to stop trace elements of drugs, including antidepressants, birth control medication and even cocaine and ketamine, from making their way back into the water.

In a report this week in the Journal of Experimental Biology, scientists in the Czech Republic said they found brown trout (Salmo trutta) became less active and disturbingly dependent when put in water containing small amounts of meth equivalent to what's in freshwater rivers.

Later, when given a choice between a freshwater tank or water containing methamphetamine, the trout invariably chose the latter.

Drug addiction could potentially drive fish to congregate near unhealthy water treatment discharges 'in search of a fix,' study author Pavel Horkey told DailyMail.com previously.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Climate change could completely shut off Yellowstone’s Old Faithful geyser, which has been active for hundreds of years, a new report warns.

Researchers at Montana State University, the US Geological Survey (USGS) and the University of Wyoming released a climate assessment this week that states if temperatures rise above 10 degrees Fahrenheit, the geyser will likely stop erupting.

The report warns that by 2100, rising temperatures could transform the lush 3,000-square-mile area into a region plagued by drought.

Although the stark warning still has 80 years to become a reality, such an event happened about 800 years ago – Old Faithful stopped erupting for decades due to extreme heat and a lack of precipitation.

Scroll down for video

Climate change could completely shut off Yellowstone’s Old Faithful, which has been active for hundreds of years

Old Faithful was first discovered in 1870 by the Washburn Expedition, which explored northwestern Wyoming for two years, but experts believe it has been existence for thousands of years.

The geyser received its name for its frequent and somewhat predictable eruptions, which expels 3,700 to 8,400 gallons of water each time it erupts – which is about every 60 to 110 minutes.

However, the latest climate report warns Old Faithful could cease to exist because climate change is slowly taking over Yellowstone National Park, according to The Guardian.

According to the assessment, temperatures in the area have increased by more than two degrees Fahrenheit since 1950 and are expected to rise another five to 10 degrees by the end of the century.

A climate assessment this week states if temperatures rise above 10 degrees Fahrenheit the geyser will likely stop erupting

Yellowstone is also set to see an annual precipitation increase of up to 15 percent, but with elevated temperatures and higher evaporation rates, the region will likely have drier summers.

‘Geologic records indicate that decade-long periods of low precipitation have occurred in the past 1,200 [years],’ reads the report.

‘These dry periods were times of reduced snowpack, more fires, lower streamflow, establishment of trees above present tree line, and even a near-century hiatus in geyser activity of Old Faithful.

‘Megadroughts occurred in the GYA [the Greater Yellowstone Area] and across much of the western United States in the early 600s, late 800s, 1200s, and late 1500s.

‘These dry periods led to more fires, desiccation of small lakes, reduced streamflow, an upslope shift in upper tree line, and reduced Old Faithful geyser activity.’

Some 800 years ago, one of these megadroughts affected the Greater Yellowstone Area and stopped Old Faithful from erupting for about 130 years.

Researchers said that the geyser stopped erupting long enough to allow trees to grow in the area between the years 1230 and 1360.

These findings were reported in a 2020 study published in Geophysical Research Letters.

This study concludes that since climate change models predict severe drought by the middle of this century, it is likely Old Faithful will either see extremely long intervals of eruption or cease erupting altogether – the same conclusion made by researchers of the new climate change assessment.

Although the stark warning still has 80 years to become a reality, such an event happened about 800 years ago – Old Faithful stopped erupting for decades due to extreme heat and a lack of precipitation

Steve Hostetler, a USGS scientist and co-lead author of the report, said in a statement: ‘Greater Yellowstone is valued for its forests, rivers, fish and wildlife.

‘The trend towards a warmer, drier climate described in this study will likely affect ecosystems in the region and the communities that depend on them.'

The team studied climate change in the Greater Yellowstone Area from 1950 through 2018 and found the average temperature has increased approximately 2.3 degrees, with the most warming observed at elevations above 5,000 feet.

Researchers also note that Bozeman, Montana, and in Jackson, Pinedale and Cody, Wyoming are all likely to experience 40 to 60 days in the year that are exceeding 90 degrees by the end of the century.

The team studied climate change in the Greater Yellowstone Area from 1950 through 2018 and found the average temperature has increased approximately 2.3 degrees, with the most warming observed at elevations above 5,000 feet

Cathy Whitlock, Regents Professor Emerita of Earth Sciences at Montana State University and report co-lead author, said in the statement: ‘The assessment is intended to provide the best available science on past, present and future conditions in the GYA so that stakeholders have needed information to plan ahead.’

Geologic studies done for the report also highlights the effects of climate change over recent decades, showing the average temperature was as high or higher than any period in the last 20,000 years and likely the warmest of the last 800,000 years, according to geologic studies.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Humans have wiped out 469 bird species from the Earth over the last 50,000 years, a new study reveals.

Scientists at Tel Aviv University and the Weizmann Institute found avian endured a major extinction event starting 20,000 years ago that ended with up to 20 percent of species disappearing - but researchers say the real number is much higher.

The team found that most of the extinct species were very large, lived on islands and were flightless.

This includes the massive Moa that lived in New Zealand and went extinct in the 17th century and the infamous dodo bird, which were native to island of Mauritius off the coast of Madagascar - it went extinct in the 1600s.

The extinctions, according to the researchers were caused by the arrival of humans on islands who hunted the large birds to feed the entire community.

Scroll down for video

Humans have wiped out 469 bird species from the Earth over the last 50,000 years, a new study reveals. This includes the moa (pictured) that once lived in New Zealand

Shai Meiri of the School of Zoology at The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences and the Steinhardt Museum of Natural History at Tel Aviv University, said in a statement: 'We conducted a comprehensive review of scientific literature, and for the first time collected quantitative data on the numbers and traits of birds worldwide.

'Those that became extinct in the last 300 years or so are relatively well known, while earlier species are known to science from remains found in archaeological and paleontological sites worldwide.

'Altogether we were able to list 469 that became extinct over the last 50,000 years, but we believe that the real number is much higher.'

The reason Meiri and his team are putting the blame on humans is due to the large amount of bird remains unearthed at ancient human sites, along with other evidence that shows the avian disappeared shortly after humans arrived on an island.

The study also includes the infamous dodo bird, which were native to island of Mauritius off the coast of Madagascar - it went extinct in the 1600s

'Extinctions mostly occurred in families of large-bodied birds, whilst lineages of small birds have fared better. Insular birds are overall larger than mainland birds, a trend that becomes even more evident when the extinct forms are analyzed,' reads the study published in the Journal of Biogeography.

'However, within lineages, sizes are only slightly larger on islands than on continents.'

The large birds were found to be 10 times the size of those that survived the arrival of humans.

The reason humans targets large birds, like the 9-foot-tall Mihirung, is because they provided more food.

The Mihirung, also known as thunder bird or demon duck, was a flightless bird that lived in Australia up to 50,000 years ago, but was killed off by human hunters.

Another feature among the extinct species is that 90 percent of them lived on islands that were either killed by humans who just arrived on the island or the animals they brought with them, pigs, rats and cats.

A large portion of the extinct bird species were flightless, and often unable to escape their pursuers, such as the Giant Moa that once roamed New Zealand.

The reason humans targets large birds, like the 9-foot-tall Mihirung, is because they provided more food. The Mihirung, also known as thunder bird or demon duck, was a flightless bird that lived in Australia up to 50,000 years ago, but was killed off by human hunters

The study found that the number of flightless bird species that became extinct is double the number of flightless species still existing today - 68 percent of the flightless bird species known to science became extinct.

'Our study indicates that before the major extinction event of the past millennia, many more large, even giant, as well as flightless avian lived on our globe, and the diversity of birds living on islands was much greater than today,' Meiri said in a statement.

'We hope that our findings can serve as warning signals regarding bird species currently threatened with extinction, and it is therefore important to check whether they have similar features.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A novel strain of morbillivirus, a deadly marine mammal virus, has been detected in a Fraser's dolphin in Hawaii sparking fears of an outbreak around the Pacific island.

A team from UH Mānoa's Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology identified the virus in a male juvenile that became stranded on Maui on January 17, 2018, but the diagnosis was only recently determined.

UH Health and Stranding Lab Director Kristi West said in a statement: 'Morbillivirus is an infectious disease that has been responsible for mass mortalities of dolphins and whales worldwide.

'It is related to human measles and smallpox.'

The researchers say the next step in determining if the virus is circulating in the Central Pacific is to focus on antibody testing of Hawaiian dolphins and whales.

A novel strain of morbillivirus, a deadly marine mammal disease, has been detected in a Fraser's dolphin that washed ashore Maui, Hawaii in 2018

The morbillivirus, which impacts dolphins and whales, is highly contagious and causes debilitation, severe pneumonia and inflammation of the brain.

Although it is found around the world, morbillivirus is most prevalent in the Atlantic Ocean, according to Science Direct.

When the male Fraser's dolphin washed ashore in 2018, biologists were puzzled to what led to its death, as its body was in good condition, but its organs and cells showed signs of infection.

'The lungs had a mottled surface, with areas of consolidation (1–2 cm in diameter),' West and her colleagues wrote in the study published in Nature Scientific Reports.

When the male Fraser's dolphin washed ashore in 2018, biologists were puzzled to what led to its death, as its body was in good condition, but its organs and cells showed signs of disease. Researchers found its lungs (pictured) had a mottled surface

The team examined tissue samples, which led them to identify the cause of death was morbillivirus. The left image shows signs of the virus in the lymph nodes and right is in the dolphin's brain tissue

'Areas of consolidation revealed dark red to tan firm tissue around small bronchi in cross-section.

'The left lung marginal lymph node was enlarged and had an irregular surface. The trachea and main bronchi contained small amounts of red-tinged foam.'

The team examined tissue samples, which led them to identify the cause of death was morbillivirus, which caused the dolphin to experience neurologic and hepatic dysfunction.

This research identifies morbillivirus as a significant threat to other marine animals, because Fraser's dolphins are highly social and tend to interact closely with other dolphins and whales in Hawaiian waters.

'It's also significant to us here in Hawaii because we have many other species of dolphins and whales—about 20 species that call Hawaii home—that may also be vulnerable to an outbreak from this virus,' said West.

The next step in determining if this virus is circulating in the Central Pacific is to focus on antibody testing of Hawaiian dolphins and whales

Biologists fear the disease could spread to endangered false killer whales - there are only about 167 remaining. Pictured is an image of a beach false killer whale in New Zealand. The image was snapped on April 5, 2021

'An example is our insular endangered false killer whales—where there is only estimated to be 167 individuals remaining.

'If morbillivirus were to spread through that population, it not only poses a major hurdle to population recovery, but also could be a threat to extinction.'

Other species of Hawaii's dolphins and whales may have acquired immunity to morbillivirus through prior exposure, but this can only be determined through antibody testing, which has not been conducted to date.

The next step in determining if this virus is circulating in the Central Pacific is to focus on antibody testing of Hawaiian dolphins and whales.

'This research is part of the work of the Health and Stranding Lab, which provides hands-on opportunities for UH students to be involved in all aspects of stranding and research,' said West.

'This also is anticipated to bring greater recognition to UH's role in looking at infectious disease in Hawaiian marine mammals and how the strains found here in Hawaii compare to those that have been described in other regions of the world.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hermit crabs are attracted to an additive released by plastics in the oceans that could lead to them mistaking pollution for food, a new study has warned.

Researchers discovered that oleamide – an additive found in plastics – increases the respiration rate of the crustaceans, indicating excitement.

They also found that oleamide can be mistaken for food, potentially increasing the consumption of microplastics by hermit crabs and other marine life.

The University of Hull team studied hermit crabs taken from waters off the Yorkshire coast as part of research into the impact of climate change, plastic and other molecules on marine species.

Scroll down for video

Hermit crabs are attracted to an additive released by plastics in the oceans that could lead to them mistaking pollution for food, a new study has warned

The hermit crabs were placed in tanks. Researchers then measured oxygen concentrations before and after adding oleamide to establish the crustaceans' rate of oxygen consumption

WHAT IS OLEAMIDE? Oleamide is a fatty amide derived from oleic acid. Along with other plastic additives it has been found to leach into foods and drinks that are stored in plastic, or plastic-lined, containers, especially those made of polypropylene. It is known to be a sex pheromone or stimulant for certain species of insects, and has now been found to increase the respiration rate of hermit crabs, indicating excitement. This may indicate the crabs are 'sexually excited' by oleamide, researchers from the University of Hull said. Advertisement

In the study, 40 hermit crabs were collected from a rocky shoreline near Scarborough and transported to the aquarium facilities at the University of Hull, where they were placed in tanks with artificial seawater.

Researchers then measured oxygen concentrations before and after adding oleamide to establish the crustaceans' rate of oxygen consumption.

PhD candidate Paula Schirrmacher, who was part of the research team, said: 'Our study shows that oleamide attracts hermit crabs.

'Respiration rate increases significantly in response to low concentrations of oleamide, and hermit crabs show a behavioural attraction comparable to their response to a feeding stimulant.'

She also said that because oleamide can be mistaken for food, crabs may travel a distance in search of a meal, only to discover plastic.

Schirrmacher added: 'Oleamide has a striking resemblance to oleic acid, a chemical released by arthropods during decomposition.

'As scavengers, hermit crabs may misidentify oleamide as a food source, creating a trap.

'This research demonstrates that additive leaching may play a significant role in the attraction of marine life to plastic.'

Schirrmacher's research on hermit crabs in Robin Hood's Bay in North Yorkshire also looked at how hermit crabs detect smells in acidified oceans and found that the crustaceans were attracted to a chemical cue known as PEA (2-phenylethylamine).

PEA is known to warn mammals and sea creatures of predators and its effectiveness may be increased in an acidified ocean, the scientists said.

Researcher Dr Christina Roggatz said: 'In short, pH can make or break successful communication in the ocean.'

The University of Hull team studied hermit crabs in waters off the Yorkshire coast as part of research into the impact of climate change, plastic and other molecules on marine species

A previous study by the University of Essex also found that exposure to microplastic pollution may affect hermit crabs' sensitivity to predators as they behave bolder and in more predictable ways.

Scientists were interested in the startle response where the animal retracts into its shell when exposed to a potential threat.

The length of time it takes a crab to re-emerge is often used as a measure of individual boldness.

Dr Gerrit Nanninga, who led the study, said: 'Crabs became less risk averse on average by re-emerging faster from shelter and their behaviour became more predictable with increasing microplastic concentrations.'

The University of Hull team said another study found that rising sea temperatures, combined with increased plastic pollution, can confuse the breeding cycles of blue mussels and affect reproduction rates.

Research showed that male blue mussels were affected by increased temperature, while females were sensitive to DEHP – a toxic chemical found in many plastics.

Luana Fiorella Mincarelli, a PhD student, said: 'It is critically important to understand how plastic additives work on molecular levels, especially on reproductive success.

'We have found that their toxic effect can be amplified in a climate change scenario.'

The research has been published in the journal Marine Pollution Bulletin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As crafty birds go, it turns out the tufted titmouse might just be the pluckiest of the lot.

That's because scientists have filmed them daringly stealing hair from cats, dogs and even humans to pad out their nests.

It rubbishes the long-held thought that the birds only pillage fur from dead animals or opportunistically snag it when hair is shed.

Scroll down for video

Crafty: The tufted titmouse (pictured) has been filmed daringly plucking hair from cats, dogs and even humans to pad out its nest. It rubbishes the long-held thought that the birds only pillage fur from dead animals or opportunistically snag it when hair is shed

WHAT IS THE TUFTED TITMOUSE? The tufted titmouse is a little grey bird that is common in deciduous forests. It has black eyes, a small, round bill, and brushy crest. The birds have been filmed plucking hair from live animals including dogs, cats, foxes and porcupines. They also snatch fur from the environment when it is shed and take it from dead animals to build their nests. Among the animal hairs found in their nests are raccoons, possums, mice, woodchucks, squirrels, rabbits, livestock, pets and even humans. The oldest known wild tufted titmouse was at least 13 years, 3 months old, having been banded in Virginia in 1962 and found in the same state in 1974. Advertisement

The cunning behaviour was spotted by chance when an ecologist was carrying out a bird count in Illinois.

'The titmouse I saw was plucking hair from a live animal,' said Jeffrey Brawn of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

'This was from a live raccoon with claws and teeth. And the raccoon didn't seem to mind because it didn't even wake up.'

Brawn was so intrigued that he went looking for an explanation.

He and several colleagues found that fur theft had been mentioned only sparsely in scientific literature, but YouTube videos uploaded by bird enthusiasts suggested that what he had seen was not isolated behaviour.

In these clips, tufted titmice were seen plucking hair from pet cats and dogs, and even a porcupine.

The researchers have named the behaviour kleptotrichy, which is Greek for 'theft' and 'hair'.

However, there is plenty of evidence to suggest that stealing is not the tufted titmouse's main method of sourcing hair, with footage also showing the birds retrieving shed animal fur from the ground.

This begs the question of why steal the hair at all.

It may be because there are benefits to having fur from predators in a bird's nest, Brawn believes, adding: 'There's a local species called the great crested flycatcher, which, like the titmouse, is a cavity nester, that actually puts shed snakeskins into its nest, possibly to deter predators.'

Finches in Africa also exhibit a similar behaviour, using the faeces of a predator as a deterrent.

Some birds line their nests with plant materials that help repel parasites and prevent them from killing tiny hatchlings, which researchers think might be another reason why the tufted titmice use animal hair.

However, it's unclear whether mammal fur has similar properties.

Brawn's colleague Henry Pollock said: 'Unexpected interactions such as these remind us that animals exhibit all types of interesting and often overlooked behaviours and highlight the importance of careful natural history observations to shed light on the intricacies of ecological communities.'

The research has been published in the journal Ecology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The 2020 heatwave that occurred during the summer in Siberia led to an increase in methane gas emissions from limestones, an event that could lead to Earth's atmosphere getting hit with a 'methane bomb.'

A new study from researchers at the University of Bonn found that the extreme heatwave in Siberia resulted in a 'temperature anomaly' of 6 degrees Celsius over the baseline time period of 1979-2000.

Since June 2020, there has been an increase in methane concentration in two long areas in the region: the Taymyr Fold Belt and the rim of the Siberian Platform.

The summer 2020 heatwave in Siberia led to an increase in methane gas emissions from limestones, which could result in a 'methane bomb'

In early 2021, the methane had spread all over the region, the researchers found.

The extreme heatwave resulted in a 'temperature anomaly' of 6 degrees Celsius over the baseline time period of 1979-2000. Since June 2020, methane concentration has increased in Taymyr Fold Belt and the rim of the Siberian Platform

What is concerning about the two areas is that the bedrock has been formed by limestone formations from the Paleozoic era, dating as far back as 541 million years ago.

In early 2021, there was methane all over the area, as methane spread. The bedrock has been formed by limestone formations from the Paleozoic era, dating as far back as 541 million years ago

'Methane is particularly dangerous here because its warming potential is many times higher than that of CO2,' the study's lead author, University of Bonn professor Dr Nikolaus Froitzheim said in a statement.

According to the Environmental Defense Fund, methane has 80 times the warming power that carbon dioxide does over the first 20 years it hits the atmosphere.

WHY IS PERMAFROST SO IMPORTANT? Permafrost - soil that has been frozen for at least two years - is sensitive and susceptible to global warming. It is mostly found in high-latitude regions like the Arctic, and stores large quantities of carbon dioxide and methane, which are released into the atmosphere if the soil melts and decomposes. An estimated 35 million people currently live in cities or towns on top of permafrost, and thawed soil could cause the ground to become unstable, the scientists said. This would put buildings, roads and other infrastructure at risk of collapsing. Advertisement

The researchers compared spatial and temporal distribution of methane concentrations in the air of northern Siberia with geological maps to come up with their findings.

Approximately 15 percent of the Northern Hemisphere or 11 percent of the entire globe is covered by permafrost, according to an April 2021 study.

If this portion of the ground were to thaw due to climate change, it could be especially worrisome, given the implications it would have on rising temperatures.

Previous research suggested that a thawing of the permafrost would contribute to a rise of 'only' 0.2 degrees Celsius by 2100 and would not lead to the aforementioned 'methane bomb,' but the new study challenges that assumption.

Froitzheim noted that the soil formation in these areas are 'very thin to nonexistent,' so there is little to worry about methane from decaying soil.

However, the fracture and cave systems in the limestone are likely to become porous with higher temperatures.

'As a result, natural gas being mainly methane from reservoirs within and below the permafrost can reach the Earth's surface,' he explained.

Frotizheim continued: 'The estimated amounts of natural gas in the subsurface of North Siberia are huge. When parts of this will be added to the atmosphere upon thawing of the permafrost, this could have dramatic impacts on the already overheated global climate.'

The study has been published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Several groups of scientists have expressed concerns about what would happen if Earth's permafrost were to melt.

In July 2020, a separate group of experts found that increased permafrost melt could result in microbes releasing 40 billion more tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than previously thought.

Other studies, including one published in September 2017, have expressed concern about the unlocking of ancient diseases that are trapped in the permafrost.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Female giraffes have evolved to go through the menopause early so they can help care for their grandchildren, a new study reveals.

Elegant females spend up to 30 per cent of their lives in a 'post-reproductive state' to help raise successive generations of offspring in later life and ensure the preservation of their genes, the authors claim.

This evolutionary trait is known as the 'grandmother hypothesis' and has been used to explain why humans live such a comparatively long time after reproduction.

The authors also say 30 per cent is comparable to elephants and killer whales, which spend 23 per cent and 35 per cent of their lives in a post-reproductive state, respectively.

Scientists at the University of Bristol have discovered evidence that giraffes are a highly socially complex species - more so than previously thought - because females help care for their offspring's offspring. Pictured, a other Rothschild's giraffe (Giraffa camelopardalis rothschildi, a giraffe sub-species) tending to her baby. The photo was taken in Soysambu Conservancy, in the Rift Valley region of Kenya

THE GRANDMOTHER HYPOTHESIS The grandmother hypothesis, put forward by evolutionary biologist William Hamilton in a 1966 paper, has been applied to humans and other animals. Female chimps rarely live past childbearing years, usually into their 30s and sometimes their 40s. Human females often live decades past their child-bearing years - and that may have begun with our early Homo relatives 2 million years ago. The grandmother hypothesis says that before then, few females lived past their fertile years. But changing environments led to the use of food like buried tubers that weaned children couldn't dig themselves. So older females helped feed the kids, allowing their daughters to have the next baby sooner. By allowing their daughters to have more kids, grandmothers' longevity genes became increasingly common in the population and human lifespan increased. A 2010 modelling study suggested the hypothesis isn't plausible, however. Advertisement

Both elephants and killer whales are known for being 'socially complex', meaning they live together in large groups and cooperate to conduct tasks.

But, in comparison, the social complexity of giraffes may have been unfairly overlooked until now.

Giraffes have been thought as having little or no social structure, and only weak and fleeting relationships, according to the authors at the University of Bristol's School of Biological Sciences.

'It is baffling to me that such a large, iconic and charismatic African species has been understudied for so long,' said lead author Zoe Muller.

'This paper collates all the evidence to suggest that giraffes are actually a highly complex social species, with intricate and high-functioning social systems, potentially comparable to elephants, cetaceans and chimpanzees.

'I hope that this study draws a line in the sand, from which point forwards, giraffes will be regarded as intelligent, group-living mammals which have evolved highly successful and complex societies, which have facilitated their survival in tough, predator-filled ecosystems.'

For the study, Muller looked at how long adult giraffe females live for in the wild (28 years, according to a 2017 study) then deducted the age at which they stop bearing young (20 years).

'This left an eight-year period where adult giraffes remain with the herd, but are not producing offspring,' she told MailOnline.

This eight-year period represents 35 per cent of their total lifespan, but to 'err on the side of caution', this was rounded down to 30 per cent.

Muller has suggested key areas for future research, including the need to understand the role that older, post-reproductive adults play in society and what fitness benefits they bring for group survival.

The study author says 'giraffes are actually a highly complex social species, with intricate and high-functioning social systems'

'Recognising that giraffes have a complex cooperative social system and live in matrilineal societies will further our understanding of their behavioural ecology and conservation needs,' she said.

'Conservation measures will be more successful if we have an accurate understanding of the species' behavioural ecology.

'If we view giraffes as a highly socially complex species, this also raises their "status" towards being a more complex and intelligent mammal that is increasingly worthy of protection.'

The paper, published in the journal Mammal Review, follows previous research into giraffe behaviour by Muller.

According to her 2018 study, the size of giraffe groups is not influenced by the presence of predators, unlike other animal species in the wild.

It is commonly accepted that group sizes of animals increase when there is a risk of predation, since larger group sizes reduce the risk of individuals being killed, and there are 'many eyes' to spot any potential risk.

Giraffe populations have declined by 40 per cent since the late 1980s, and there are now thought to be fewer than 98,000 individuals remaining in the wild.

The Northern giraffe (G. camelopardalis) is listed as 'vulnerable' on the International Union for Conservation in Nature's Red List of Threatened Species.

IUCN currently recognises only one species and and nine subspecies of giraffe, even though Germany-based researchers confirmed earlier this year that there are four distinct giraffe species and seven subspecies.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Single men are contributing more to climate change than women by purchasing goods with larger carbon footprints, such on meat, tobacco, alcohol and fuel for vehicles, a new study reveals.

A team of Swedish researchers found single men, on average, were responsible for 16 percent more greenhouse gases than their counterparts, despite males only spending two percent more on goods.

The study shows that women tended to spend money on 'low-emitting products' like healthcare, furniture and clothing.

Vacations played a big role in emissions for both genders, with one-third of the carbon emitted every year by a typical spender tied to a vacation.

However, men were more likely to drive during a getaway, so their leisure trips released more emissions than women who are more likely to take public transportation.

Scroll down for video

Men are contributing to climate change more than women by purchasing goods with larger carbon footprints

'The difference in men's and women's emissions is not due to differences in expenditure but rather to differences in expenditure patterns,' lead author Annika Carlsson Kanyama, at the research company Ecoloop in Sweden, and her colleagues wrote in the study published in the Journal for Industrial Ecology.

'Men spend only slightly more money than women, 2%, but emit 16% more greenhouse gases.

'This is due to number of factors such as more expenditure among women on low-emitting products and services such as health care, furnishings, and clothes while men spend a lot more money (70% more) on greenhouse gas intensive items such as fuel.'

Data on household expenditure were provided by Statistics Sweden (SCB) who unfortunately had no data beyond 2012, according to the researches , but updated the data to 2016 with relevant consumer prices indices.

The average single male tends to purchase higher-emitting goods like meat, tobacco, alcohol and fuel for vehicles

The study shows that women tended to spend money on 'low-emitting products' like healthcare, furniture and clothing

The team only looked at the spending habits of single men and women due to the fact that a 'large proportion' of people in affluent countries, such as those in the EU, live in single-person households.

Although men consumed more meat, women tended to purchase more dairy products which is nearly equal in its carbon footprint.

'Meat and dairy products have much higher emissions than all their replacements,' reads the study.

'Pork is five times more polluting than tofu and lamb is 25 times more polluting than tofu.

'Milk is five times as polluting as oat drink and cheese is four times as polluting as vegan cheese.

Although men consumed more meat, women tended to purchase more dairy products which is nearly equal in the carbon footprint

'Lettuce grown conventionally [in commercial facilities] is 12 times as polluting as lettuce grown locally.'

'The changes in expenditures affect men and women a bit differently as men spent more money on meat and meat products before the change (9%) and women spent more money on dairy products (23%).

'The changes contributed with 32–45% less greenhouse gas emissions from the food purchased.'

The researches suggested that people could lower their carbon emissions by 36 percent to 38 percent if they consume plant-based foods, travel by train instead of in planes or cars and purchase secondhand furnishings instead of brand new items.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Spending more than four hours a day sitting in front of the TV increases your risk of obstructive sleep apnoea — and resulting snoring — by 78 per cent, a study found.

Researchers with the Harvard Medical School monitored the health and physical activity levels of some 138,000 people for 10–18 years.

They found that increased levels of sedentary behaviour — and corresponding low levels of physical activity — increased the risk of obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).

People who spend all day sitting down, such as in office jobs, should compensate by getting more exercise during their leisure time, the researchers recommended.

Sleep apnoea is a condition in which one's airways can become completely blocked at night, interrupting normal breathing and leading to snoring and disrupted sleep.

If untreated, it can increase the risk of cancer, glaucoma, heart attacks, high blood pressure, strokes, type 2 diabetes and cognitive and behavioural disorders.

Experts have estimated that, globally, around 1 billion adults aged between 30–69 are affected by mild-to-severe obstructive sleep apnoea.

Spending more than four hours a day in front of the television increases your risk of obstructive sleep apnoea — and resulting snoring (pictured) — by 78 per cent, a study found

'We saw a clear relationship between levels of physical activity, sedentary behaviour and OSA risk,' said paper author and epidemiologist Tianyi Huang of the Harvard Medical School.

'People who followed the current World Health Organization physical activity guidelines of getting at least 150 minutes of moderate activity per week and spent less than four hours per day sitting watching TV, had substantially lower OSA risk.'

'Importantly, we saw that any additional increase in physical activity, and/or a reduction in sedentary hours, could have benefits that reduce the risk of developing obstructive sleep apnoea.'

'The difference in OSA risk between sedentary work and time spent sitting watching TV could be explained by other behaviours that are related to those activities.'

'For example, snacking and drinking sugary drinks is more likely to go along with watching TV compared with being sedentary at work or elsewhere, such as sitting during travelling.'

'This could lead to additional weight gain, which we know to be a risk factor OSA.'

In their study, Professor Huang and colleagues monitored the health of more than 138,000 US adults for between 10–18 years.

While none had obstructive sleep apnoea at the start of the investigation, 8,733 participants had been diagnosed with the condition by the end of the study period.

After accounting for potential confounding factors — include age, body mass index and alcohol/tobacco usage — the team found that participants found that those who engaged in more physical activity had a significantly lower risk of developing OSA.

Specifically, those who did the equivalent of three hour's worth of running per week were 54 per cent less likely to develop the disorder than those who only got the equivalent amount of exercise as walking for two hours a week.

Furthermore, those who spent more than four hours a day sitting watching TV had a 78 per cent greater risk of OSA than the most active subjects, while those whose work involved sitting down had a 49 per cent greater risk.

The researchers cautioned that the current study relied on self-reported health data — and that future work would benefit from collecting data instead by means of wearable health-monitoring technologies.

'Obstructive sleep apnoea is a common and pervasive disorder that can have a serious impact on the quality of people’s lives,' said European Respiratory Society president Anita Simonds, who not involved in the present study.

'Although OSA can be managed with modern treatments, only a minority of studies focus on prevention,' the respiratory and sleep medicine expert from the Royal Brompton Hospital added.

'Health professionals should prioritise prevention and support people who are at-risk of developing OSA to be more active before it is too late.'

'This study adds to the evidence on the importance of maintaining an active lifestyle on preventing lung disease, and it is encouraging that even a small increase in physical activity or reduction in sedentary hours could reap potential benefits.'

'It is therefore an important message to get across to our patients and their families in primary care and respiratory clinics.'

The full findings of the study were published in the European Respiratory Journal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@India, China and Singapore are in a list of the ten countries 'significantly' more likely to be impacted by toxic pollution and climate change, scientists have warned.

A new analysis of public datasets from 176 countries revealed a significant link between climate risk and toxic pollution impact in countries around the globe.

Researchers from the University of Notre Dame in Indiana discovered that if a nation is at risk of toxic air pollution, they will find it harder to adapt to global warming.

They say this is in part due to poorer countries having more relaxed environmental regulations, or being subject to the harmful influence of foreign firms.

This puts billions at risk, as the top third of 'at risk' countries, represent two thirds of the world's population - mainly poorer countries in Africa and Southeast Asia.

They found of those at most risk, Singapore, Rwanda and China were in the best position to enact changes, such as tougher environment policies, to reduce the risk.

Researchers from the University of Notre Dame in Indiana discovered that if a nation is at risk of toxic air pollution, they will find it harder to adapt to global warming

TEN COUNTRIES MOST AT RISK FROM CLIMATE CHANGE AND TOXIC AIR POLLUTION Researchers created a top ten 'target list' of countries most at risk of climate change and toxic air pollution. These are in order of those in the best position to tackle the problem by imposing stricter environmental regulations to clean their air. Singapore Rwanda China India Solomon Islands Bhutan Botswana Georgia Republic of Korea Thailand Advertisement

The researchers came up with a top-ten list of countries at highest risk from climate change - and those best equipped to begin reducing their risk from pollution.

As well as Singapore, Rwanda and China, India, Solomon Islands, Bhutan, Botswana, Georgia, the Republic of Korea, and Thailand also featured, in order of ability to make necessary changes needed to offset the climate change risk.

This is one of the first studies to explore the relationship between these two risks of pollution and climate change, scientists said.

The authors said vast work had been done previously to understand the magnitude and distribution of risk from climate change and pollution separately.

'We wanted to know if the spatial distribution of these two types of environmental risks are similar and, unfortunately, our results say that in general they are,' they said.

Climate change and toxic pollution interact to create even worse problems, such as warming temperatures increasing rates of heat-related illness and death.

They also act to increase the toxicity of material contaminating different natural environments, scientists said.

The authors of the study added that the demographic, ecological, and social factors at work are interconnected and demonstrated broader patterns of inequality.

Physical geography, capacity for environmental policy and enforcement, and external factors such as firms taking advantage of reduced regulation pay a role in exacerbating the risk facing these poorer countries, the authors explained.

Addressing these impacts on the environment may need a more detailed assessment of each country as risks can vary widely within areas.

The data used in this study do not capture all forms of harm or potential risk from toxic pollution and climate change, only those measured in the initial datasets.

They say the risk is in part due to poorer countries having more relaxed environmental regulations, or being subject to the harmful influence of foreign firms

But the immediate findings clearly point to a need to jointly address the effects of pollution and climate change globally, the team said.

Previous research has also shown that low-income countries face higher risks than high-income countries from toxic pollution and climate change.

This new study was published in the journal PLOS ONE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the COVID-19 pandemic wages on and the academic repercussions are still being felt, high school students - in particular older students - had more social, emotional and academic problems than those who learned in school, a new study suggests.

The research notes that the problems were universal, impacting students of all income levels, as well as race.

On a 100-point scale, in-person students scored a 77.2 rating for social well-being, compared to 74.8 for those who learned remotely.

Emotional and academic well-being scores saw similar discrepancies, with emotional levels for in-person students at 57.4, compared to 55.7 for remote and 78.4 for academic well-being and 77.3 for remote, respectively.

'Notably, the thriving gap was larger among students in 10th through 12th grades than it was among ninth graders,' said study co-author and Temple University professor Laurence Steinberg in a statement.

High school students - in particular older students - had more social, emotional and academic problems than those who learned in school, a new study suggests

On a 100-point scale, in-person students scored a 77.2 rating for social well-being, 57.4 for emotional well-being and 78.4 for academic well-being. Those who learned remotely had scores of 74.8, 55.7 and 77.3, respectively

According to UNICEF, 77 percent of countries around the world used some form of digital instruction for upper secondary education, which includes high school students. Lower levels, such as pre-primary education and primary education, saw 42 percent and 74 percent of digital instruction, respectively.

According to UNICEF, 77 percent of countries around the world used some form of digital instruction for upper secondary education, which includes high school students

'Many news stories have reported on individual stories of teenagers who have suffered from anxiety, depression, and other mental health challenges during the pandemic,' added the study's lead author, University of Pennsylvania professor and Character Lab CEO and founder Angela Duckworth.

'This study gives some of the first empirical evidence of how learning remotely has affected adolescent well-being.'

The results are the findings of a two-part survey that was conducted prior to COVID-19 emerging (February 2020) and its peak (October 2020), with some 6,500 students in Orange County Public Schools in Florida, considered 'a large, diverse school district' questioned.

In an interview with The 74 Million, Duckworth said that COVID-19 distancing 'seems to have a deleterious effect in every aspect of thriving, in every way we were measuring it.'

After the second-part was conducted in October 2020, the families in the district were offered to keep remote learning for the 2020-21 school year or go back to in-person and two-thirds of students in the survey went remotely.

The differences were not drastic, but large enough that it likely impacted millions of students across the country, Duckworth explained.

'As policymakers gear up for national tutoring and remediation programs, which we agree are urgent priorities, we must recognize that our nation's students are not just lagging as performers, they are suffering as people,' Duckworth said in the statement.

'Meeting their intrinsic psychological needs – for social connection, for positive emotion, and authentic intellectual engagement – is a challenge that cannot wait.'

For social well-being, the survey included questions about fitting in at school, if there was an adult in the school that the students could turn to for advice or if there was an adult in the school who wanted the students to do their best.

To measure emotional well-being, questions included how often the students felt happy, relaxed or sad, as well as the state of their lives overall.

Questions that measured academic well-being included asking the students how interested they were in their classes, how important it was to do well and how confident they were they could succeed.

The findings were published in the scientific journal Educational Researcher.

Although no firm data is available just yet, experts believe the 'vast majority' of high school students learned remotely during 2020.

High school students is a segment of the school-going population that policymakers have little information on, especially in light of the fact that many are now eligible to take the vaccines.

However, they often move from one class to another, impacting social distancing and other safety measures put in place, according to US News.

According to the National Center for Education Statistics, there are approximately 56.4 million students in elementary, middle and high schools across the US, with 4.1 million in the 9th grade and about 3.7 million who are expected to graduate high school or have done so already during the 2020-21 school year.

Of those, 3.3 million went to public schools and about 400,000 went to private schools.

The findings coincide with guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

According to the July 9 update from the CDC, students benefit from in-person learning and 'safely returning to in-person instruction in the fall 2021 is a priority.'

Other takeaways from the update include promoting vaccination education, masks should be worn by those who are not fully vaccinated and a recommendation of at least three feet between students within classrooms.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The joint European-Japanese BepiColombo mission released its first image of Venus as the craft made its closest approach to the planet known as 'Earth's evil twin.'

BepiColombo, a collaboration between the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), snapped a black and white image of Earth's twin when it was 977 miles away.

The image shows just a small section of Venus, capturing the detailed curve of the planet, and a few of BepiColomob's components.

The Mercury-bound craft swung by Venus Tuesday after snapping the image and making its closets approach of just 340 miles from the surface of the planet.

Shortly after the flyby, data showed that BepiColombo's solar panels went from -148F to 50F, a sharp rise of 200 degrees, which was due to sunlight reflecting off of Venus.

Dr James O'Donoghue, a planetary scientist at JAXA, commented on the event via Twitter: 'Venus will find a way to be inhospitable to you, even when you fly by it from 550 km [341 miles] away.

Scroll down for videos

BepiColombo, a collaboration between the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), snapped a black and white image of Earth's twin when it was 977 miles away

BepiColombo arrived at Venus for its gravity assist as it travels to Mercury - and did so 33 hours after fellow ESA probe, the Solar Orbiter, made its close approach to Venus - marking a double flyby.

They were both using the gravitational pull of Venus to help them drop a little bit of orbital energy to reach their destinations at the center of the solar system.

The Mercury-bound BepiColombo is on a seven-year mission to study the structure and atmosphere of the innermost planet in the solar system and learn more about how it interacts with the sun.

JAXA tweeted: '[It] will not begin orbiting Mercury until the end of 2025, the spacecraft will make the first swing-by of Mercury this October. Stay tuned!'

The Mercury-bound BepiColombo spacecraft swung by Venus Tuesday after snapping the image and making its closets approach of just 340 miles from the surface of the planet

BepiColombo arrived at Venus for its gravity assist as it travels to Mercury - and did so just 33 hours after fellow ESA probe, the Solar Orbiter, made its close approach to Venus - marking a double flyby

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes.

VENUS: THE BASICS Venus, the second planet from the sun, is a rocky planet about the same size and mass of the Earth. However, its atmosphere is radically different to ours - being 96 per cent carbon dioxide and having a surface temperature of 867°F (464°C) and pressure 92 times that of on the Earth. The inhospitable planet is swaddled in clouds of sulphuric acid that make the surface impossible to glimpse via the visible light spectrum. In the past, Venus likely had oceans similar to Earth's - but these would have vaporized as it underwent a runaway greenhouse effect. The surface of Venus is a dry desertscape, which is periodically changed by volcanic activity. The planet has no moons and orbits the Sun every 224.7 Earth days. Advertisement

The first image of BepiColomob's flyby was take at 9:57 am ET by the Mercury Transfer Module’s Monitoring Camera 3.

The cameras provide black-and-white snapshots in 1024 x 1024 pixel resolution.

'The image has been lightly processed to enhance contrast and use the full dynamic range,' ESA shared in a statement.

'A small amount of optical vignetting is seen in the bottom left of the image.

The image also shows the high-gain antenna of the Mercury Planetary Orbiter and part of the body of the spacecraft.

It was being tracked by Malargüe station in Argentina during its flyby.

'From 187,672,259.248 km away, signals from the spacecraft take over 10 minutes to get to the station,' said ESA.

As it passed into the dayside of the planet, ESA tweeted: 'BepiColombo is feeling the heat as it swoops past the Venus dayside.

'Sunlight reflected from Venus is heating the spacecraft by up to 50 degrees!

'And the reaction wheels used to keep Bepi pointing straight are feeling the pull of the planet’s mighty gravity.'

Solar Orbiter is on its way to study the polar regions of the sun in a bid to better understand its 11-year cycle, and made its approach at 12:42am ET, ESA said, coming within 4,967 of the planet.

That was 33 hours prior to the BepiColombo fly-by of Venus.

Solar Orbiter is a partnership between ESA and NASA to study the polar regions of our host star.

This isn't the first time the sun-observing satellite has visited Venus.

It is scheduled to make repeated gravity assist flybys of the planet throughout its mission in its bid to get close to the star at the heart of the solar system.

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes

During the Venus flybys, it is changing its orbital inclination.

While doing this, it is acting to boost itself out of the ecliptic plane, to get the best – and first – views of the sun's poles.

BepiColombo is a partnership between ESA and JAXA and is on its way to the mysterious innermost planet of the solar system.

To get there, it has required flybys of Earth, Venus and even Mercury itself to get close enough and build up momentum.

BepiColombo, a partnership between ESA and the Japanese space agency JAXA, flew by Venus at 15:48 BST on August 10, coming just 340 miles from the surface of the planet

These flybys, coupled with the spacecraft's solar electric propulsion system, is what is required to steer into Mercury's orbit against the gravitational pull of the sun.

It is not possible to take high-resolution imagery of Venus with the science cameras onboard either mission, so there won't be new pictures of Earth's 'evil twin.'

HOW WILL BEPICOLOMBO GET TO MERCURY? BepiColombo's two orbiters, Japan's Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter and the ESA's Mercury Planetary Orbiter, will be carried together. The carrier will use electric propulsion and gravity-assists at Earth, Venus and Mercury in its 7.2 year journey. Once at Mercury, they will separate and move into their own orbits to make complementary measurements of Mercury's interior, surface, exosphere and magnetosphere. The information will tell us more about the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star, providing a better understanding of the overall evolution of our own Solar System. BepiColombo features three components that will separate: Mercury Transfer Module (MTM) for propulsion, built by the European Space Agency (ESA) Mercury Planetary Orbiter (MPO) built by ESA Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter (MMO) or MIO built by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Advertisement

Solar Orbiter must remain facing the sun, and the main camera onboard BepiColombo is shielded by the transfer module that will deliver the two planetary orbiters to Mercury, according to ESA officials.

However, two of BepiColombo's three monitoring cameras took photos around the time of close approach and in the days after as the planet fades.

The cameras provide black-and-white snapshots in 1024 x 1024 pixel resolution, and are positioned on the Mercury Transfer Module such that they also capture the spacecraft's solar arrays and antennas.

During the approach, Venus filled the entire field of view, but as the spacecraft changes its orientation the planet will be seen passing behind the panels.

The images will be downloaded in batches, one by one, with the first image expected to be available this evening, and the majority tomorrow.

Even though both spacecraft flew within a few thousand miles of Venus and just a day apart, they were separated by over 350,000 miles of open space.

Solar Orbiter has been acquiring data near-constantly since launch in February 2020 with its four instruments that measure the environment around the spacecraft itself.

Both Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo's Mercury Planetary Orbiter and Mercury Magnetospheric Orbiter collected data on the magnetic and plasma environment of Venus from different locations around the planet.

JAXA's Akatsuki spacecraft is already in orbit around Venus, creating a unique constellation of datapoints on the mysterious hot world.

It will take many months to collate the coordinated flyby measurements and analyse them in a meaningful way, so information won't be available straight away, ESA explained.

The data collected during the flybys will also provide useful inputs to ESA's future Venus orbiter, EnVision, which will launch to the planet in the 2030s.

Solar Orbiter, a partnership between ESA and NASA, flew by Venus on August 9, coming about 5,000 miles from the planet at 05:42 BST that morning

Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo both have one more flyby of Venus this year.

BepiColombo will see Mercury for the first time overnight on October 1, making its first of six flybys of Mercury – with this one from just just over 100 miles.

The two planetary orbiters will be delivered into Mercury orbit in late 2025, tasked with studying all aspects of this mysterious inner planet.

This includes its core to surface processes, magnetic field, and exosphere, to better understand the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star.

On November 27, Solar Orbiter will make a final flyby of Earth, coming just under 300 miles from the surface, kicking off the start of its main mission.

Even though both spacecraft were flying within a few thousand miles of Venus and just a day apart, they were separated by over 350,000 miles of open space

Both NASA and the European Space Agency are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin

It will continue to make regular flybys of Venus to progressively increase its orbit inclination to best observe the sun's uncharted polar regions.

Solar scientists say understanding and imaging the polar regions of our star is key to understanding its 11 year activity cycle.

Both NASA and the European Space Agency are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Having a lot of female friends can make men a less attractive prospect to women, a it makes them look like they have 'many options' to choose from, a study has claimed.

This makes the men in question look like they might be 'hard to secure' — and 40 per cent less appealing — the researchers from Australia's Monash University argued.

Furthermore, men who advertise have a lot of women as friends can be seen as lacking in humility, the team concluded.

Having a lot of female friends can make men a less attractive prospect to women, a it makes them look like they have 'many options' to choose from, a study has claimed (stock image)

The study was conducted by psychologists Ryan Anderson and Cagla Tekin of the Monash University in Melbourne, Australia.

'Saying one has a lot of female friends may seem boastful,' said Dr Anderson.

He added that men who report having particularly high numbers of female friends may seem to be exaggerating — which may elicit 'suspicion and/or distrust'.

In their study, the duo showed various women photos of four men and asked them to rate their attractiveness. Each man had previously been judged to be of a similar level of attractiveness by a separate panel of volunteers.

The participants were told that each man was single and had 300 friends on Facebook — and, in some cases, were also informed of how many of these friends were of the opposite sex.

The researchers found that the men with with most women in their social circles (comprising 9 out of every 10 friends) were rated around 40 per cent less attractive that the gentlemen for whom no friendship information had been provided.

When the genders in the experiment were flipped, the team found that having a lot of male friends similarly made women less attractive to men, albeit to a much lesser degree — reducing their perceived attractiveness by only 10 per cent.

In total, the psychologists ran their test of 224 heterosexual men and women.

While having too many friends of the opposite sex was seen as a turn-off, the researchers also found that there were also drawbacks in having too few of them.

Men with the smallest number of women as friends were rated as being 10 per cent less attractive than those for whom no friendship details were given.

Meanwhile, women with the least male friends were rated by men as being seven per cent less attractive.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Evolutionary Psychological Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A pair of scientists are reviving the method of plant-made vaccines to reduce cost and tailor treatments to meet individuals' needs.

Hugues Fausther-Bovendo and Gary Kobinger, Canda and the US, propose using 'molecular farming,' which places DNA that creates proteins inside a plant cell.

The cell is then transformed into an extract to make a vaccine.

Molecular farming was first proposed as an alternative to biomanufacturing in 1986 because all scientists needed was a greenhouse setup, which is much cheaper than bioreactor suites.

This method has shown successful in phase 3 clinical trials for CoVLP, a COVID-19 vaccination candidate, and a vaccine against influenza – both of which would be administered orally and not as a shot.

Scroll down for video

Scientists propose using 'molecular farming,' which places DNA that creates proteins inside a plant cell that is than transformed into an extract to make a vaccine. Pictures is the process being done to make a potential COVID vaccine candidate

'The plant-made vaccines against influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2 are expected to be the first therapeutic proteins produced in whole plants for human use,' Fausther-Bovendo and Kobinger wrote in an article published in Science Magazine.

'The glucocerebrosidase enzyme, produced as an injectable protein drug called taliglucerase alfa for the treatment of Gaucher disease, is produced in a carrot cell culture rather than in actual plants.'

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Preventions (CDC), the most common method for making flu vaccines is using an egg-based manufacturing process – a method that has been used for more than 70 years.

Candidate vaccine viruses (CVVs) are injected into fertilized chicken eggs and incubated for several days so the viruses can replicate.

The fluid containing the virus is harvested from the eggs and used to create the injectable vaccine.

Not only do Fausther-Bovendo and Kobinger repeatedly mention the cost of the traditional method in the Science Magazine article, but they noted that plant-produced proteins give a stronger immune response mainly because they can be taken orally.

The team highlighted clinical trials of both plant-made and traditional vaccines to treat E. coli, hepatitis B virus, rabies lyssavirus, and norovirus, which occurred between 1998 and 2004.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Preventions (CDC) website, the most common method for make flu vaccines is using an egg-based manufacturing process – a method that has been used for more than 70 years

'In these trials, the proportion of immunized individuals who generated an immune response against the desired target was disappointingly lower than in clinical trials involving standard vaccines administered via the parenteral route, the scientists wrote in the article.

'The yield of recombinant proteins produced in plants has since increased substantially, suggesting that new edible plant-made vaccines could now generate meaningful immune responses.'

Given orally, plant-made therapeutics are also interesting to consider, explains Fausther-Bovendo and Kobinger; they may require minimal processing, thus skipping expensive and time-consuming steps in the manufacturing process.

Edible vaccines – still predominantly in the preclinical stage of development – are also currently under development, the authors note.

Compared to proof-of-concept edible vaccines tested decades ago, which generated weak immune responses, new edible plant-made vaccines could now trigger more powerful immune responses, thanks to improved technology.

Because doses for therapeutics are much higher than for vaccines, investment in manufacturing infrastructure needs to increase to achieve large-scale manufacturing of plant therapeutic products, Fausther-Bovendo and Kobinger shared in the article.

Medicago, a Canadian-based biopharmaceutical company, announced in April 2021 that it began testing a new two-dose COVID-19 vaccine that uses tobacco shrub to produce coronavirus-like particles.

It is made using a tobacco plant variant and uses virus-like particles (VLPs).

VLPs, which are molecules that closely resemble authentic native viruses, but are non-infectious because they don't contain genetic material, are added to the soil and absorbed by the plant as it grows.

This is different from the COVID-19 vaccines authorized for emergency use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which target just the spike protein on the outside of the virus, rather than resembling the overall structure of the virus.

It then mimics the shape of the coronavirus to train the immune system to recognize it and mount an immune response.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rating:

Spending $1,000 on a wireless speaker at first sounds absurd.

But think back to an era where music really meant something, and wasn't just a commodity bundled free with your phone.

Naim's incredible Mu-So Qb takes you back those days - where the music captivates and enthralls, rather that simply being something in the background.

Scroll down for video

Inside, there’s the same high-grade signal processor you find in the Naim Mu-so Qb's expensive big brother – and it takes the same throw-everything-at-it approach to music

MU:SO QB DIMENSIONS Width: 8.6 in Depth: 8.3 in Height: 8.3 in Weight: 12.35 lbs Advertisement

Naim’s original, the Mu-so, marked a massive change for wireless, digital music.

It sounded stunning, and boasted incredible volume and more importantly, clarity that no other all in one system could match.

However, it was big, hefty, and cost an eye watering $1499.

Now, Naim has taken the same sound quality and crammed it into a smaller and (slightly) more affordable box.

Setup is easy thanks to a newly redesigned app, and you can even use it to turn the system into a multi room one.

It also offers internet radio and high-quality Bluetooth Apt-X, and the app makes it simple to play music stored on your PC’s hard drive.

Adding new services is also easy - and crucially Spotify Connect and Tidal are included.

This allows the speaker to stream directly itself, without going through your phone.

While many have written it off, Tidal actually offer the highest quality files of any streaming service, and by a significant margin.

MU-SO QB: WHAT'S INSIDE 300 watts of power, with five drivers, two bass radiators and a woofer driven by its own 100-watt amp Connect the Naim Mu-so Qb to your Wi-Fi network and it streams in high quality from Spotify itself (ie, not from your phone) using Spotify Connect Advertisement

Set the Qb up with it, and you'll be in audio nirvana.

One of the problems with the Qb is despite its smaller size, it won't fit in front of a TV, so it really does become a music only option for most.

However, the soundstage it produces is astonishing - clear, with amazing stereo separation for a single speaker, while bass is also excellent in all but the biggest of rooms.

It'll fill all but the biggest of rooms - and I found myself staying up late into the night to listen, much to the horroe of my neighbours.

Design wise, it's extremely simple, with one large dial to control the volume (and it's no ordinary dial, but one weighted to feel great).

There are also a couple of touchscreen buttons on the dial to switch sources, and a USB port to plug in a devices.

Like its predecessor, the Qb is worth every penny.

One problem you will encounter is actually a rather unusual one - the Naim is actually too good at times, making all but the best quality files sound a little lacking.

However, streaming services such as Spotify, and the latest downloads do sound great - while the higher quality lossless files sound absolutely stunning.

Overall, the price tag is a little intimidating, but after spending a bit of time you'll see that you really do get what you pay for - and the Naim mu:so Qb is the best all in one bookshelf speaker I've ever heard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An angler fishing at Jennette's Pier in North Carolina was surprised when the fish he caught had a full mouth of human-like teeth.

The nine-pound sheepshead fish is a common dweller of the Atlantic Ocean and uses its large molars to feast on a variety of oysters, clams and other crustaceans.

Nathan Martin, from South Mills, caught the sheepshead fish using sand fleas as bait.

'It's a very good fight when you're fighting on the line, it's a really good catch, and it tastes very good,' Martin told McClatchy News before adding that he plans to mount the sheepshead on his wall.

An angler fishing at Jennette's Pier in North Carolina was surprised when the fish he caught had a full mouth of human-like teeth

The photos, which were published on Facebook on August 3, later went viral, and many people commented under the post in disbelief after seeing the creature with a mouth full of human-like teeth.

One Facebook user wrote, 'Is this where dentures come from?' while another person said, 'Those fish have the freakiest teeth.'

One person also joked, 'That fish has better teeth than me!'

No one really knows where the fish got its name, but it's been suggested that it's because its teeth also resemble those of sheep.

The nine-pound sheepshead fish is a common dweller of the Atlantic Ocean and uses its large molars to feast on a variety of oysters, clams and other crustaceans. Nathan Martin (right), from South Mills, caught the sheepshead fish using sand fleas as bait

Sheepshead fish can be found on the Gulf and the Atlantic coasts of the United States. And Sheepshead Bay in New York City was even named after the creepy-looking fish, although the species is no longer found that far north

And Sheepshead Bay in New York City was even named after the creepy-looking fish, although the species is no longer found that far north.

The fish is also referred to as the 'convict fish' for its dark stripes that run down its gray body, which looks similar to a prison jump suit.

It can grow up three feet long and has several rows of stubby teeth – the frontal ones closely resembling human teeth – which help crush the shells of prey, according to the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.

Although their teeth look threatening to humans, David Catania, California Academy of Science collections manager for ichthyology, told Snopes: 'I would not hesitate to swim in waters inhabited by these fish.

Another sheepshead fish was pulled from the waters around South Carolina in 2018 and wildlife experts had some fun on Facebook after they posted a photo of an unidentified fish to see if the public could identify it

'They pose no threat to humans unless harassed. Since they are good to eat, sheepshead are targeted by anglers, so the handling of one after capture creates the possibility of being bitten or poked by their sharp dorsal fin spines.'

Another sheepshead fish was pulled from the waters around South Carolina in 2018 and wildlife experts had some fun on Facebook after they posted a photo of an unidentified fish to see if the public could identify it.

'You'll need a saltwater fishing license to catch me! I like to hang out near rocks, jetties, reefs, and even bridges. I'm also known as the convict fish because of my black and white stripes,' biologists wrote in the caption in May 2018.

'The coolest thing about me? I have human-like incisors and molars to help crush my food. I like shrimp and oysters just like you do!' the post continued.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Psyche asteroid is packed full of precious metals and could be worth more than $10,000 quadrillion (£8,072 quadrillion), new measurements of its surface temperature have confirmed.

Psyche is a 124 mile-wide space rock that orbits the sun in the asteroid belt, a donut-shaped region of space between Mars and Jupiter containing over a million rocks.

NASA is sending a mission to study the metal rich asteroid in 2026 in an effort to determine its origins, with some speculation it was the core of an early planet.

To help in this mission, a new temperature map has been created of Psyche by a team from Caltech in Pasadena, California to provide insight into its surface properties.

Normally, infrared images of a space rock provide a single pixel of data, but using the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) in Chile, researchers were able to get 50 pixel resolution and learn more about the surface of the space rock.

They were able to determine it has a metallic surface made up of at least 30 per cent metal and that the rocks on the surface are peppered with metal grains.

It is hoped this will help NASA in its mission, as it will have a more detailed starting point in its observations.

The first high-resolution measurements of the surface temperature of asteroid Psyche confirms it is packed full of $10,000 quadrillion worth of precious metal

To help in this mission a new temperature map has been created of Psyche by a team from Caltech in Pasadena, California to provide insight into its surface properties

NASA PSYCHE MISSION: TIMELINE AND KEY EVENTS KEY EVENTS Launch: 2022

Solar electric cruise: 3.5 years

Arrival at Psyche: 2026

Observation Period: 21 months in orbit, mapping and studying Psyche's properties TIMELINE 2022 - Launch of Psyche spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center, Florida

2023 - Mars Flyby of Psyche spacecraft

2026 - Psyche spacecraft arrives in asteroid's orbit

2026-2027 - Psyche spacecraft orbits the Psyche asteroid Advertisement

Psyche 16 was originally discovered in 1852 and is believed to be the remnants of a protoplanet destroyed by 'hit-and-run collisions' when the solar system was forming.

Unlike other rocky or icy bodies, Psyche 16 is suspected to be made of mostly iron and nickel, and could be worth quadrillions of dollars in potential mining value.

Ahead of the NASA mission, the team from California carried out a close examination of the millimeter-wavelength emissions from the asteroid.

This allowed them to produce the first temperature map of the space rock, providing new insight into its surface properties.

'The findings are a step toward resolving the mystery of the origin of this unusual object, which has been thought by some to be a chunk of the core of an ill-fated protoplanet,' according to the study authors.

Psyche is the largest of the M-Type asteroids, an enigmatic class of asteroids that are thought to be metal rich and therefore potentially may be fragments of the cores of proto-planets that broke up as the solar system formed.

'The early solar system was a violent place, as planetary bodies coalesced and then collided with one another while settling into orbits around the sun,' says Caltech's Katherine de Kleer, assistant professor of planetary science and astronomy.

'We think that fragments of the cores, mantles, and crusts of these objects remain today in the form of asteroids. If that's true, it gives us our only real opportunity to directly study the cores of planet-like objects.'

Studying such relatively tiny objects that are so far from Earth, with Psyche as far as 200 million miles away, poses a significant challenge to planetary scientists.

Typically, thermal observations from Earth - which measure the light emitted by an object itself rather than light from the sun reflected off of that object - are in infrared wavelengths and can produce only 1-pixel images of asteroids.

However, that single pixel contains a lot of information on an asteroid, such as the thermal inertia, or how fast it heats up in sunlight and cools in darkness.

An artists' depiction of what the 16 Psyche spacecraft will look like. It is slated to launch in August 2022

Nasa plans to explore a $10,000 quadrillion asteroid that could cause the world's economy to COLLAPSE It may be 230 million miles (370 million km) away from Earth, but this asteroid could be worth a small fortune. 16 Psyche is one of the most mysterious objects in our solar system, and scientists could soon be getting a close-up view thanks to a newly confirmed Nasa mission. If the asteroid could be transported back to Earth, the iron alone would be worth $10,000 quadrillion (£8,072 quadrillion). It's value would be large enough to destroy commodity prices and cause the world's economy - worth $73.7 trillion (£59.5 trillion) – to collapse. Lindy Elkins-Tanton the lead scientist on the Nasa mission and the director of Arizona State University's School of Earth and Space Exploration, said: '16 Psyche is the only known object of its kind in the solar system, and this is the only way humans will ever visit a core. 'We learn about inner space by visiting outer space.' Dr Elkins-Tanton has calculated that the iron in 16 Psyche alone, would be worth $10,000 quadrillion (£8,072 quadrillion). Assuming the market for asteroid materials is on Earth, this could cause the value of precious metals to plummet, completely devaluing all holdings including those of Governments, and all companies involved in mining, distributing and trading such commodities. Ultimately, it could lead to the collapse of the entire economy. Advertisement

'Low thermal inertia is typically associated with layers of dust, while high thermal inertia may indicate rocks on the surface," says Caltech's Saverio Cambioni.

'However, discerning one type of landscape from the other is difficult.'

Viewing the each surface location at many times of day helps to providee greeater levels of detail and an interpretation with less ambiguity.

This in terms provides a more reliable prediction of the landscape before the arrival of the NASA probe - allowing the mission to gather more reliable data.

De Kleer and Cambioni, together with co-author Michael Shepard of Bloomsburg University in Pennsylvania, took advantage of the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) in Chile to obtain such data.

The array of 66 radio telescopes enabled the team to map the thermal emissions from Psyche's entire surface at a resolution of 18 miles (30 kilometres).

In the dataset each pixel is 18 miles x 18 miles, and when combined generate an image of the asteroid composed of about 50 pixels.

This provides significantly better resolution and data than the typical single pixel images obtained of the surface of these asteroid belt space rocks.

It was possible as ALMA observed the space rock at millimeter wavelengths, longer than the infrared wavelengths used in previous observations of the rock.

The use of longer wavelengths allowed the researchers to combine the data collected from the 66 telescopes to create a much larger effective telescope; the larger a telescope, the higher the resolution of the images it produces.

The study confirmed that Psyche's thermal inertia is high compared to that of a typical asteroid, indicating it has an unusually dense or conductive surface.

When de Kleer, Cambioni, and Shepard analysed the data, they also found that Psyche's thermal emission, that is the amount of heat it radiates, is 60 per cent of what would be expected from a typical surface with thermal inertia.

Because surface emission is affected by the presence of metal on the surface, their finding indicates that Psyche's surface is no less than 30 per cent metal.

Normally infrared images of a space rock provide a single pixel of data, but using the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) in Chile, researchers were able to get 50 pixel resolution and learn more about the surface of the space rock

An analysis of the polarisation of the emission helped the researchers to roughly determine what form that metal takes.

A smooth solid surface emits well-organised polarised light, but the light emitted by Psyche was scattered - suggesting surface rocks are peppered with metallic grains.

'We've known for many years that objects in this class are not, in fact, solid metal, but what they are and how they formed is still an enigma,' de Kleer says.

The findings reinforce alternative proposals for Psyche's surface composition, including that Psyche could be a primitive asteroid that formed closer to the sun than it is today instead of a core of a fragmented protoplanet.

It is hoped this will help NASA in its mission due to launch next year and arrive at the rock in 2026, as it will have a more detailed starting point in its observations

WHY IS IT WORTH SO MUCH? Dr Elkins-Tanton has calculated that the iron in 16 Psyche alone, would be worth $10,000 quadrillion (£8,072 quadrillion). Assuming the market for asteroid materials is on Earth, this could cause the value of precious metals to plummet, completely devaluing all holdings including those of governments, and all companies involved in mining, distributing and trading such commodities. Ultimately, it could lead to the collapse of the entire economy. Speaking to Global News Canada, Dr Elkins-Tanton said: 'Even if we could grab a big metal piece and drag it back here … what would you do? 'Could you kind of sit on it and hide it and control the global resource — kind of like diamonds are controlled corporately — and protect your market? 'What if you decided you were going to bring it back and you were just going to solve the metal resource problems of humankind for all time? This is wild speculation obviously.' Advertisement

The techniques described in this study provide a new perspective on asteroid surface compositions.

The team is now expanding its scope to apply these techniques to other large objects in the asteroid belt.

The study was enabled by a related project by the team led by Michael Shepard at Bloomsburg University that utilised de Kleer's data in combination with data from other telescopes, including Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico, to pin down the size, shape, and orientation of Psyche.

That in turn allowed the researchers to determine which pixels that had been captured actually represented the asteroid's surface.

Shepard's team was scheduled to observe Psyche again at the end of 2020, but damage from cable failures shut the telescope down before the observations could be made.

Psyche was discovered by Italian astronomer Annibale de Gasparis on March 17, 1852. He named the asteroid for Psyche, the Greek goddess of the soul who was born mortal and married Eros (Roman Cupid), the god of Love.

This intriguing asteroid is now the primary target of NASA's Psyche mission, launching next year and arriving at the rock in early 2026.

Over 21 months in orbit, the spacecraft will map and study 16 Psyche’s properties using a multispectral imager, a gamma-ray and neutron spectrometer, a magnetometer, and a radio instrument (for gravity measurement).

The mission’s goal is, among other things, to determine whether Psyche is indeed the core of a planet-sized object or a large metal asteroid.

The findings have been published in the Planetary Science Journal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A bejeweled 6th century sword adornment was found in east England by an amateur archaeologist with a metal detector.

The artifact, made of gold and garnet, is known a 'sword pyramid' or 'sword harness,' and dates to between 560 and 630 AD when Norfolk was part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of East Anglia.

The small mounds are often ornately decorated and would be attached to the end of bands wrapped around a sword.

This one was uncovered in Breckland, Norfolk, in April, where it was turned over to the Norfolk Coroner's Office, as required by law.

Sword pyramids always came in pairs, Finds liaison officer Helen Geake told BBC News, so just uncovering just one 'was like losing one earring - very annoying.'

Scroll down for video

A 'sword pyramid' made of gold and garnet was found in Norfolk, England. It dates to between 560 and 630 AD when Norfolk was part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of East Anglia

With the rise in metal detectorists, finding sword pyramids has become increasingly common.

Rather than the result of a burial or death in battle, Geake imagines many were dislodged accidentally.

'Lords would have been careening about the countryside on their horses and they'd lose them,' Geake said.

An Anglo-Saxon civilization, East Anglia emerged in the 6th century but was finally absorbed into the Kingdom of England in 918 AD.

It's not entirely clear what purpose these mounds served, but experts believed they helped secure a sword to its scabbard, perhaps event to prevent a hasty withdrawal of a weapon

The pieces of garnet embedded in the Norfolk pyramid are from India or Sri Lanka, she added, representing a distance of more than 5,000 and underscoring the incredible global trade occurring at the time.

Though tiny—about 0.4-inch by 0.4-inch and weighing just 3 grams—the mount is of fine quality, with incredibly fine foil work on the back. It would have belonged to someone of the upper class, Geake said.

'Somebody in the entourage of a great lord or Anglo-Saxon king, and he would have been a lord or thegn [a medieval nobleman] who might have found his way into the history books,' she told the BBC.

'They or their lord had access to gold and garnets and to high craftsmanship.'

Pictured: Sword pyramids, which always came in pairs, were discovered in the 1930s at Sutton Hoo, an Anglo-Saxon burial site

Pictured: King Rædwald (c.560 - c.624), an East Anglian king suspected to be buried in Sutton Hoo

A more ornate pair now on view at the British Museum was discovered in the 1930s at Sutton Hoo, an Anglo-Saxon burial site popularized by the recent Netflix movie The Dig.

According to the National Trust, an East Anglian king or warrior was laid to rest at Sutton Hoo in a 90 foot-ship 'surrounded by his extraordinary treasures.'

It's not exactly clear what the sword harness' purpose is, but archaeologists believe they may have helped keep a weapon holstered in its scabbard, 'possibly acting as a check on an angry reaction,' Geake said.

Discovering one on his first post-lockdown outings was the 'find of lifetime,' detectorist Jamie Harcourt told Treasure Hunting.

'It is very similar to those examples recovered during the world famous 1939 excavation at Sutton-Hoo,' he said. 'The garnet workmanship is also reminiscent of several items in the Staffordshire Hoard matrix.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It may look like a harmless flowering plant, but hemlock in the US that came from Europe can be deadly if consumed – and it has spread to 43 states.

The toxic hemlock produces white flowers at the top, which resembles Queen Anne’s Lace, and was first introduced in the 1800s as a garden plant.

It contains poisonous seeds and sap that can cause welts and blisters on skin when touched, but also results in respiratory failure if eaten.

Each part of the plant contains toxic alkaloids that slowly poison the nerve-muscle junctions and cause the failure of the muscles.

Infestations are usually found along roadsides, ditches and meadows, but wildlife officials observed the plants spreading into more populated areas.

Dan Shaver, with Indiana's Natural Resources Conservation Service, told USA Today: ‘That movement is a bit scary to me because this plant is very toxic and it’s more of an opportunity for kids to play with it and pets to eat it.

‘It is not a plant you want around your home or in your local park.’

It contains poisonous seeds and sap that can cause welts and blisters on skin when touched, but also results in respiratory failure if eaten. Each part of the plant contains toxic alkaloids that slowly poison the nerve-muscle junctions and cause the failure of the muscles

The plant typically begins to spread during this time of year and one can produce up to 30,000 poisonous seeds, which eventually turn into white flowers.

Poison hemlock is a member of the carrot or parsley and in its first year, the plant produces a basal rosette.

In its second year, it is distinguished by its long white taproot, hollow stem with purple spots, highly dissected carrot-like leaves, large white umbrella-like inflorescence, and a foul smell when crushed.

Kevin Tungesvick, a senior ecologist with Eco Logic, an environmental restoration company, told USA Today that the hemlock has spread too much that it is near impossible to eradicate.

It may look like a harmless flowering plant, but hemlock in the US that came from Europe can be deadly if consumed – and it has spread to 43 states

According to the National Park Service , the hemlock can grow up to six feet tall with leaves that live like a fern and purple-splotched stems. The flowers are borne in many umbrella-shaped clusters at the end of the flower stalks

According to the National Park Service, the hemlock can grow up to six feet tall with leaves that live like a fern and purple-splotched stems.

The flowers are borne in many umbrella-shaped clusters at the end of the flower stalks.

And underneath each cluster are four to six brown bracts.

Each part of the hemlock contains toxic alkaloids that impact muscle nerves when consumed and could lead to respiratory failure.

Symptoms from being poisoned include trembling, salivation, pupil dilation, muscle paralysis and loss of speech - and they can appear within 30 minutes of ingesting the plant.

And there is no antidote for hemlock poisoning.

The plant is not just a threat to humans, but also animals grazing in pastures where the plant may have taken hold or a curious pet sniffing in the yard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

NASA's Ingenuity made history as the first powered vehicle to fly on another planet and with this great success, the space agency is already looking to design its predecessor that aims to be bigger and better.

The roboticists at NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory have been sketching out what they call the Mars Science Helicopter (MSH), a 66-pound hexacopter capable of collecting samples from the Red Planet.

Ingenuity, on the other hand, weighs just four pounds and features only two rotors.

Unlike Ingenuity, which is a scout for the Perseverance rover, MSH would carry and deploy scientific payloads and be given its own formation on Mars to explore for ancient signs of life.

NASA could deploy the hexacopter in Mawrth Vallis, a 3.5 billion-year-old waterflow channel once home to flowing rivers, lakes and wetlands.

On Earth, minerals found at sites similar to Mawrth Vallis preserve organic material – and that is what NASA hopes to find on Mars.

Scroll down for video

The Mars Science Helicopter (MSH) (left) is a 66-pound hexacopter capable of collecting samples from the Red Planet. Ingenuity (right), on the other hand, weighs just four pounds and features only two rotors

The helicopter would scout above the promising locations over a wide area, and then use an arm and microdrill to bring samples back to an accompanied lander.

J. (Bob) Balaram, Ingenuity Chief Engineer at JPL, told IEEE Spectrum: 'This is a brand-new way of looking at Mars.

'Aerial mobility gives you reach, range, and resolution. You can reach places that no wheeled vehicle can get to. You can travel kilometers every day. And depending on what height you fly at, you can get whatever resolution you want with your instruments. We were just telling the scientists, think big.'

Along with collecting rock samples, NASA sees MSH mapping out subsurface water ice over large areas.

NASA could deploy the hexacopter in Mawrth Vallis, which is a 3.5 billion-year-old waterflow channel once homes for flowing rivers, lakes and wetlands. On Earth, minerals found at sites like these preserve organic material – and that is what NASA hopes to find on Mars

The helicopter would scout above the for promising locations over a wide area, and then use an arm and microdrill to bring samples back to an accompanied lander

'One region with many icy scarps is Milankovič crater, ~75 km in diameter and located 212°E, 54.7°N at –4000 m elevation15,27,' Balaram and his team wrote in a whitepaper.

'Landscapes in and around the crater indicate periglacial and/or glacial activity, supporting widespread ground ice.

'Shallow ground ice is also a valuable resource for future human exploration13. We propose a mission employing a standalone hexacopter to perform proximate inspection of the icy scarps and the surrounding area, and to conduct vertical profiles to quantify volatile exchange with the atmosphere.'

Along with collecting rock samples, NASA sees MSH mapping out subsurface water ice over large areas

The concept MSH would be able to carry up to 11 pounds of payload, top speeds of 67mph and hover up to five minutes each flight. And just like Ingenuity, MSH would include solar panels to generate its power from the sun

Although MSH is still a sketch in a whitepaper, Balaram says the concept for the vehicle itself 'isn't just a cartoon—it's a serious engineering effort.'

The proposed MSH would be able to carry up to 11 pounds of payload, top speeds of 67mph and hover up to five minutes each flight.

Just as with Ingenuity, MSH would include solar panels to generate its power from the sun.

JPL has yet to reveal when and if it will begin developing MSH, but the agency is still monitoring Ingenuity on Mars.

The small rotocopter performed its 11th flight on August 5, which saw it fly 1,250 feet for 130 seconds as it prepares for a series of reconnaissance missions for the Perseverance rover, which is exploring the Jezero Crater in search of ancient signs of life.

Ingenuity flew for about two minutes before landing in a region scientists have dubbed South Séítah.

This is a patch of ground on the floor of Mars' Jezero Crater which has sandy ripples that NASA scientists fear could be very challenging for the rover.

In a tweet, JPL said: '#MarsHelicopter has safely flown to a new location! Ingenuity flew for 130.9 seconds and traveled about 380 meters before landing at a spot that will set up a series of future reconnaissance flights to help @NASAPersevere in its search for ancient microbial life.'

Perseverance is currently heading south from its landing spot on the Jezero Crater, while Ingenuity is scouting locations to help it plot its way on the ground.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk’s SpaceX is another step closer to sending humans to Mars – the firm stacked its Starship onto of the Super Heavy booster for the first time on Friday.

The combined craft measures a towering 400 feet tall, making it the tallest rocket in history. And with the orbital launch stand that measures 75 feet, the entire system is larger than the Great Pyramid in Giza.

A massive crane picked up Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20) and slowly lowered it on top of booster early Friday morning, after Super Heavy was brought to the launch pad at SpaceX’s site in Boca Chica, Texas on Wednesday.

Super Heavy is the first stage of SpaceX's two-stage, fully reusable Starship system, which will be used to send people and cargo to Mars and other distant planets.

The upper, or second stage, is the 165-foot-tall Starship.

Musk, the CEO and cofounder of SpaceX, has calculated that to reach his very ambitious goal of putting one million humans on Mars by the mid-2020s, his Starship rockets would need to conduct around three flights a day and a total of 1,000 flights a year.

Scroll down for videos

Elon Musk’s SpaceX is another step closer to sending humans to Mars – the firm stacked its Starship onto of the Super Heavy booster for the first time on Friday. The combined craft measures a towering 400 feet tall

SpaceX's Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20), which is set for an orbital launch later this year, was rolled out Thursday, a day after the Super Heavy booster was lowered onto the launch pad.

On Wednesday, Musk tweeted three pictures of a giant crane hoisting the booster, including its 29 massive Raptor engines, onto the pad, noting 'Mechazilla will do this for future rockets, but it's not quite ready.'

Mechazilla will eventually be the Starship tower that catches the giant booster following a launch.

The Super Heavy, also known as Booster 4, is set to perform a series of pressurization and engine tests, and if all goes to plan, will eventually launch with SN20 at its helm, Space.com reports.

A massive crane picked up Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20) and slowly lowered it on top of booster early Friday morning, after Super Heavy was brought to the launch pad at SpaceX’s site in Boca Chica, Texas on Wednesday

SpaceX's Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20), which is set for an ambitious orbital launch rolled out to the firm's in Boca testing facility in Chica, Texas Thurs, a day after the Super Heavy was lowered onto the launch pad

SpaceX has yet to announce a date for the launch, but a filing with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) states it is targeting a six-month period as of June 20.

However, the Musk-led firm is still waiting on an environmental review from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), which could take months to be cleared.

The filing also revealed how the orbital launch would play out, starting with the Super Heavy Booster taking off and firing for 169 seconds, before allowing Starship to take its own journey, SpaceNews reports.

The booster would 'softly land' in the Gulf of Mexico, about 20 miles from the shore.

Starship would use its Raptor engines to soar into orbit and splash down in the Pacific Ocean, 62 miles northwest of the Hawaiian island of Kauai.

CEO Elon Musk proudly shared three pictures Wednesday of a giant crane hoisting the booster, including its 29 massive Raptor engines, onto the pad

Musk's dream, however, is on hold until SpaceX receives approval from the FAA, but that has not stopped the billionaire from preparing for the mission.

SpaceX has completed several tests on the 160-foot Starship upper stage, with the most recent, SN15, landing on the launch pad after a short high-altitude flight.

However, this will be the first test of the full Starship system, including the booster stage.

Super Heavy is the first stage of SpaceX's two-stage, fully reusable Starship system, which is will be used to send people and cargo to Mars and other distant planets - and the upper stage is a 165-foot-tall Starship

In 2020, Musk told SpaceX employees that Starship progress was a top priority, with progress accelerating 'dramatically and immediately.'

That resulted in a rapid increase in Starship prototypes being built, often with a new prototype ready before the previous one had even been tested.

The test flights have ranged from static firing the engines, to launching up to six miles into the air and attempting to land back down on the launch pad.

SpaceX is working with the FCC, US Air Force, NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration for the flight to arrange the safest time to launch.

One of SpaceX's key goals is to ensure that the Starship rockets are reusable, and future tests will see both stages return to the launch pad, rather than the ocean.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The mystery of a Finnish warrior buried in women's clothing 1,000 years ago may have been solved after DNA tests revealed it could have been an intersex person with an extra X chromosome.

The grave in Suontaka Vesitorninmäki, Hattula was first discovered in 1968 during a digging project for a water pipe, and has baffled experts ever since.

It had been thought the Middle Ages grave was the final resting place of either a high-ranking female or a double burial of a man and woman.

But scientists now believe it was just one person, buried with weapons and jewellery, who had an abnormal number of sex chromosomes.

Scroll down for video

Discovery: The mystery of a Finnish warrior buried in women's clothing 1,000 years ago may have been solved by new DNA tests. The grave is depicted in this artist's impression above

The warrior was buried on a soft feather blanket with valuable furs, trinkets and brooches (pictured), pointing to high social status. There were also two swords in the Middle Ages grave

The grave in Suontaka Vesitorninmäki, Hattula (pictured) dates back to between AD1050 and AD1300

WHAT IS KLINEFELTER SYNDROME? Klinefelter syndrome is a non-hereditary genetic condition where a person is born with an extra X chromosome. Usually, a female is born with 2 X chromosomes (XX) and a male has 1 X and 1 Y (XY). But in Klinefelter syndrome, a person has an extra copy of the X chromosome (XXY). They are still genetically male, and often will not realise they have this extra chromosome, but it can cause enlarged breast growth, infertility, diminished muscle mass, and reduced body and facial hair. Klinefelter syndrome affects around 1 in every 660 males. Advertisement

Tests of DNA and soil samples suggest the individual had a genetic condition where males are born with an extra X chromosome, known as Klinefelter syndrome.

A person with XXY chromosomes is still genetically male, and often will not realise they have this extra chromosome, but it can cause enlarged breast growth, infertility, diminished muscle mass, and reduced body and facial hair.

Today the condition affects around 1 in every 660 males.

The study by archaeologists from the University of Turku suggests the fighter could have been non-binary.

However, people who identify as non-binary are usually born with bodies that fit typical definitions of male and female, meaning the term intersex is a better description for the Finnish warrior.

Intersex people have anatomy or genes that don't fit typical definitions of male and female, as can be the case with Klinefelter syndrome.

Elina Salmela, a postdoctoral researcher from the University of Helsinki, said: 'According to current data, it is likely that the individual found in Suontaka had the chromosomes XXY, although the DNA results are based on a very small set of data.'

The warrior was wearing typical feminine clothes of the Middle Ages and buried on a soft feather blanket with valuable furs, trinkets and brooches, researchers said, pointing to high social status.

Two swords were also found, including a hiltless sword on the skeleton's left hip.

The grave in Suontaka Vesitorninmäki, Hattula dates back to between AD1050 and AD1300 and was first discovered in 1968 during a digging project for a water pipe.

'The buried individual seems to have been a highly respected member of their community,' said Ulla Moilanen from the University of Turku in southwestern Finland.

Archaeologist also discovered that only one of the two swords found in the grave belonged to the original burial setting. They suspect the second (pictured) was hidden in the grave later

This image shows how the skeleton, swords and other objects were found and a reconstruction

The grave in Suontaka Vesitorninmäkim was first discovered in 1968 during a digging project

'They had been laid in the grave on a soft feather blanket with valuable furs and objects.'

She added: 'If the characteristics of the Klinefelter syndrome were evident on the person, they might not have been considered strictly a female or a male in the Early Middle Ages community.

'The abundant collection of objects buried in the grave is a proof that the person was not only accepted but also valued and respected. However, biology does not directly dictate a person's self-identity.'

Researchers also discovered that only one of the two swords found in the grave belonged to the original burial setting.

They suspect the second, which had a bronze handle, was hidden in the grave at a later date.

'This also emphasises the importance of the person and their memory for their community,' Moilanen said.

The study has been published in the European Journal of Archaeology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The International Space Station (ISS) received a new module Thursday when Russia docked its 22-ton Nauka Multipurpose Laboratory Module at 9:29am ET – the first time in a decade that a new part has been sent to the floating space lab.

Nauka, which means 'science' in Russian' launched on July 21 atop a Russian Proton rocket. This rocket also carried the new European Robotic Arm, or ERA, a 16-foot-long two-handed robot that can move freely outside of the ISS.

After eight days in free-flight, the uncrewed 43-foot-long module linked up to the port on the Earth-facing Russian segment of the ISS.

Nauka will be a new science facility, docking port and spacewalk airlock for future operations, along with providing additional crew quarters, a galley and a toilet.

The new module will occupy the area vacated by the Pirs docking compartment, with the attached Progress 77 spacecraft which had called the ISS home for the past 20 years until Monday - the crew released it from the ship and sent it into space.

Shortly after docking, there was unexpected thruster burns at 12:45pm ET on Nauka that caused it to move out of its proper position, Space Flight Now reports.

The station drifted about 45 degrees out of its correct orientation, but attitude control has been restored, according to Rob Navias, a NASA spokesperson, who also noted that the ISS crew was not in any danger during the incident.

Scroll down for video

The International Space Station (ISS) received a new module Thursday when Russia docked its 22-ton Nauka Multipurpose Laboratory Module at 9:29am ET – the first time in a decade that a new part has been sent to the space ship

The new modular completed the docking process using its autonomous navigation system, along with the help of cosmonaut Oleg Novitsky, who guided it through the final approach while on the ISS.

'Congratulations, that was not an easy docking,' Russia's mission control radioed Novitsky about three hours before the unexpected thruster burn.

Russian crewmembers on the ISS have done two spacewalks to connect cables in preparation for Nauka's arrival.

For Nauka to be prepared for operation, it will require a long series of maneuvers, including up to 11 spacewalks beginning in early September.

Nauka, which means 'science,' launched on July 21 atop a Russian Proton rocket (pictured), which also carried the new European Robotic Arm, or ERA, a 16-foot-long two-handed robot that can move freely outside of the ISS

Its launch, initially scheduled for 2007, had been repeatedly delayed because of technical problems.

NASA commentator Rob Navias said the new module 'will provide roll control for the International Space Station; it will provide propellant transfer between the Progress vehicles — the unpiloted cargo ships — that will arrive in the months and years to come; and it will serve as a docking port for piloted Soyuz and unpiloted Progress vehicles.'

'It will also serve as a docking port for a node module — a multi-hatched docking port — that is to be launched by the Russians later this year for additional vehicles and components to be attached to it, as the ever-expanding Russian segment of the International Space Station continues,' Navias added.

Nauka will be a new science facility, docking port and spacewalk airlock for future operations, along with provide additional crew quarters, a galley and toilet. Pictured is the module preparing for launch

The Nauka module also serves as a base of operations for the European Robotic Arm, a 36-foot-long manipulator built by the European Space Agency (ESA) to become the first exterior-mounted appendage designed specifically to service the Russian segment of the station.

The module will also provide an additional crew quarters, a new toilet and house water and oxygen regeneration equipment, improving the conditions of cosmonauts' stays on the station and increasing the safety of the entire ISS crew.

The last time the ISS was upgraded was in 2011, when space shuttle Discovery delivered a bus-size storage room, known as the Permanent Multipurpose Module (PMM), to the orbiting lab.

PMM is 21 feet long and 15 feet wide, and provided astronauts with more than 2,470 cubic feet additional storage space.

After eight days in free-flight, the uncrewed 43-foot-long module linked up to the port on the Earth-facing Russian segment of the ISS

The new module will occupy the space vacated by the Pirs docking compartment (pictured), with the attached Progress 77 spacecraft which had called the ISS home for the past 20 years until Monday when it was released from the ship and sent into space

Nauka now joins four other pressurized modules to comprise the Russian segment of the International Space Station. In addition to the Zvezda service module and Zarya FGB, the segment also has two mini-research modules, Poisk and Rassvet. Nauka is Russia's largest contribution (by size) to the station and the country's first new addition since 2010, CollectSpace reports.

Together with the US operating segment, the space station now has a total of 14 pressurized modules.

The International Space Station is currently operated by NASA astronauts Mark Vande Hei, Shane Kimbrough and Megan McArthur; Oleg Novitsky and Pyotr Dubrov of Russia´s Roscosmos space corporation; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency astronaut Akihiko Hoshide and European Space Agency astronaut Thomas Pesquet.

In 1998, Russia launched the station´s first module, Zarya, which was followed in 2000 by another big module, Zvezda, and three smaller modules in the following years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A highly concerning new study lays bare the danger of repeated head impacts for rugby players.

After performing scans of 44 elite adult rugby players, experts found 23 per cent had abnormalities in brain structure, specifically in white matter and blood vessels of the brain.

White matter mainly comprises the neural pathways, the long extensions of the nerve cells, and is crucial to our cognitive ability.

The study also found 50 per cent of the rugby players had an unexpected reduction in brain volume.

Non-profit the Drake Foundation, which backed the study, is now calling for immediate changes in rugby protocols to ensure long-term welfare of elite players.

Contact sports including rugby already been under the radar for their potential to have irreversible effects on the brain and even lead to dementia.

There's been a growing concern that contact sports can lead to long-term problems. Pictured, Scottish player Zander Fagerson during a match between the British & Irish Lions and DHL Stormers at Cape Town Stadium on July 17, 2021

The Drake Foundation has invested more than £2.2 million into researching the short- and long-term impact of sport on brain health in rugby and football.

'I have invested in research into the relationship between head impacts in sport and player brain health for almost a decade because I have been concerned about the long-term brain health of sportspeople, including elite rugby players,' said founder James Drake.

'Common sense dictates that the number and ferocity of impacts, both in training and actual play, need to be significantly reduced.

'These latest results add further support to this notion, particularly when coupled with existing findings across sport and anecdotal evidence.'

Drake said the game of rugby has 'changed beyond all recognition' since it was professionalised in the 1990s, becoming more dangerous.

'Players are now generally bigger and more powerful, so we have to be mindful of all the ramifications that increased impacts will have on their bodies,' he said.

'Seeing younger players suffer with the consequences of that, I am not convinced that the game is safer now than it was when I started The Drake Foundation in 2014.

'More must be done to protect players, and without delay.'

White matter, the paler tissue towards the centre of the brain, speeds up signals between the cells. Grey matter is mostly found on outer-most layer of the brain, or cortex, and serves to process information

Dr Virginia Newcombe at the University of Cambridge, who was not involved with the study, said there's been a growing concern contact sports involving repeated blows to the head lead to long-term problems.

'These may range from problems with mood and thinking, including in the most severe cases a type of dementia commonly known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy,' she said.

'So far the diagnosis of CTE has largely been made post-mortem – after death.

THE DRAKE RUGBY BIOMARKER STUDY The Drake Foundation Rugby Biomarker Study started in 2015, involving elite rugby players from a number of Premiership and Championship rugby union and rugby league teams. The study has involved the collection of blood, saliva and urine in an effort to uncover potential biomarkers of concussion injuries, as well as using advanced neuroimaging techniques and cognitive testing. The project is investigating any changes associated with participation in elite rugby. Advertisement

'However, being able to detect injury while a player is still playing is key to be able to offer earlier advice and treatment, manage symptoms appropriately – as misdiagnosis is common – and improve the long-term outcomes of these players.'

Today's results come from the Drake Rugby Biomarker Study, undertaken by researchers at Imperial College London, University College London, the Rugby Football Union and clubs across rugby union and rugby league in the UK.

The Drake Rugby Biomarker Study assessed 41 male and three female elite rugby players, all of whom had their data anonymised.

The research team used advanced neuroimaging techniques to look at the brains of the players in comparison with control participants.

Techniques included advanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), including diffusion tensor imaging, which allows assessment of microstructural damage.

Increased presence of small microhaemorrhages (bleeds) among the players may indicate damage, and potentially neurodegeneration – a loss of nerve cells – which is characteristic of diseases including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.

Derek Hill, a professor of medical imaging science at University College London, who was not involved in the study, pointed out that brain differences might not be damage.

'The MRI methods they use are sensitive to changes, but are not specific to the cause of the change,' he said.

'Brain scans can be changed by factors other than irreversible brain damage.

'For example, dehydration and some medicines can result in change in fluid balance in the brain that can be picked up by advanced MRI.'

Rugby has 'changed beyond all recognition' since the 1990s, according to the Drake Foundation. Pictured, Jamie Roberts of the British and Irish Lions (left) with South Africa's Jean de Villiers during the second rugby union test match in Pretoria, June 2009

Even if the results are indicative of brain damage, the long term implications of this damage 'are not clear', Professor Hill added.

'A longer study would be needed to determine of the brain changes lead to harmful long term effects,' he said.

CONCUSSIONS IN RUGBY As a contact sport, rugby does involve frequent body impacts and a risk of accidental head impacts, and therefore a significant potential risk of concussion. According to the data collected through the RFU's Community Injury Surveillance & Prevention Programme (CRISP) in age grade rugby (age 15 – 18) the most recent rate shown equates to 1 concussion per team every 10 games and 1 concussion per team every 25 games in adult male rugby. In professional rugby it is 1 every 2-3 team games. The rise in the rates seen since 2012/13 are almost certainly due to the increased awareness and the much lower threshold for suspecting concussion, and reflect the success of the awareness and education programmes, and media coverage. Source: England Rugby Advertisement

Drake Foundation CEO Lauren Pulling also said the long-term consequences of these brain structure abnormalities are unknown and require further research.

But taken together with existing evidence and cases of rugby players being diagnosed with brain diseases in their 40s, the results paint 'a concerning picture' when it comes to the long-term brain health of players, she said.

'The results of the Drake Foundation Rugby Biomarker Study are particularly concerning when taken in tandem with the wider current context,' said Pulling.

'Given today's research findings, we believe that the need to take proactive, common-sense action to protect the health of rugby players is urgent.'

Updates to the game's laws and protocols should further minimise players' exposure to head impacts across matches and training, she added.

Former England rugby international, Lewis Moody said player welfare 'is not always at the forefront of people's minds' in the game.

'We need to ensure that everyone involved in the game, from Premiership to grassroots, is educated to ensure that the priority is focused on player welfare, rather than returning to competition,' Moody said.

'I would like to see a clear set of standards outlined across the game, from Premiership to grassroots, informing the maximum amount of contact training (and protocols around this) permissible per season.

'From the findings released today, as well as the players coming forward with early signs of brain conditions, there is still much to do to ensure that the game, we love, is safe and enjoyable for all involved.'

The Rugby Football Union (RFU) has also announced today it will undertake more research into head impact exposure as well as plans to address the risks to rugby players.

Premiership players will participate in 'instrumented mouthguard project' – involving mouthguards with embedded devices – to measure movements of the head in matches and training.

It will also open a 'Brain Health Clinic' for retired retired elite male and female rugby players, due to start operations later in the year.

The specialist clinical service will be based at the Institute of Sport, Exercise and Health (ISEH) in London.

It will help assess and manage retired players between the ages of 30 and 55 who have concerns over their individual brain health.

The Drake Rugby Biomarker Study was funded and instigated by The Drake Foundation and published in the journal Brain Communications.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They're often referred to as 'man's best friend', but a new study suggest that dogs may not actually be that generous when it comes to sharing with humans.

Researchers in Vienna found that while domestic dogs show many adaptations to living closely with humans, they do not seem to reciprocate food-giving.

In experiments, dogs given food by humans did not return the favour – whether or not the human feeder was helpful or not.

The findings suggest that dogs may lack a behaviour known as reciprocal altruism - a process that favours costly cooperation among reciprocating partners.

Scroll down for video

Researchers in Vienna found that while domestic dogs show many adaptations to living closely with humans, they do not seem to reciprocate food-giving

In the study, researchers from the University of Veterinary Medicine in Vienna set out to understand whether or not dogs reciprocate food-giving with humans.

The team trained 37 dogs to operate a food dispenser by pressing a button, before separating the button and dispenser in separate enclosures.

In the first part of the experiment, dogs were paired with two unfamiliar humans, one at a time.

One human was helpful – pressing their button to dispense food in the dog's enclosure – while the other was unhelpful, and did not press the button.

Next, the researchers reversed the set-up, placing the button in the dog's enclosure, and a food dispenser in the human's enclosure.

The results revealed that there were no significant differences in the dogs' tendency to press the button for helpful or unhelpful humans.

The team trained 37 dogs to operate a food dispenser by pressing a button, before separating the button and dispenser in separate enclosures. In the first part of the experiment, dogs were paired with two unfamiliar humans, one at a time. One human was helpful – pressing their button to dispense food in the dog's enclosure – while the other was unhelpful, and did not press the button. Next, the researchers reversed the set-up, placing the button in the dog's enclosure, and a food dispenser in the human's enclosure

Meanwhile, the human's behaviour in the first stage did not affect the dog's behaviour towards them after the experiments.

Dr Jim McGetrick, who led the research, said: 'In our study, pet dogs received food from humans but did not return the favour.'

While previous research has suggested that dogs display reciprocal altruism, the findings suggest that dogs are unable to combine these skills with humans.

The researchers highlight that there could be several reasons for the findings.

For example, the team suggest the dogs might not have understood the experiment because humans are typically the food-giver in the relationship, not the receiver.

Alternatively, the dogs could have failed to recognise the connection between the human's pressing the button and the reward.

Dr McGetrick added: 'Given that dogs have already been shown to reciprocate help received from other dogs in experimental studies, the absence of reciprocity here may be explained by methodological inadequacies, though it is possible that dogs are not predisposed to engage in such cooperative interactions with humans naturally.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Children born in the summer who are the youngest in their class are more likely to develop depression and substance misuse disorder as adults, a study reveals.

The London authors claim so-called 'summer babies' are also more likely to have low educational achievement, such as poorer grades, by the time they leave school.

This is not just because they're missing out on extra learning time, but because there's something about being less mature behaviourally, cognitively and socially that 'places a child at risk for many later outcomes'.

For example, being young in a school class could make kids less accepted by their peers, leading to mental health issues later.

Summer-born children can be almost 12 months younger than some of their fellow classmates, and have therefore had less time to develop.

Based on the findings, the team is calling for greater flexibility about school starting age, so that summer born children don't miss out on nearly a whole calendar year of extra learning.

Summer-born children are more at risk of depression and substance misuse later in life, the study reveals (stock image)

WHAT IS ADHD? Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioural condition defined by inattentiveness, hyperactivity and impulsiveness. It affects around five per cent of children in the US. Some 3.6 per cent of boys and 0.85 per cent of girls suffer in the UK. Symptoms typically appear at an early age and become more noticeable as a child grows. These can also include: Constant fidgeting

Poor concentration

Excessive movement or talking

Acting without thinking

Little or no sense of danger

Careless mistakes

Forgetfulness

Difficulty organising tasks

Inability to listen or carry out instructions Advertisement

Currently, the UK school year runs from September 1 to August 31, so children born towards the end of this period are at an unfortunate disadvantage.

Being young in a school class – known as having a 'young relative age' – also increases the risk of being diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the experts warn.

The new research has been conducted at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN) at King's College London, in collaboration with the Karolinska Institute and Orebro University.

'In the early stages of childhood, this is a significant difference in terms of maturity, behaviour and cognitive abilities,' said study author Professor Jonna Kuntsi.

'Behavioural characteristics that are normal in younger children are in some cases being compared to much older individuals, and we can see from the data that there are very real and long-term consequences to being the youngest in a class year.

'We show that simply a child's month of birth can place them at a disadvantage.

'This is of course a problem, because children's future outcomes should be fully independent of their relative age at the start of school.'

For their study, the researchers wanted to look at the combined effects of young relative age and ADHD on several negative long-term outcomes.

The study looked at data from 300,000 Swedish individuals from the Swedish National Registers, all born between 1990 and 1997.

As the Swedish cut-off date for school entrance is January 1, those with a 'young relative age' – being young in a school class – are born nearer the end of the calendar year.

In the study, those with a young relative age were born in November and December, and those with an old relative age were born between January and February.

All individuals were followed from their 15th birthday to their birthday in 2013, and were between 16 to 23 years of age by the end of follow-up.

Researchers looked at whether or not they'd had a criminal conviction and took data from the National Patient Register for the occurrence of substance misuse and depression.

In the individuals without ADHD, young relative age was associated with a 14 per cent increased risk of depression, as well as a 14 per cent increased risk of substance misuse, and a 17 per cent increased risk of low educational achievement.

However, there was no increased risk of criminality detected for this group.

In the individuals with ADHD, meanwhile, young relative age was associated with a 23 per cent increased risk of substance misuse and 12 per cent increased risk of low educational achievement, but not depression or criminality.

Being young in a school class (known as having a 'young relative age' ) also increases the risk of being diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) - a behavioural condition defined by inattentiveness, hyperactivity and impulsiveness (stock image)

THE RESULTS Children without ADHD - 14% increased risk of substance misuse - 17% increased risk of low educational achievement - 14% increased risk of depression - No increased risk of criminality Children with ADHD - 23% increased risk of substance misuse - 12% increased risk of low educational achievement - No increased risk of depression or criminality Advertisement

So although the youngest in a class overall were more likely to experience low educational achievement, substance misuse disorder, and depression in later life, younger children with ADHD appeared less at risk of depression.

Overall, the prevalence of ADHD was higher in children with young relative age (2.8 per cent of the sample) compared to those with old relative age (1.7 per cent).

Professor Kuntsi said the results don't necessarily show having young relative age causes negative outcomes.

'What our data shows is a longitudinal association – being young-for-class increases the risk for these outcomes later on,' she told MailOnline.

The academics note that the negative effects of young relative age is much less common in countries like Denmark, possibly due to the more flexible approach to school starting age there.

Young children that might not be ready to start school have the opportunity to start school later, and as such are less at risk of experiencing negative side effects seen in other countries.

It is a practice that the researchers say could be emulated elsewhere, such as in the UK.

'Being the youngest child in a classroom can have complex developmental consequences, and can place them at a disadvantage at the earliest stages of their academic life,' Professor Kuntsi said.

'If we are to overcome this, there needs to be a greater understanding from decision makers, teachers, and clinicians so that all children have an equal chance to succeed later in life.'

The study has been published today in the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.

Drug addiction, also called substance use disorder, leads to an inability to control the use of a legal or illegal drug or medication (stock image)

Earlier this year, Dr Tammy Campbell, a researcher at the London School of Economics and Political Science, said summer-born primary school kids are disproportionately given the 'special educational needs or disabilities' (SEND) label.

Summer-born children, particularly boys, are much more likely to be given the SEND label by the end of their primary school career, she found.

Nearly half of summer-born boys are categorised as having SEND by primary schools, according to her research paper.

'The crux of the problem as I see it is not quite that they have had less time to learn,' she told MailOnline at the time.

'It is more that they are simply younger and less developed – and so of course shouldn't be expected to have learned and developed as much – because they are up to 12 months younger.

'Expectations of what is 'normal' for very young children should be flexible, and emphasise individual progress and growth rather than static thresholds.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Woolly mammoths that lived in the Arctic would go on epic journeys, with scientists finding they would roam far enough to circle the Earth twice in their lifetimes.

Scanning the six foot tusk of a mammoth that died aged 28 in what is now Alaska, experts from the University of Alaska in Fairbanks retraced its astonishing life.

The giant creature lived 17,000 years ago, and by the time it died it had covered enough of the Alaskan landscape that it could have circled the Earth twice.

Woolly mammoths were about the size of an African elephant but with smaller ears, and adapted to the cold through a thick coat.

They died off after the weather became warmer and their food supply changed, coupled with humans hunting them for food.

The male roamed so far because it had been kicked out of its herd - like some elephant descendants today, eventually succumbing to starvation.

Woolly mammoths that lived in the Arctic would go on epic journeys, with scientists finding they would roam far enough to circle the Earth twice in their lifetimes

Scanning the six foot tusk of a mammoth that died aged 28 in what is now Alaska, experts from the University of Alaska in Fairbanks retraced its astonishing life

HOW THEY TRACK THE MOVEMENTS OF AN EXTINCT MAMMOTH A massive mammoth tusk, like tree rings, grows day by day with a new layer added as each day passes. Researchers split the tusk lengthwise and generated about 400,000 microscopic data points using a laser and other techniques. They then looked for evidence of the elements strontium and oxygen within the massive dataset. They then linked them to charts that predicted isotope variations across Alaska at the time it was alive. The team then scanned the teeth of hundreds of small rodents. These rodents, that lived around the same time, travelled small distances in their lifetime, leaving markers. The local dataset from the short area covered by rodents provided a baseline to track the mammoth's steps. Geographic barriers and weekly averages distances were taken into account - and spatial modelling used to draw up its likely routes. Advertisement

The findings are based on a chemical analysis of its 17,000 year old fossilised tusk housed in the University of Alaska Museum of the North.

Co-lead author Professor Matthew Wooller said it wasn't clear cut if the mammoth was a seasonal migrator from the analysis but regardless it 'covered serious ground.'

'It visited many parts of Alaska at some point during its lifetime, which is pretty amazing when you think about how big that area is.'

Museum director Dr Pat Druckenmiller said every moment of mammoth lives, from the moment they are born until they die, is written in their tusks.

'Mother Nature doesn't usually offer up such convenient and life-long records of an individual's life,' Dr Druckenmiller explained, saying it was 'like a diary'.

The findings shed fresh light on the iconic Ice Age beast's behaviour and movements - revealing for the first time the vast distances they travelled in their lifetime.

The study in Science also has implications for saving animals from extinction today.

Isotopic data enabled the international team to match the individual's whereabouts and diet with maps of the region they once lived thousands of years ago.

They split the tusk lengthwise and generated about 400,000 microscopic data points using a laser and other techniques.

This incredible dataset was available because of the way the tusks grow, with new layers added steadily on a daily basis - making each layer a page in the diary.

The growth bands were described as looking 'like stacked ice cream cones' - offering a chronological record of the mammoth's entire life.

It perished on Alaska's North Slope above the Arctic Circle where its remains were unearthed by researchers.

The researchers pieced together the mammoth's journey from the elements strontium and oxygen and linking them to charts that predicted isotope variations across Alaska at the time the create was alive.

The maps were created by scanning the teeth of hundreds of small rodents held in the museum's collections that travelled small distances in their lifetime.

Using the local dataset from the short are covered by these rodents, that provided a baseline to track the mammoth's steps.

The giant creature lived 17,000 years ago, and by the time it died it had covered enough of the Alaskan landscape that it could have circled the Earth twice

They died off after the weather became warmer and their food supply changed, coupled with humans hunting them for food

Geographic barriers and weekly averages distances were taken into account - and spatial modelling used to draw up its likely routes.

It was identified as a male from ancient DNA preserved in its bones - and found to be related to the last group that lived on the mainland.

An abrupt shift was discovered in its isotopic signature, ecology and movement at about the age of 15, according to the researchers, who say it coincided with it being banished by the herd, a similar pattern found in modern-day elephants.

Co author Prof Beth Shapiro, of the University of California Santa Cruz, said: 'Knowing he was male provided a better biological context in which we could interpret the isotopic data.'

They also offered a clue about what led to its demise, finding that nitrogen isotopes spiked during the final winter of its life - a sign of starvation in mammals.

Co author Prof Clement Bataille, of the University of Ottawa, said: 'It is just amazing what we were able to see and do with this data.'

Geographic barriers and weekly averages distances were taken into account - and spatial modelling used to draw up its likely routes

An abrupt shift was discovered in its isotopic signature, ecology and movement at about the age of 15, according to the researchers, who say it coincided with it being banished by the herd, a similar pattern found in modern-day elephants

About the size of an African elephant, their ears were much smaller - an adaptation to the cold that kept them closer to their heads, the team explained.

Adding that their tusks could reach up to 15 feet and were used for fighting and digging in the deep snow.

Mammoths were gentle giants and ate mostly grass - but also other types of plants and flowers and discovering more about their lives is vital.

Those details could be surprisingly relevant now as animals adapt their movement patterns and ranges with the shifting climate.

Prof Wooller said: 'The Arctic is seeing a lot of changes now, and we can use the past to see how the future may play out for species today and in the future.

'Trying to solve this detective story is an example of how our planet and ecosystems react in the face of environmental change.'

The findings have been published in the journal Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA's Ingenuity helicopter captured a stunning view of the Martin landscape, and hidden in the image searching for life on Mars is the Perseverance rover.

Driving through Jezero crater at 0.01 miles per hour, the Perseverance rover is taking rock samples and using its on board instruments to find signs of ancient life.

Ingenuity has been helping the rover in its mission, having recently completed its 11th flight on the Red Planet where it captured images of rocks and sand dunes.

Along with capturing the boulders, sand dunes, and rocky outcrops prevalent in the 'South Séítah' region of Jezero Crater, a few of the images capture NASA's Perseverance rover amid its first science campaign.

Despite being over 9ft long and weighing more than a tonne, the rover fades into the background of the image, hidden among massive rocks when seen from 39ft up.

Along with capturing the boulders, sand dunes, and rocky outcrops prevalent in the 'South Séítah' region of Jezero Crater, a few of the images capture NASA's Perseverance rover amid its first science campaign - but can you see it in this picture from 39ft up?

Driving through Jezero crater at 0.01 miles per hour, the Perseverance rover is taking rock samples and using its on board instruments to find signs of ancient life

INGENUITY FLIGHTS SO FAR Flight one: April 19, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 9.8ft, stationary hover and a landing Flight two: April 22, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, then shift westward for 14ft before returning and landing Flight three: April 25, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, shift northwards for 328ft at an airspeed of 2 m/s before returning to land Flight four: April 30, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, shift southwards 873ft at 3.5m/s before returning to land Flight five: May 7, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 33ft, hover, shift southwards 423ft at 3.5 m/s before landing at that new location Flight six: May 22, 2021 with a vertical takeoff of 33ft, hover, shift southwest 492ft at 9mph, travel 49ft south, travel 164ft before returning to land Flight seven: June 8, 2021 with a vertical takeoff of 33ft, hover, shift 348ft at 9mph, land at Airfield D Flight eight: June 21, 2021 with a vertical takeoff, hover, shift southwest 520ft, land at Airfield E 438ft away from Perseverance Flight nine: July 5, 2021 with a record length of 2,050ft southwest over a prospective research location at 16ft per second. Flight ten: July 24, 2021 with a record height of 40 feet (12 metres) over Raised Ridges to Airfield G. Flight duration 165.4 seconds. Flight eleven: August 5, 2021 by flying 1,250ft for 130 seconds in preparation for a series of reconnaissance missions for the Perseverance rover. Advertisement

Ingenuity began as a technological demonstration to prove powered, flight on Mars is possible, but is now proving its worth as a science instrument.

The team are putting it through its paces to see how a rotorcraft can add an aerial dimension to planetary science.

As well as capturing images of Mars like never before, it is scouting possible areas of scientific interest and offering detailed views of nearby areas too hazardous for the rover to explore.

'Ingenuity's aerial images are awesome – but even better when you get to play "Where's Perseverance?" with them,' said Robert Hogg from the Ingenuity team.

'Once you find our rover and zoom in, you can make out some details, like the wheels, remote sensing mast, and the MMRTG' – the Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator– 'on the aft end.'

So where is Perseverance? At the bottom centre of the image, you can find Ingenuity's shadow. From there, go straight up. Just beyond the dune field near the top of the image, and just to the right of centre is a bright white speck.

That's what a Mars rover looks like from about 1,600 feet away and 39 feet up.

NASA said the latest flight was designed to keep Ingenuity ahead of Perseverance, allowing it to continue to support the rover by photographing geologic features.

Flying north-by-northwest at 11 mph, it took Ingenuity 130.9 seconds to make the trip to its 8th airfield.

From this new staging area, the helicopter is scheduled to make at least one reconnaissance flight of the geologically intriguing South Séítah area.

This is an area made up of rocks and sand dunes, that the rover itself would find impossible to cross, so Ingenuity allows scientists to study it in some detail.

A key objective for Perseverance’s mission on Mars is astrobiology, including the search for signs of ancient microbial life.

The rover will characterise the planet’s geology and past climate, pave the way for human exploration of the Red Planet, and be the first mission to collect and cache Martian rock and regolith.

So where is Perseverance? At the bottom centre of the image, you can find Ingenuity's shadow. From there, go straight up. Just beyond the dune field near the top of the image, and just to the right of centre is a bright white speck

Subsequent NASA missions, in cooperation with ESA (European Space Agency), would send spacecraft to Mars to collect these sealed samples from the surface and return them to Earth for in-depth analysis.

The first attempt to collect rocks from the Martian surface didn't go as planned, as when the robot checked the tube there was nothing inside.

NASA had been waiting six months for Perseverance to collect its inaugural Mars core samples, but the American space Agency will have to wait a little longer.

The percussive drill, coring bit and sample tube processing all worked 'as intended, but data shows the sample tube was empty following extraction'.

Flying north-by-northwest at 11 mph, it took Ingenuity 130.9 seconds to make the trip to its 8th airfield - during that flight it captured this image of Perseverance from 39ft up

Diagram showing the different components of Ingenuity. The Ingenuity Mars Helicopter was built by JPL, which also manages the technology demonstration for NASA Headquarters

INGENUITY: THE SMALL ROTORCRAFT THAT TOOK TO THE MARTIAN SKY Ingenuity was designed as a technology demonstrator rather than carrying any of its own science experiments or equipment. It rode to Mars attached to the belly of the SUV-size Perseverance rover. The helicopter took off from the 'Wright Brothers Field' on Monday April 19, making history as the first powered flight on another world. For the first flight, the helicopter took off, climbed to about 10ft above the ground, hovered in the air briefly, completed a turn, and then landed. It is built to be light and strong to survive the harsh Martian environment. It weighs just under 4lb and is only 19 inches tall as it has to fly in the much thinner atmosphere - about 1% that of the atmosphere found on Earth. It can fly up to 980ft, go up to 15ft in the sky and can spend about 90 seconds in the air before landing. The rotors are 4ft in diameter and the craft includes solar panels that charge lithium-ion batteries. It has a 30 day lifespan, with a total of five flights expected in that time. Advertisement

The rover carries 43 titanium sample tubes, and is exploring Jezero Crater, where it will be gathering samples of rock and regolith for future analysis on Earth.

Jennifer Trosper, project manager for Perseverance at JPL, said in a statement: ‘The initial thinking is that the empty tube is more likely a result of the rock target not reacting the way we expected during coring, and less likely a hardware issue with the Sampling and Caching System.

‘Over the next few days, the team will be spending more time analysing the data we have, and also acquiring some additional diagnostic data to support understanding the root cause for the empty tube.’

During the 11th flight Ingenuity flew for a little over two minutes before landing in a region scientists have dubbed South Séítah.

This is a patch of ground on the floor of Mars' Jezero Crater which has sandy ripples that NASA scientists fear could be very challenging for the rover.

In a tweet, JPL said: '#MarsHelicopter has safely flown to a new location! Ingenuity flew for 130.9 seconds and traveled about 380 meters before landing at a spot that will set up a series of future reconnaissance flights to help @NASAPersevere in its search for ancient microbial life.'

Perseverance is currently heading south from its landing spot on the Jezero Crater, while Ingenuity is scouting locations to help it plot its way on the ground.

While airborne, Ingenuity keeps track of its motion using an onboard inertial measurement unit (IMU), which tracks acceleration and rotation rates.

By integrating this information over time, it is possible to estimate where it is, how fast it is moving, and how it is oriented in space.

The onboard control system reacts to the estimated motions by adjusting control inputs rapidly – at a rate of 500 times per second.

Ingenuity arrived on Mars attached to the belly of Perseverance, which touched down on Mars on February 18 after a nearly seven-month journey through space.

‹ Slide me › NASA's Ingenuity helicopter captured a stunning view of the Martin landscape, and hidden in the image searching for life on Mars is the Perseverance rover
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Unusually soft, powdery rock on the surface of Mars was to blame for a sampling fiasco that saw Perseverance fail to collect its first specimen, according to NASA.

Soon after starting its science mission on the Red Planet, the rover collected a core sample but when it pointed cameras into the titanium tube it was completely empty.

NASA found that it had drilled to the intended depth of nearly three inches, and the borehole itself looked good, but something clearly went wrong with collection.

Engineers have since determined that the sampled rock was not strong enough to produce a core sample, and the small, powdery fragments remained in the hole.

The rover has now begun its slow 0.01 mile per hour trudge to the next sampling site in its quest to find signs of ancient Martian life, arriving early in September.

The percussive drill, coring bit and sample tube processing all worked ‘as intended, but data shows the sample tube was empty following extraction. Pictured is the hole Perseverance made to collect core samples

The rover carries 43 titanium sample tubes, and is exploring Jezero Crater, where it will be gathering samples of rock and regolith (broken rock and dust) for future analysis on Earth

PERSEVERANCE ROVER COMES WITH 23 CAMERAS There are 23 cameras mounted to the Perseverance rover including: Nine engineering cameras, seven science cameras and seven for entry, descent and landing. The engineering cameras give detailed information in colour about the terrain the rover has to cross. They measure the ground for safe driving, check out the status of hardware and support sample gathering. There are Hazcams for hazard detection and Navcams for navigation. Science cameras record in more detail and can even capture 3D images. The Mastcam-Z on a 2 metre arm has a zoom feature for focusing on distant objects and can film video. The Supercam fires a laser at mineral targets beyond the reach of the rovers arm to analysed the chemical composition of the rock. Advertisement

As well as having multiple on board instruments to study rocks, sand dunes and other features of the Martin surface, Perseverance will drill into the surface.

Once it drills out a sample of Mars the rover will store the rocks in tubes.

Later in the 2020s early 2030s these rock samples will be collected by a European Space Agency (ESA) Fetch rover and returned back to Earth for study.

The rover carries 43 titanium sample tubes, with NASA hoping to gather at least 32 samples during its time on the Red Planet.

Thanks to images by the Ingenuity helicopter, and the rover itself, NASA is confident the next sampling site has sedimentary rock that should be better for collection.

Louise Jandura, chief engineer for Perseverance's sampling campaign, said hardware for the failed mission performed as commanded but the rock didn't cooperate.

'It reminds me yet again of the nature of exploration. A specific result is never guaranteed no matter how much you prepare,' she wrote in an update.

This isn't the first time a Mars lander has run into ground resistance when trying to drill into the Martian soil to learn more about the planet.

Earlier this year a German digger on NASA's InSight lander failed to burrow more than a couple of feet, far short of its target.

The clumping soil didn't provide enough friction for the heat-measuring device, and experimenters gave up in January.

After analysing the initial data, the researchers revealed that the rock sample was softer than expected and didn't make it into the tube

Pictured is an animation of Perseverance using its robotic arm to collect core samples from Mars

The multi-billion dollar project to bring back a piece of Mars to Earth will involve three separate launches and would only be successful as soon as 2031. The mission will start when Perseverance, NASA's new exploration rover, launches this summer

The little helicopter, Ingenuity, meanwhile, is still wowing its team, having recently completed its 11th test flight, scoping out areas for Perseverance to explore.

The latest one lasted more than two minutes, and even conducted aerial surveys of Jezero Crater.

That is the ancient river delta where Perseverance and its hitchhiking chopper landed in February, following a nearly seven-month flight from Earth.

Scientists believe the area would have been prime for microscopic life billions of years ago, if it existed.

Later in the 2020s early 2030s rock samples will be collected by a European Space Agency (ESA) Fetch rover and returned back to Earth for study

Humankind has sent dozens of spacecraft and landers to Mars - those that have been successful have left their mark on the Red Planet such as these from Perseverance

WHAT IS MASTCAM-Z USED TO FILM THE INGENUITY FLIGHT The main purpose of Mastcam-Z, a camera mounted on a mast attached to Perseverance, is to take photos and video in high definition. It is also able to capture panoramic, colour and 3D images of features in the atmosphere and on the surface. It has a zoom lens so it can magnify distant targets, making it perfect to track the first Ingenuity flight. It is mounted at the eye level of a 6 and a half foot tall person with two cameras about 9.5 inches apart. NASA says it is the 'main eyes' of the Perseverance rover. Advertisement

Perseverance, nicknamed Perky, landed on Mars on February 18, following a 239-million-mile journey, it spent the first few months helping the Ingenuity helicopter.

It has now begun its primary mission on the Red Planet, to look for traces of ancient life signs that could suggest microbial life evolved on Mars billions of years ago.

As part of this is it hoping to collect samples to be studied in much more advanced laboratories back on Earth.

Perseverance is carrying seven instruments that analyse samples from the surface, including an advanced panoramic camera, a ground-penetrating radar and an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer for analysis of chemical elements.

Selected samples will be collected by drilling down to nearly three inches and then sealed in special sample tubes and stored on the rover.

When the rover reaches a suitable location, the tubes will dropped on the surface and collected by a future retrieval mission, which is currently being developed.

Currently, NASA and ESA plan to launch two more spacecraft that would leave Earth in 2026 and reach Mars in 2028.

The first will deploy a small ESA Fetch rover, being built in the UK, which will make its way to Perseverance, pick up the filled sampling tubes and transfer them to a ‘Mars ascent vehicle’ – a small rocket.

Perseverance snapped a 'selfie' of it and Ingenuity on April 6. Perseverance is carrying seven instruments that analyse samples from the surface, including an advanced panoramic camera, a ground-penetrating radar and an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer for analysis of chemical elements.

NASA's Perseverance Mars rover used its dual-camera Mastcam-Z imager to capture this image of 'Santa Cruz' a hill about 1.5 miles (2.5 kilometers) away from the rover

This rocket will blast off – in the process becoming the first object launched from the surface of Mars – and place the container into Martian orbit, meaning it will essentially be floating in space

At this point, the third and final spacecraft involved in the tricky operation will manoeuvre itself next to the sample container, pick it up and fly it back to Earth.

Providing its re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere is successful, it will plummet to the ground at a military training ground in Utah in 2031, meaning the Martian samples won't be studied for another 10 years, so Perky has plenty of time to get it right.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@easyJet is introducing new uniforms for its cabin crew and pilots that are made from recycled plastic, with 45 bottles going into each outfit, the firm said.

Up to half a million bottles will be re-used each year as part of the change to the new uniform, which is made from a high-tech material created using renewable energy.

easyJet says it will replace all uniforms over a five-year contract, potentially preventing 2.7 million plastic bottles from going into landfill or the ocean.

The new uniforms have been developed by Northern-Ireland based Tailored Image, and will be introduced into cabin crew circulation this month.

The material used to create the uniforms has a 75 per cent lower carbon footprint than the polyester currently used to make the outfits worn by airline staff.

While easyJet offsets the carbon emitted from their flights and takes measures to reduce emissions, it has come under fire from Greenpeace and other campaigners for operating short haul domestic flights with rail alternatives.

Airline easyJet are introducing new uniforms for its cabin crew and pilots that are made from recycled plastic, with 45 bottles going into each outfit, the firm said

UN report says global warming is ALREADY causing extreme weather and the world will heat up by 1.5C by 2040 - a decade earlier than forecast The Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected. Heatwaves, flooding and droughts will also become more frequent and intense, a UN report has warned. Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040. The report into climate change also said it was 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'. Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850. 'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.' It comes as record heatwaves, wildfires and floods hit countries around the world. The 1.5C mark is considered to be the point where climate change becomes increasingly dangerous. Advertisement

The new fabric, adapted to the airline's current style, was first trialled last year for suitability in the cabin and flight deck environments, said Tailored Image.

Compared to the non-recycled alternative, it is more abrasion-resistant, and provides more elasticity with better fit and freedom of movement for the crew.

This development can lead to it being long-lasting for the wearer, reducing the need for more uniform items to be produced in the long term, the firm said.

Beyond the new fabric, plastic has also been replaced in the packaging and other related items used to send out the uniform to crew and pilots.

Plastic collar strays will be replaced with recyclable cardboard ones, plastic shirt clips with metal shirt clips, non-recyclable white coated card with recyclable cardboard card and polypropylene outer shirt covers with biodegradable shirt covers.

easyJet says this is an expansion of its existing efforts to reduce onboard plastic, including reducing the number of single-use plastic items on its flights.

The airline has already replaced many items with more sustainable alternatives, such as introducing a small plant-based bowl as a teabag holder.

The firm says it has removed over 27 million individual items of plastic from inflight retail operation in Financial Year 2020, and has never offered plastic straws.

It also offers a 50p discount on hot drinks for customers bringing a reusable cup.

Tina Milton, Director of Cabin Services at easyJet, said climate change is an issue fore everyone, and easyJet are doing what they can to reduce emissions and waste.

'We are excited to be debuting this new pilot and cabin crew uniform made from recycled plastic bottles and to introduce it for our pilots and cabin crew colleagues,' Milton said, adding 'sustainability is an important issue.'

'It is a priority for us to continue work on reducing our carbon footprint in the short term, coupled with long-term work to support the development of new technology, including zero-emission planes which aspire to reduce the carbon footprint of aviation radically.

'We continue to work with innovative technology partners Wright Electric and Airbus. Each of them has set out its ambitious timetables for bringing zero-emission aircraft into commercial service to become a reality.

'People have a choice in how they travel, and if people choose to fly with us, we want to be one of the best choices they can make.'

easyJet says it has focused on being as carbon efficient as possible since its first flight 25 years ago, working to reduce emissions.

The firm says it is working on transitioning its fleet to increasingly more modern, fuel and therefore carbon-efficient planes.

easyJet says it will replace all uniforms over a five-year contract, potentially preventing 2.7 million plastic bottles from going into landfill or the ocean

Since 2000 easyJet has reduced the carbon emissions for each kilometre flown by a passenger by over a third. Initiatives have included introducing lightweight carpets, trolleys and seats, single-engine taxiing and removing paper manuals from aircraft.

In 2019, easyJet became the world's first major airline to operate carbon neutral flights across its whole network by offsetting the carbon emissions from the fuel used for all of its flights, something they say is an 'only an interim measure'.

While easyJet has come out on top in terms of the airline doing the most to reduce carbon emissions from flying, it has previously come under fire for operating routes also available by rail.

The material used to create the uniforms has a 75 per cent lower carbon footprint than the polyester currently used to make the outfits worn by airline staff

In February, it launched 12 domestic UK routes that saw Greenpeace say it shows the airline is prioritising profit over the planet's health.

An easyJet spokesperson said: 'The new routes which will operate this summer have been introduced in response to the demand we’re seeing for domestic air travel in the UK and as with all our flights, we offset all of the carbon emissions from the fuel used for them.'

They added that they are 'supporting the development of radical new technologies to achieve zero-emission flying in the future, which we are committed to transitioning to as soon as they are available'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A pair of 'dancing ghosts' have been spotted swirling around two 'host' galaxies some one billion light years from Earth.

Researchers from Western Sydney University and CSIRO, Australia's national science agency, reveal the ghoulish figures are actually clouds of electrons spewing from two supermassive black holes that sit at the center of the galaxies.

The giant spectral clouds, named PKS 2130-538, were captured by galactic winds that created the twirling figures.

The team hopes this discovery will allow them to uncover more about how black holes behave and what could occur in the space between the two galaxies.

Scroll down for video

A pair of 'dancing ghosts' have been spotted swirling around two 'host' galaxies some one billion light years from Earth. Researchers say the ghoulish figures are actually clouds of electrons spewing from two supermassive black holes that sit at the center of the galaxies

Western Sydney University and CSIRO, Australia's national science agency, said in a statement: 'When we first saw the 'dancing ghosts' we had no idea what they were. After weeks of work, we figured out we were seeing two 'host' galaxies, about a billion light years away.

'In their centers are two supermassive black holes, squirting out jets of electrons that are then bent into grotesque shapes by an intergalactic wind.

'New discoveries however always raise new questions and this one is no different. We still don't know where the wind is coming from? Why it is so tangled? And what is causing the streams of radio emission?

'It will probably take many more observations and modelling before we understand any of these things.'

The dancing ghosts were discovered through the Evolutionary Map of the Universe (EMU) project, which uses the new ASKAP telescope to analyze radio sources in space

The dancing ghosts were discovered through the Evolutionary Map of the Universe (EMU) project, which uses the new ASKAP telescope to analyze radio sources in space.

The ASKAP telescope is operated by the CSIRO and forms part of the Australia Telescope National Facility.

It uses novel technology to achieve extremely high survey speeds, making it one of the best instruments in the world for mapping the sky at radio wavelengths.

Other objects and phenomena uncovered so far as part of the EMU Project include the discovery of the mysterious Odd Radio Circles, which seem to be giant rings of radio emission nearly a million light years across, surrounding distant galaxies.

'We are even finding surprises in places we thought we understood. Next door to the well-studied galaxy IC5063, we found a giant radio galaxy, one of the largest known, whose existence had never even been suspected,' Norris said.

'Its supermassive black hole is generating jets of electrons nearly 5 million light years long.

'ASKAP is the only telescope in the world that can see the total extent of this faint emission.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A small increase in air pollution from tiny, toxic particles raises dementia risk by 16 percent, a new study finds.

Researchers from the University of Washington used decades' worth of data from two long-running projects in the Puget Sound region, one on dementia risk factors and one on air pollution.

In addition to increased dementia risk, the researchers found that the same small air pollution increase raised Alzheimer's risk by 11 percent.

The study suggests that improving air quality could be a key strategy for reducing dementia - especially in vulnerable neighborhoods.

Long-term exposure to air pollution can drive up risk of dementia, a new University of Washington study suggests. Pictured: The Seattle Space Needle during wildfire season in September 2020

It's well-known among environmental researchers that air pollution can lead to respiratory issues ranging from asthma to lung cancer.

One particularly dangerous type of pollution is called fine particulate matter, or PM2.5 - named because the particles are 2.5 micrometers wide, about 30 times smaller than a human hair.

PM2.5 pollution is tied to car exhaust, construction sites, smokestacks, fires, and other sources.

This pollution has been linked to increased risk of severe COVID-19.

Recent research has also established ties between PM2.5 pollution and dementia, the degradation in memory and thinking ability that often affects seniors.

A new study - published Wednesday in the journal Environmental Health Perspectives - provides evidence for this trend.

For those patients diagnosed with dementia, the UW researchers investigated their air pollution exposure using past PM2.5 measurements. Seattle's suburbs tend to have less pollution than the downtown area

University of Washington (UW) researchers investigated decades' worth of data on dementia development and air pollution in the Seattle, Washington area.

Most studies on dementia risk investigate five years of data or less, making this new research unique in its long time period.

The researchers utilized the Adult Changes in Thought (ACT) Study, a collaborative effort between UW and Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute to identify risk factors for dementia.

ACT researchers followed over 4,000 Seattle seniors for 25 years. The seniors did not have dementia when the study started, but received cognitive check-ups every two years.

Out of those 4,000 patients, over 1,000 were diagnosed with dementia over the course of the study.

For those patients who were diagnosed, the researchers investigated their exposure to air pollution using air quality data - measured regularly in Seattle since 1978.

Using detailed data on where the patients lived, the researchers were able to determine how much PM2.5 pollution they'd been exposed to - and how that compared to the patients who did not develop dementia.

The finding was striking - a tiny increase in long-term pollution exposure drove significant risk of developing dementia.

'We found that an increase of one microgram per cubic meter of exposure corresponded to a 16 percent greater hazard of all-cause dementia,' said Rachel Shaffer, lead author nd doctoral student in environmental health at UW.

That amount - one microgram per cubic meter - is equivalent to the pollution difference between downtown Seattle and an outlying residential area.

The researchers also found that an increase of one microgram per cubic meter led to a 11 percent higher risk of Alzheimer's.

These comparisons were made over 10-year spans of exposure to pollution.

'We know dementia develops over a long period of time. It takes years - even decades - for these pathologies to develop in the brain, and so we needed to look at exposures that covered that extended period,' Shaffer said.

Shaffer and other researchers on the study expressed thanks to the ACT Study. This study's long-term data collection made the dementia risk investigation possible.

'Having reliable address histories let us obtain more precise air pollution estimates for study participants,' said Lianne Sheppard, senior author on the paper and environmental health professor at UW.

Patients who were exposed to higher air pollution over a 10-year period were more likely to develop dementia or Alzheimer's

'These high-quality exposures combined with ACT's regular participant follow-up and standardized diagnostic procedures contribute to this study's potential policy impact.'

This research provides key evidence for air pollution's contribution to dementia and other neurological conditions.

In another recent study, released at the July Alzheimer's Association International Conference, researchers said that improving air quality is a key dementia prevention strategy.

When neighborhoods are impacted by pollution, the consequences are widespread and long-reaching.

'Over an entire population, a large number of people are exposed. So, even a small change in relative risk ends up being important on a population scale,' Shaffer said.

'There are some things that individuals can do, such as mask-wearing, which is becoming more normalized now because of COVID. But it is not fair to put the burden on individuals alone.

'These data can support further policy action on the local and national level to control sources of particulate air pollution.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 680-tonne tidal turbine billed as the most powerful in the world has started to generate electricity off the northeastern coast of Scotland.

The Orbital O2 is anchored near Orkney and has the capacity to meet the annual electricity demand of 2,000 homes for the next 15 years.

It took Orbital Marine Power about 15 years to develop and 18 months to build its first commercial turbine, which it has described as a 'major milestone'.

Scroll down for video

Clean energy: A 680-tonne tidal turbine (pictured) billed as the most powerful in the world has started to generate electricity off the northeastern coast of Scotland

Power: The Orbital O2 is anchored near Orkney and has the capacity to meet the annual electricity demand of 2,000 homes for the next 15 years

HOW DOES THE TIDAL TURBINE GENERATE ELECTRICITY? The Orbital O2 works like an underwater windmill with the turbine's two rotors attached to its legs and propelled by some of the world's fastest tidal flows. Tidal energy is generated by the relative motion of the Earth, Sun and Moon, which interact via gravitational forces. Although more expensive to develop it is far more predictable than wind energy or solar power. The Orbital O2 is anchored in place by four mooring chains that each have the strength to lift over 50 double decker buses. Electricity is transferred from the turbine via a subsea cable to the local onshore electricity network in Orkney. It has the capacity to meet the annual electricity demand of 2,000 homes for the next 15 years. Advertisement

The 2MW turbine's superstructure, which floats on the surface of the water, was sailed out to its position in May and is connected to the local onshore electricity network via a subsea cable.

It is anchored in 35 metres of water and starts producing clean power when the tide comes in. When the tide stops, its blades then rotate and start generating electricity in the other direction.

Orbital chief executive Andrew Scott said: 'This is a major milestone for the O2 and I would like to commend the whole team at Orbital and our supply chain for delivering this pioneering renewable energy project safely and successfully.

'Our vision is that this project is the trigger to the harnessing of tidal stream resources around the world to play a role in tackling climate change whilst creating a new, low-carbon industrial sector.'

The company said it chose to anchor the turbine in the Fall of Warness because that is where some of the strongest tidal currents in the world happen.

It is connected to the local electricity grid and 'will help power the communities of Orkney cleanly and sustainably from the waters that flow past their islands', Orbital said.

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge visited the turbine's superstructure back in May and were given whisky to throw over the side of the vessel to bless it.

The firm received £3.4million from the Scottish government's Saltire Tidal Energy Challenge Fund to make the Orbital O2 in Dundee.

Energy secretary Michael Matheson said: 'With our abundant natural resources, expertise and ambition, Scotland is ideally-placed to harness the enormous global market for marine energy whilst helping deliver a net-zero economy.

It took Orbital Marine Power about 15 years to develop and 18 months to build its first commercial turbine, which it has described as a 'major milestone'

The 2MW turbine's superstructure, which floats on the surface of the water, was sailed out to its position in May and is connected to the local onshore electricity network via a subsea cable

It is anchored in 35 metres of water and starts producing clean power when the tide comes in

When the tide stops its blades then rotate and start generating electricity in the other direction

'The deployment of Orbital Marine Power's O2, the world's most powerful tidal turbine, is a proud moment for Scotland and a significant milestone in our journey to net zero.'

Renewables overtook fossil fuels to become the biggest source of electricity in the UK for the first time in 2020, according to analysis revealed in January this year.

Combined, wind, solar, bioenergy and hydropower – all renewable energy sources – generated a record 42 per cent of the UK's power last year.

Meanwhile, fossil fuels – mostly gas – produced 41 per cent of total UK power, the analysis from think tanks Ember and Agora Energiewende showed.

In 2018 a scheme to build the world's first power station powered by wave energy in a lagoon was scrapped on cost grounds.

The Tidal Lagoon Power project would have cost £1.3billion and seen the construction of a U-shaped sea wall with turbines in Swansea Bay in South Wales.

More than £35million was spent on developing the project – a mixture of public and private money.

Enough for a sip? The Duchess of Cambridge is given whisky by CEO Andrew Scott (right) to throw overboard to bless the Orbital Marine Power tidal energy turbine back in May

The Duke of Cambridge threw the whisky over the side of the vessel to bless the tidal turbine

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge were shown the tidal energy turbine in Orkney in May
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If greenhouse gas emissions are allowed to continue at extreme rates, deadly week-long heatwaves could be up to seven times more likely by 2050, a study has warned.

Experts led from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology modelled the frequency of extreme temperature episodes under various future emission scenarios.

They found that record-shattering heatwaves become more likely not in association with the severity of global warming, but with the rate at which the climate heats up.

Scroll down for video

If greenhouse gas emissions are allowed to continue at their present rate, deadly week-long heatwaves will be up to seven times more likely by 2050, a study found. Pictured: an artist's impression of a heatwave over Europe (stock image)

How heatwaves could change The team found that under a high-emissions scenario, record-shattering, week-long extremes of heat will be 2–7 times more likely over the period from now until 2050 than they have been in the past three decades. The probability of these heatwaves will increase even further to 3–21 times recent rates in the period from 2051–2080, during which time the events will likely strike with a frequency of every 6–37 years in the northern midlatitudes. However, the researchers' models also indicated that record-shattering heat spells will tend to occur in spurts during periods of accelerated climate warming, and, in contrast, will be less probable in 'quiet' periods with little or no warming. Advertisement

The study was undertaken by climate scientist Erich Fischer of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH Zürich) and his colleagues.

'Models project not only more intense extremes but also events that break previous records by much larger margins,' the researchers wrote in their paper.

'These record-shattering extremes, nearly impossible in the absence of warming, are likely to occur in the coming decades.'

In their study, the researchers ran climate simulations to determine the likelihood of week-long, record-shattering heatwaves under various future emissions scenarios.

The team found that under a high-emissions scenario, record-shattering, week-long extremes of heat will be 2–7 times more likely over the period from now until 2050 than they have been in the past three decades.

The probability of these heatwaves will increase even further to 3–21 times recent rates in the period from 2051–2080, during which time the events will likely strike with a frequency of every 6–37 years in the northern midlatitudes.

However, the researchers' models also indicated that record-shattering heat spells will tend to occur in spurts during periods of accelerated climate warming, and, in contrast, will be less probable in 'quiet' periods with little or no warming.

The team found that under a high-emissions scenario, record-shattering, week-long extremes of heat will be 2–7 times more likely over the period from now until 2050 than they have been in the past three decades (stock image)

'Their probability of occurrence depends on warming rate, rather than global warming level, and is thus pathway-dependent,' the team said.

Given this, they explained, if human-induced warming was successfully stabilised by aggressive mitigation, there would still be more frequent and intensive heatwaves than experienced in the past, but record-breaking extremes would be less likely.

'Just in the last month, the world has experienced temperature records being smashed in North America and devastating floods in Europe and China,' said University of Bristol climatologist Vikki Thompson, who was not involved in the study.

'It is clear that climate change is affecting the planet. The need to understand what could happen in the future is vital to allow us to adapt.

'The good news is that we can prevent the worst case shown in this study — we are already on target to be below it and further reductions in emissions will reduce the risk of unprecedented extremes further.

'Studies like this show the need for clear global emissions targets, which could come out of the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Nature Climate Change.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Men who speak in a lower pitch are worse at communicating with their loved ones, and so can be more likely to avoid forming close attachments, a study discovered.

Scientists recruited 218 undergraduate students, assessed their attachment style through a questionnaire, and had them record sentences to assess their vocal pitch.

Those with a 'more masculine' voice found it harder to develop strong attachments in a relationship, say experts from Sichuan Normal University in Chengdu, China.

They also used less positive communication patterns in their relationships compared to those that speak with a higher pitch.

The authors say this could be due to a previously discovered link between deeper voices and higher testosterone levels in men, or it could be that higher voiced men develop better communication strategies to attract a mate.

Scroll down for video

Men who speak in a lower pitch are worse at communicating with their loved ones, and so can be more likely to avoid forming close attachments, a study discovered. Stock image

Men with deep voices are more likely to cheat Men with deep voices are more likely to attract a partner, but are also more likely to cheat on their partner - and it is due to high levels of testosterone, study finds. Researchers from China's Southwest University recorded the voices of 88 men and 128 women, then had them fill out a form to assess their attitudes towards infidelity. Women are often attracted to men with low, rich voices because they are associated with high testosterone levels which, in evolutionary terms, suggests the speaker will be a good mate for producing healthy children, according to the Chinese team. However, men with higher levels of testosterone are also more likely to have a lax attitude to infidelity, care less about their relationships and eventually cheat. The same was not true of women, with no noticeable difference in attitudes to fidelity whether they had high or low pitched voices. Advertisement

The voice has been shown to convey information about relationship behaviours, the authors said, including pitch being linked to physical attractiveness being unfaithful.

Lower voice pitch has been shown to be linked to greater levels of testosterone, and higher testosterone is linked to relationship issues, authors of the new study said.

Jing Zhang and Lijun Zheng recruited 218 undergraduate students - 90 men and 128 women - who filled out a questionnaire that measured their attachment style.

They then had the students speak five expressions into a microphone so the researchers could determine their voice pitch level.

The questionnaire measured anxious attachment - characterised by clinginess and persistent need for reassurance.

They also completed a scale that measured the communication patterns typically used when tackling relationship issues.

During the recordings they had to speak five expressions into a microphone which were analysed to measure fundamental frequency - an indicator of the pitch of the voice.

They then calculated variations in fundamental frequency over the five words to create a standard measure.

Men with a lower pitch were more likely to avoid attachments and less constructive in their communication style.

Voice pitch had no link to attachment and communication style among the female students involved in the study Zhang and Zheng say that people with feminine traits are more likely to show greater levels of warmth and empathy.

They said these were important qualities in maintaining a healthy relationship, so men with more feminine voices would be more prone to adopting better relationship maintenance behaviours.

This included positive communication strategies.

They say that testosterone levels are the most likely explanation, with higher testosterone linked to lower voices.

Those with a 'more masculine' voice found it harder to develop strong attachments in a relationship, say experts from Sichuan Normal University in Chengdu, China. Stock image

The team say that the alternative is that as deep voiced men are more attractive to women, those with higher pitched voice develop more favourable communication strategies to increase their value to potential mates.

It was a limited study, as the cohort was made of students who were likely less secure in their opinions than the general population.

The findings have been published in the Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk has hit out at billionaire space rival Jeff Bezos, saying he would be on Pluto by now 'if lobbying and lawyers could get you to orbit'.

It is the latest barb in a war of words between the two that was kicked into overdrive when NASA awarded SpaceX a lunar lander contract over Bezos-owned Blue Origin.

SpaceX, owned and founded by Elon Musk, won a lucrative contract to develop a version of its Starship spaceship to take astronauts to the lunar surface in 2024.

Blue Origin was hoping NASA would pay two firms to develop alternative landers but funding cuts led the space agency to go with just SpaceX, prompting the firm to file a 50-page protest to the Government Accountability Office.

This appeal, that accused NASA of 'moving the goalposts at the last minute,' was denied by officials, prompting Musk to say: 'If lobbying and lawyers could get u to orbit, Bezos would be on Pluto [right now].'

The battle isn't a one way street though, as last week Blue Origin shared an infographic of the SpaceX lunar Starship and called it an 'immensely complex and high risk' approach for sending the first woman and next man to the moon in 2024.

NASA has chosen Elon Musk 's SpaceX to build the spacecraft that take the first woman and next man to the moon. SpaceX's HLS Starship will include the company's tested Raptor engines, along with pulling inspiration from the Falcon and Dragon vehicles' designs

Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin did have high hopes of winning its protest against NASA's decision and told DailyMail.com that 'there were fundamental issues with NASA’s decision.' Elon Musk also responded to last week's decision by posting 'GAO' with the strong arm emoji on Twitter, which is the typical gesture of someone who won a fight

This appeal, that accused NASA of 'moving the goalposts at the last minute,' was denied by officials, prompting Musk to say: 'If lobbying and lawyers could get u to orbit, Bezos would be on Pluto [right now]'

ARTEMIS LANDER: A COMMERCIAL RETURN TO THE MOON NASA has chosen Elon Musk's SpaceX to build the spacecraft that will take the first woman and next man to the surface of the moon in 2024. The deal includes SpaceX's $2.9 billion contract to build the lunar lander that is reportedly much lower than what competitors bid. It isn't clear what Dynetics and Blue Origin bid to build the lander. The officials statement from NASA confirms SpaceX will be the only one to take humans back to the moon. NASA had originally planned to have two companies go forward to develop a lander, but budget cuts changed that and led to a single lander contract. This prompted Blue Origin to file a complaint against NASA for 'moving the goalposts' which failed. It found 'NASA did not violate procurement law or regulation when it decided to make only one award,' which was Blue Origin's defence. The Artemis mission, which is set for 2024, will see four spacefaring heroes board the Orion spacecraft that will be rocketed off to space by NASA's powerful Space Launch System (SLS). Once in orbit, two crew members will transfer to the SpaceX human landing system (HLS) and head to the moon. After a week exploring the surface, they will board the lander for their short trip back to orbit where they will return to Orion and their colleagues before heading back to Earth. Advertisement

It started in April 2020 when NASA announced it would award three initial research contracts to Blue Origin, Dynetics and SpaceX to develop a lander system.

Blue Origin received $579 million, Dynetics $253 million and SpaceX $135 million as part of that initial research contract with the hope of winning the final deal.

On April 16, 2021, NASA announced SpaceX was going to be the only company to construct a lunar lander, and being awarded less than either of the other two firms.

SpaceX received a $2.9 billion contract to develop the lander that will go to the lunar surface, possibly as soon as 2024.

Blue Origin's protest with the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) was rejected, after the 'congressional watchdog' found NS did nothing wrong.

It found 'NASA did not violate procurement law or regulation when it decided to make only one award,' which was Blue Origin's entire defence on the matter.

Last month, just before Bezos went to the edge of space on the Blue Origin New Shepard rocket, he published an open letter to NASA calling for competition to be restored to the Artemis mission.

He offered to cover billions of dollars of costs involved in developing the lander, saying he was fortunate to be in a position to do so.

This prompted Musk to tweet: 'Just want to say thanks to those in government who fight hard for the right thing to happen, despite extreme pressure to do otherwise. Therin lies the core goodness of the American state.'

The Artemis mission, which is set for 2024, will see four spacefaring heroes board the Orion spacecraft that will be rocketed off to space by NASA's powerful Space Launch System (SLS) rocket - due to make its debut launch early next year.

Once in orbit, two crew members will transfer to the SpaceX human landing system (HLS), an adapted version of the Starship spacecraft, and head to the surface.

Musk also responded to the decision by posting 'GAO' with the strong arm emoji on Twitter, which is the typical gesture of someone who won a fight

After a week exploring the lunar surface, they will board the SpaceX lander for their short trip back to orbit where they will dock with the Orion and their colleagues that remained on board, before heading back to Earth.

Eventually, possibly by 2028, both the Starship lander and Orion will dock with the Lunar Gateway space station due to be built in orbit around the moon.

Blue Origin's infographic, claiming the SpaceX solution would be unsafe and risky, cites the massive size of the Starship compared to the Blue Origin lander.

'There are an unprecedented number of technologies, developments, and operations that have never been done before for Starship to land on the Moon,' Blue Origin wrote in the infographic.

Blue Origin posted an infographic on its website , seen Wednesday, that calls SpaceX's lunar Starship an 'immensely complex and high risk' approach for sending the first woman and next man to the moon in 2024. The criticism comes just days after the Jeff Bezo-owned company's protest against NASA's decision to award SpaceX a contract to build the lunar was denied, and suggests Blue Origin isn't taking the loss lightly

Blue Origin highlights it would only need three National Team launches with proven systems. Starship's exit is 126 feet off the ground, which would likely use elevators to ferry astronauts down to the lunar surface, while the Blue Origin lander is 32 feet off the ground and would use a simple down a long ladder

SPACEX HUMAN LUNCH SYSTEM STARSHIP TO GO TO THE MOON IN 2024 SpaceX's HLS Starship will include the company's tested Raptor engines, along with pulling inspiration from the Falcon and Dragon vehicles' designs. It will feature a spacious cabin and two airlocks for astronaut moonwalks. Work started on designing the lunar vehicle in May 2020 and work will now begin to fully build it thanks to a NASA $2.89 billion contract. The initial contact covers an uncrewed demonstration mission, and a crewed lunar landing in 2024. It is also planned future lunar landings will be made using Starship HLS. It is equipped with a complement of thrusters used on the final descent and takeoff from the surface of the moon. The final design will have a 100 day loiter capability in lunar orbit allowing for more trips to the lunar surface. It also is designed to carry extra propellant to allow for an emergency ascent from the moon. Length : 50 m (164 ft 1 in)

: 50 m (164 ft 1 in) Width : 9 m (29 ft 6 in)

: 9 m (29 ft 6 in) Payload : 100–200 t (220,000–440,000 lb)

: 100–200 t (220,000–440,000 lb) Status : In development

: In development First launch : Uncrewed 2023

: Uncrewed 2023 Applications : Reusable lunar lander Advertisement

The infographic is designed as a comparison between the two company's lunar landers.

While it states SpaceX would need more than 10 Starship launches, Blue Origin highlights it would only need three National Team launches with proven systems.

The criticism continues with Blue Origin calling out SpaceX for not sending any craft into orbit from its own launch site.

However, Musk's company has sent more than 100 Falcon 9 rockets into orbit and Bezos' firm has only sent a crewed capsule 351,000 feet into the air and back.

The infographic also shows a comparison of the lunar landers, with Blue Origin's mirroring those of the past and Starships massive cylinder-like shape.

Starship's exit is 126 feet off the ground, which would likely use elevators to ferry astronauts down to the lunar surface, while the Blue Origin lander is 32 feet off the ground and would use a simple ladder.

What the image fails to include is the cost to construct the lunar lander and get it off the ground, which was a major part of NASA's final decision - SpaceX bid $2.9 billion, while Blue Origin was roughly double at $5.99 billion.

Blue Origin did have high hopes of winning its protest against NASA's decision and told DailyMail.com that 'there were fundamental issues with NASA’s decision.'

'We’ll continue to advocate for two immediate providers as we believe it is the right solution,' the Blue Origin spokesperson continued.

'The Human Landing System [HLS] program needs to have competition now instead of later – that's the best solution for NASA and the best solution for our country.'

Musk also responded to last week's decision by posting 'GAO' with the strong arm emoji on Twitter, which is the typical gesture of someone who won a fight.

The American space agency is looking to develop two types of spacesuits: : intravehicular suits, which are worn inside a spacecraft, and extravehicular suits, which are worn for exploring outside of a spacecraft

NASA hopes to send the first woman and next man to the moon as early as 2024, although that date could be in doubt over issues with the spacesuit design.

An audit from the agency's Office of Inspector General found NASA is on track to spend more than $1 billion developing the suits by the time the first two are ready, which won't happen until 'April 2025 at the earliest,' according to the report.

Musk caught wind of the delay via a tweet posted by CNBC space reporter Michael Sheetz, in which the billionaire commented: 'SpaceX could do if need be.'

In the tweet thread, Sheetz also noted there are 27 different companies supplying components for the Artemis suits and Musk commented that the issue may bee that there are 'too many cooks in the kitchen.'

Sandra Johnson, public affairs officer for spacesuits at NASA, told DailyMail.com in an email: 'Artemis includes a collaborative effort between NASA, its international partners, and industry partners to return humans to the Moon.

'NASA is currently accepting industry feedback to a draft Request for Proposals (RFP) for the agency’s strategy for purchasing commercial spacesuits, hardware, and services for use on Artemis missions and the International Space Station. NASA plans to release the formal RFP in early Fall.

'The opportunity will be open to all of industry.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jupiter will put on a show for planet-hunters later this week, giving them a chance to spot the mighty gas giant with the naked eye.

Astronomers say it will appear as 'a bright star, though it won't twinkle like the stars' this Thursday evening, and there's even a chance to catch a glimpse of the four largest of Jupiter's 79 moons if you look through a telescope.

This is because the planet will be at 'opposition', meaning that, as Earth passes between the Sun and Jupiter, it will be opposite the Sun.

The best time to view it from the UK will be a few hours after sunset, experts say.

Jupiter should be visible low above the southeastern horizon from sunset on Thursday night. It will also be possible to see Saturn and its rings if you are looking through a telescope. Both planets should be visible to the bottom left of the Summer Triangle of stars (pictured above)

Jupiter will put on a show for planet-hunters later this week, giving them a chance to spot the mighty gas giant with the naked eye

WHAT IS A PLANET AT OPPOSITION? Opposition is when two celestial bodies appear in opposite directions in the sky from Earth. The moon, when full, is said to be in opposition to the sun; the Earth is then approximately between them. A superior planet (one with an orbit farther from the sun than Earth's) is in opposition when Earth passes between it and the sun. The opposition of a planet is a good time to observe it, because the planet is then at its nearest point to the Earth and in its full phase. The planets Venus and Mercury, whose orbits are smaller than Earth's, can never be in opposition to the sun. 2021 dates for planets in opposition: Jupiter: 19 August Saturn: 2 August Neptune: 14 September Uranus: 4 November Source: Encyclopaedia Britannica/Royal Museums Greenwich Advertisement

Bryony Lanigan, an astronomer at the Royal Observatory Greenwich, said: 'When a planet is at opposition, it is on the opposite side of the Earth to the Sun — if you were looking down on the Solar System from above and drew a line from Jupiter to the Sun, when Jupiter is at opposition it would pass through the Earth.

'This doesn't necessarily mean that the planet is at its closest point to the Earth — because of the elliptical nature of planetary orbits, this may occur a day or two either side.'

Planets are usually in opposition for a very short length of time but, during that time, they are visible to the naked eye, Lanigan said.

'Jupiter should be visible low above the southeastern horizon from sunset on the days around opposition on the 19th, but if planet-hunters wait until a few hours after sunset then it will have risen a little higher — around 20-25 degrees altitude — and so will be easier to spot.'

Jupiter's opposition takes places just days before the full moon, which is on August 22.

Lanigan said that while the sky will not be fully dark, the moon will not be intruding too much on astrophotographers' views.

Not only will Jupiter and its moons be visible for UK skywatchers, but there will also be a chance to catch a glimpse of Saturn and its famous rings.

Ed Bloomer, also a Royal Observatory Greenwich astronomer, said: 'Both planets are fairly low on the horizon, so try and find an observation spot free from tall buildings or trees when looking in that direction.

'And another bonus is that the waxing moon is – relative to the planets – sweeping eastwards over those few days.

Stargazing: Saturn reached its closest point to Earth earlier this month, giving sky watchers the perfect opportunity to catch a glimpse of the ringed planet in all its beauty

'There's a chance you could get a good photograph featuring stars, planets and the moon.'

Although Jupiter and Saturn should be fairly easy to spot, for those having difficulty locating them — particularly in urban areas — the Summer Triangle of bright stars will provide a guide.

Both should be below and slightly to the left of Deneb, Vega and Altair.

Bloomer added: 'The Galilean moons (Jupiter's four largest moons – Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto) will look like pinpricks of light in orbit around Jupiter.

'Around Saturn you may be able to make out the rings, and even major divisions within the rings.

'If your telescope is really good, perhaps you'll even make out the swirling clouds of Jupiter's upper atmosphere.'

Saturn was at opposition on August 2, while Neptune will reach that point on September 14 and Uranus on November 4.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A flying reptile with a massive 23ft wingspan and 'spear-like' mouth was the 'closest thing we have to a real life dragon', according to scientists studying its remains.

The pterosaur, named Thapunngaka shawi, soared over an ancient inland sea that covered much of outback Queensland 105 million years ago.

It was discovered on Wanamara Country, near Richmond in North West Queensland by palaeontologists from the University of Queensland who analysed a fossil of the creature's jaw to determine its status as Australia's largest flying reptile.

'It was essentially just a skull with a long neck, bolted on a pair of long wings,' said study author Tim Richards, adding 'this thing would have been quite savage'.

A flying reptile (artist impression) with a massive 23ft wingspan and 'spear-like' mouth was the 'closest thing we have to a real life dragon', according to scientists studying its remains

The pterosaur, named Thapunngaka shawi, soared over an ancient inland sea that covered much of outback Queensland 105 million years ago. It was identified from a lower jaw fossil

Pterosaurs were most likely bald, study finds Pterosaurs — flying reptiles from the time of the dinosaurs — were most likely bald and did not have feathers as had been previously suggested, a study has claimed. In 2018, researchers from China's Nanjing University reported having found evidence for branching 'protofeathers' in three fossil pterosaur specimens. British palaeobiologists David Unwin and Dave Martill re-evaluated this evidence, however, and came to the conclusion that the flying reptiles had no feathers at all. Instead, they say, the branching structures actually represent parts of the pterosaurs' wing membranes that had begun to decay and unravel before being preserved. 'The idea of feathered pterosaurs goes back to the nineteenth century but the fossil evidence was then, and still is, very weak,' said Dr Unwin, who is a pterosaur expert at the University of Leicester’s Centre for Palaeobiology Research. Advertisement

The skull alone would have been just over 3ft long and containing about 40 teeth, perfectly suited to grasping the many fish species inhabiting the long-gone Eromanga Sea that once covered much of Queensland's Outback.

'It would have cast a great shadow over some quivering little dinosaur that wouldn't have heard it until it was too late,' Mr Richards explained.

'It's tempting to think it may have swooped like a magpie during mating season, making your local magpie swoop look pretty trivial – no amount of zip ties would have saved you,' he said.

'Though, to be clear, it was nothing like a bird, or even a bat – Pterosaurs were a successful and diverse group of reptiles – the very first back-boned animals to take a stab at powered flight.'

The new species belonged to a group of pterosaurs known as anhanguerians, which inhabited every continent during the latter part of the Age of Dinosaurs.

Being perfectly adapted to powered flight, pterosaurs had thin-walled and hollow bones. Given these adaptations, their fossils are rare and poorly preserved.

'It's quite amazing fossils of these animals exist at all,' Mr Richards said.

'By world standards, the Australian pterosaur record is poor, but the discovery of Thapunngaka contributes greatly to our understanding of pterosaur diversity.'

It is only the third species of anhanguerian pterosaur known from Australia, with all three species hailing from western Queensland.

Dr Steve Salisbury, co-author on the paper and Mr Richard's PhD supervisor, said what was particularly striking about this new species of anhanguerian was the massive size of the bony crest on its lower jaw.

It was discovered on Wanamara Country, near Richmond in North West Queensland by palaeontologists from the University of Queensland who analysed a fossil of the creature's jaw to determine its status as Australia's largest flying reptile

It had a 23ft wingspan and is 'the closest thing we have to a real life dragon,' according to study author Tim Richards, a PhD candidate

He said it would likely have had the same crest on its upper jaw but it isn't present in the fossil record used to study this specimen.

'These crests probably played a role in the flight dynamics of these creatures, and hopefully future research will deliver more definitive answers,' Dr Salisbury said.

The fossil was found in a quarry just northwest of Richmond in June 2011 by Len Shaw, a local fossicker who has been 'scratching around' in the area for decades.

The name of the new species honours the First Nations peoples of the Richmond area where the fossil was found.

The skull alone would have been just over 3ft long and containing about 40 teeth, perfectly suited to grasping the many fish species inhabiting the long-gone Eromanga Sea that once covered much of Queensland's Outback

The name incorporates words from the extinct language of the Wanamara Nation.

'The genus name, Thapunngaka, incorporates thapun [ta-boon] and ngaka [nga-ga], the Wanamara words for 'spear' and 'mouth', respectively,' Dr Salisbury said.

'The species name, shawi, honours the fossil's discoverer Len Shaw, so the name means 'Shaw's spear mouth'.'

The fossil of Thapunngaka shawi is on display at Kronosaurus Korner in Richmond.

The research has been published in the Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Indonesia is moving forward with construction of its $4.8 million resort dubbed 'Jurassic Park,' despite a warning from United Nations Educational, Scientific, Cultural Organization (UNESCO) that it could have a negative environmental impact.

The project, located on Rinca Island, seeks to cater to visitors of the Komodo National Park, where visitors can walk among Komodo dragons in the wild.

Work on a series of tourism projects in Indonesia's Komodo National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, began last year, sparking concerns about threats to the local economy and the fragile habitat of the park's namesake, the Komodo dragon.

Last month, UNESCO told a World Heritage Committee conference that the project required a new environmental impact assessment over illegal fishing concerns and the potential risk to the Komodo dragon's natural habitat.

'This project will proceed... it's been proven to have no impact,' Wiratno, a senior official at Indonesia's environment ministry, told Reuters.

Scroll down for video

The project, located on Rinca Island, seeks to cater to visitors of the Komodo National Park, where visitors can walk among Komodo dragons in the wild

UNESCO officials told last month's meeting that they had requested an updated assessment from the Indonesian government but received no response.

Wiratno said a new assessment was being drafted and could be sent in September.

It was not clear exactly what the project entails, but last year, the government said it was building a 'premium tourism spot' on the island.

In a separate statement, Wiratno said the project mainly included renovation work on existing structures and did not pose any danger to the rare Komodo dragons.

Indonesia is home to around 3,100 Komodo dragons, according to government data. The unique lizards grow up to 10 feet long and have a yellow forked tongue

Rima Melani Bilaut of the Indonesian Forum for the Environment (WALHI), an environmental group, said the project could impact the local community, as well as disturb the dragons.

'We urge the government to develop tourism that's based on the people. There are people living there,' she said.

Last year, social media users likened the project to one on a dinosaur island featured in the 'Jurassic Park' films after photos of a dragon standing in front of a big vehicle were widely shared online.

Indonesia is moving forward with construction of its $4.8 million resort dubbed 'Jurassic Park,' despite the United Nations Educational, Scientific, Cultural Organization (UNESCO) warning could have a negative environmental impact

Indonesia is home to around 3,100 Komodo dragons, according to government data. The unique lizards grow up to 10 feet long and have a yellow forked tongue.

The fearsome beasts can weigh up to 200 pounds and are known for preying on much larger animals such as water buffalo.

Komodos have venomous bites and use their trunk-like necks to slash at their prey until they fall weak enough to go for the jugular.

As well as Rinca, another roughly 2,000 Komodos live on the islands of Komodo, Flores and Gili Motang.

Authorities last month unveiled their plans for Rinca with a promotional video of the project set to the theme music from Jurassic Park.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@New 'super-shoes' are allowing athletes at the Tokyo Olympics to smash world records thanks to their carbon-fibre plates and air pod 'mattresses'.

Sports chiefs were already facing huge pressure to ban high-tech footwear before the delayed games even began.

And now the controversial issue – which has been brewing for years – has been thrust into the limelight once again, with all eyes on Nike’s Air Zoom Maxfly.

Norway's 400m hurdles gold medal winner Karsten Warholm today launched a rant against Nike's 'bull****' spike technology after winning one of the 'greatest Olympic races of all time'.

He obliterated his own world record to claim gold while wearing the £170 ($236) Puma EvoSpeed Future Faster+ spikes, designed with the Mercedes F1 team.

But Rai Benjamin from the US, wearing the £165 ($229) Nike Maxfly spikes, came in a very close second ,and also beat the previous world record of 46.70 seconds set by Warholm in Oslo last year.

The new generation of high-tech running shoes – branded a technological arms race between footwear giants – have been created to boost performance, further enhanced by specially designed running tracks.

Expert say this means current speeds achieved by modern athletes can't be compared to those of the past due to the boost the technology provides.

New 'super-shoes' are allowing athletes at the Tokyo Olympics to smash world records thanks to their carbon-fibre plates and air pod 'mattresses'

Warholm pips America's Benjamin Rai to gold in a final that will live long in the memory

COMPARED: NIKE MAXFLY AND PUMA EVOSPEED SPIKES Two of the leading 'super-spikes' are the Nike Maxfly and Puma Evospeed. Nike Air Zoom Maxfly Puma EvoSpeed Future Faster+ Price: £165 Price: £170 Carbon-fibre plate Carbon-fibre plate Air pod cushion Carbon fibre treads Weight: 162g Weight: 135g Advertisement

The issue isn't new and first reared its head in 2016, with Nike's Vaporfly product raising concern among commentators and experts alike.

During the 2016 Olympic marathon in Rio all three male medalists were wearing a prototype of the Nike Vaporfly 4% shoe, with the same technology extended to track races from 2018.

Experts predict the shoe improved the running economy of highly trained runners by four per cent compared to a normal shoe, and improving performance by three per cent.

Since 2016 when the Vaporfly was released the top 50 male marathon runners have improved by about two per cent on average, much of which attributed to the carbon fibre plate.

'The same shoe gives you a massive variability among different athletes — even greater than 10 per cent in some cases,' says Professor Yannis Pitsiladis, of the International Olympic Committee.

'How you respond to the shoe can determine if you're going to be an Olympian or watch it on TV.

'You know who is going to win and who can qualify [for the Games].

'Athletes have qualified because they had access to a super shoe. And many who were not running in these shoes didn't qualify.'

Pitsiladis compares the shoes to a form of 'technological doping' and wants the regulations to be changed so that the shoes cannot determine the outcome of a race.

Lord Sebastian Coe, former British Olympic gold medal winner and middle-distance world record holder, said at a media event in March that he expected there would be a number of records set in Tokyo, but not just because of the new super spike shoes.

'The answer is that I hope we have a clutch of world records in Tokyo and I think they will reflect a whole series of interlocking factors that go to high class performance.'

It was nip and tuck between Warholm and Benjamin right up until the finish line in the final

The Nike (left) worn by Benjaminand Puma (right) worn by Warholm super spike shoes cost between £160 and £170 and are designed to boost the performance of middle-distance runners

How Nike’s £240 Vaporfly sparked the super shoe debate at the 2016 Olympic marathon in Rio… and are now worn by almost ever road runner The debate of super shoes isn't new and first reared its head in 2016, with Nike's £240 Vaporfly product raising concern among commentators and experts alike. Nike Zoom Vaporfly 4% is named a such due to its performance boosting capabilities During the 2016 Olympic marathon in Rio, all three male medallists wore a prototype of the trainer, with the same technology extended to track races from 2018. Now the high-tech trainers, which are lighter and more responsive, are ‘almost ubiquitous on the feet of elite road runners’. That is according to Jonathan Taylor, a sports researcher at Teesside University, who has branded the revolution in footwear development a ‘technological arms race’. Experts predicted the shoe improved the running economy of highly trained runners by four per cent compared to a normal shoe, boosting performance by three per cent. Since 2016 when the Vaporfly was released, the top 50 male marathon runners have improved by about two per cent on average, much of which attributed to the carbon fibre plate. Similar technology was then transferred into track spikes in 2019 which led to middle- and long-distant records falling. Regulations were introduced in January 2020 over the sole thickness of track spikes used in sports other than high jump and long jump. This was due to other companies replicating their carbon-fibre plate and springy foam technology into more spikes for running shoes. The new regulations require a maximum sole thickness of 20mm for up to 400m races and 25mm for any longer distances. However, experts say this is far too lenient, suggesting rules should be stricter and to a point where air pods can't be inserted into the spikes. Advertisement

Coe admitted that World Athletics, of which he is now president, should have done more to tackle the growing 'super spike' problem when he took over in 2015.

A study published by the University of Massachusetts last month explored new innovations in athletics, including lightweight, resilient, and compliant midsole foam, altered geometry, and increased longitudinal bending stiffness in shoes.

They wanted to find a way to quantify the benefit of the new technology, but found too many confounding factors had to be considered.

The team suggested it would be necessary to wait for multiple companies to offer the technology and for it to be so widely used you can track results in competition.

'In the end, we might just need to rely on an unbiased comparison of track performances pre- and post- the introduction of super spikes, or, at the individual level, changes in an athlete’s training or race times,' the authors wrote.

'In several years, we can expect performance analyses into the historical development of annual top 20 and top 50 performances, similar to those currently being published for marathon super shoes.

'It is tempting to attribute any new world record to footwear innovation, but the long-term performance trajectories of, for example, Sydney McLaughlin and Karsten Warholm, cannot be ignored,' the authors said.

In the 400m hurdles, Warholm bested his own world record set last month by 0.76 seconds, but the silver and bronze placed runners also beat the same record.

He admitted super spikes had an impact on times, but insisted there was a difference between the ones he wears and those worn by second place Benjamin.

Warholm was wearing the Puma EvoSpeed Future Faster+ shoes that were developed with support from the Mercedes Formula One team and contain a carbon-fibre plate.

This is designed to aid with energy transfer, and improve overall speed for the athlete as they race on the track.

The Nike Air Zoom Maxfly spikes, worn by Benjamin, are similar but also include an air pod underneath the forefoot to provide a bounce effect.

Warholm described this as being like putting a trampoline in the shoe, saying it takes credibility away from the sport.

His own shoes, he said, were designed to be as credible as can be, focusing on making them thin and light, but that adding a cushion was 'bull****'.

'Of course, technology will always be there but I also want to keep it down to a level where we can actually compare results. That's important,' he said.

Benjamin countered this saying he would run fast no matter what, adding that while there is some efficiency in the shoe, the effort was in the runners themselves.

The designer behind Tokyo Olympic Stadium running track is making athletes faster, as well as new technologies in the shoes they are wearing

QUANTIFYING SUPER-SPIKE SHOES 'NOT POSSIBLE' YET A study by the University of Massachusetts explored new innovations in athletics, including lightweight, resilient, and compliant midsole foam, altered geometry, and increased longitudinal bending stiffness in shoes. They wanted to find a way to quantify the benefit of the new technology, but found too many confounding factors had to be considered. The team suggested it would be necessary to wait for multiple companies to offer the technology and for it to be so widely used you can track results in competition. 'In the end, we might just need to rely on an unbiased comparison of track performances pre- and post- the introduction of super spikes, or, at the individual level, changes in an athlete’s training or race times,' authors wrote. 'In several years, we can expect performance analyses into the historical development of annual top 20 and top 50 performances, similar to those currently being published for marathon super shoes. 'It is tempting to attribute any new world record to footwear innovation, but the long-term performance trajectories of, for example, Sydney McLaughlin and Karsten Warholm, cannot be ignored,' the authors said. The findings have been published in the SportRxiv preprint. Advertisement

Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt has been critical of the super-shoes, saying records set with them is unfair on those from previous eras of athletics.

He told the Guardian he could have run the 100 metres in under 9.5 seconds 'without a doubt' if he had the new generation of spikes.

'When I was told about it I couldn't believe that this is what we have gone to.

'That we are really adjusting the spikes to a level where it's now giving athletes an advantage to run even faster.

'It's weird and unfair for a lot of athletes because I know that in the past they actually tried and the governing body said, 'No, you can't change the spikes'.'

Geoff Burns, an expert in biomechanics from the University of Michigan said that technologies will likely align between manufacturers to create a level playing field among elite athletes.

He told AFP that the sport hasn't completely re-calibrated what's good and what's great due to the rise in technology, adding it will take two years to get a feeling for what is a 'truly exceptional performance' in the new era.

Nike first combined a carbon fibre plate with hyper-responsive foam after the Rio Olympics in road shoes, causing marathon times to tumble.

This was then transferred into track spikes in 2019 which led to middle- and long-distant records falling.

Regulations were introduced in January 2020 over the sole thickness of track spikes used in sports other than high jump and long jump.

This was due to other companies replicating their carbon-fibre plate and springy foam technology into more spikes for running shoes.

The new regulations require a maximum sole thickness of 20mm for up to 400m races and 25mm for any longer distances.

However, experts say this is far too lenient, suggesting rules should be stricter and to a point where air pods can't be inserted into the spikes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Polar bears make use of blocks of ice and boulders to bludgeon unsuspecting walruses on the head and aid in hunting them for food, a new study revealed.

Walruses can weigh as much as 2,800lb, making them a tasty treat for polar bears, but with huge tusks and a thick skull, they are a risky and difficult kill.

Anecdotal evidence from Inuit tribes has long suggested that some polar bears get through the nearly impenetrable skull of a walrus using heavy objects as a weapon.

These accounts are usually dismissed by scientists, but after a polar bear in a zoo in Japan used tools to obtain suspended meat, leading polar bear expert Ian Stirling and colleagues from the University of Alberta decided to investigate further.

'If an experienced Inuit hunter tells you that he’s seen something, it’s worth listening to and very likely to be correct,' Stirling told ScienceNews.

They reviewed observations by Inuit hunters, explorers and naturalists to confirm that tools were infrequently used by polar bears, specifically in hunting walruses.

Polar bears make use of blocks of ice and boulders to bludgeon unsuspecting walruses on the head and aid in hunting them for food, a new study revealed

Walruses can weigh as much as 2,800lb, making them a tasty treat for polar bears, but with huge tusks and a thick skull, they are a risky and difficult kill

POLAR BEAR (URSUS MARITIMUS) The polar bear (Ursus maritimus) is a carnivorous bear native to the Arctic Circle and surrounding seas. They are the largest bear species still alive and the largest land carnivore. An adult male weighs up to 1,540 lb and an adult female is up to 750lb. It is a sister species of the brown bear but evolved to occupy a narrower ecological niche, adapted to the cold. Seals make up most of their diet, but they also hunt for fish and walrus. There is some evidence that they use ice blocks and boulders as tools to help bring down a walrus for food. For thousands of years they have been a major part of the material, spiritual and cultural life of people native to the polar regions and are still important. They are also traditionally known as the 'White Bear' and as the 'nonook,' a name stemming from the Inuit people. Advertisement

Since the 1700s, reports of polar bears using tools to kill walruses have been passed on verbally, according to Sterling.

This was passed to explorers and naturalists by their Inuit guides, based on local traditional ecological knowledge.

There are also more recent accounts of direct observations made by modern Inuit hunters speaking to scientists.

To assess the possibility that polar bears may occasionally use tools to hunt walruses in the wild, Sterling and his team looked back through archive records to find instances of Inuit hunteers speaking to naturalists about polar bear tool use.

They also looked at a recent observation of a polar bear in a zoo in Japan spontaneously using tools to access a new food source.

The male polar bear named GoGo used tools to access meat that had been suspended over his enclosure.

These observations and previously published experiments on brown bears, the closest living relative to polar bears, confirm that, in captivity, polar and brown bears are both capable of conceptualising the use of a tool to obtain a food source that would otherwise not be accessible.

'Based on the information from all our sources, this may occasionally also have been the case in the wild,' Stirling said.

'We suggest that possible tool use by polar bears in the wild is infrequent and mainly limited to hunting walruses because of their large size, difficulty to kill, and their possession of potentially lethal weapons for both their own defence and the direct attack of a predator.'

Anecdotal evidence from Inuit tribes has long suggested that some polar bears get through the nearly impenetrable skull of a walrus using heavy objects as a weapon

These accounts are usually dismissed by scientists, but after a polar bear in a zoo in Japan used tools to obtain suspended meat, leading polar bear expert Ian Stirling and colleagues from the University of Alberta decided to investigate further

'If an experienced Inuit hunter tells you that he’s seen something, it’s worth listening to and very likely to be correct,' Stirling told ScienceNews

'Really, the only species you would want to bonk on the head with a piece of ice would be a walrus,” polar bear expert Andrew Derocher told ScienceNews.

The director of the Polar Bear Science Lab at the University of Alberta, who was not involved in this study, suspects it is just a handful of bears able to use tools.

He said that a mother bear may have figured out how to use a stone, meaning her offspring would also pick up on the skill by watching their mother.

They reviewed observations by Inuit hunters, explorers and naturalists to confirm that tools were infrequently used by polar bears, specifically in hunting walruses

However, he said it was unlikely that it is a skill all polar bears throughout the Arctic would have.

Animals using tools to solve problems has been long regarded as a marker of a higher level of intelligence, based on how humans define intelligence.

Chimpanzees have been seen crafting spears to hunt, dolphins using sea sponges to stir sand to find prey and elephants dropping logs on electric fences.

Studies into the cognitive abilities of polar bears has been lacking, according to Stirling, who said we 'don't know anything experimental or objective at all'.

Since the 1700s, reports of polar bears using tools to kill walruses have been passed on verbally, according to Sterling

They had to rely on subjective evidence and observations to confirm polar bears make use of rocks and ice blocks specifically for the purpose of taking down prey.

“However, we have a great deal of observational information that tends to suggest polar bears are really smart,' Stirling told ScienceNews.

Members of the bear family have large brains in comparison to many other mammals and, combined with sophisticated hunting strategies, it has been assumed they have strong cognitive skills.

Inuk hunter Gabriel Nirlungayuk he's hunted around polar bears since he was seven and has seen some complex hunting behaviours. He told ScienceNews this includes pretending to be asleep in open water to trick young seals to come closer.

The findings have been published in the journal Arctic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists digging near the ancient Talayotic settlement of Son Catlar in Menorca, Spain have unearthed a treasure trove of artifacts from Roman soldiers, dating back to around 100 B.C.

The discovery, which happened in late July, includes an assortment of items found at the site, according to a statement from the University of Alicante.

Included in the find were 'weapons, knives, three arrowheads, spearheads, projectiles, surgical tools, a bronze spatula probe, and so on,' the statement explained.

Son Catlar is the largest Talayotic settlement in the area, surrounded by a stone wall that measures 2,850 feet (870m) in length, according to Heritage Daily.

Archaeologists digging near the Talayotic settlement in Menorca, Spain have unearthed a treasure trove of artifacts from Roman soldiers

The ancient Talayotic settlement of Son Catlar is located in Menorca, Spain

An assortment of items were found at the site, including a knife (pictured)

Other items include three arrowheads, spearheads, projectiles, surgical tools, a bronze spatula probe and more

Occupation at the area started between 2,000 and 1,200 B.C. and lasted until the late Roman period, which ended around 476 A.D.

It's likely that the stone barrier was built several hundred years prior, between the 5th and 4th centuries, B.C., according to Spanish news outlet La Vanguardia.

The stone wall, which measures 2,850 feet (870m) in length, was likely built between the 5th and 4th centuries, BC

It's possible that the Roman soldiers, who conquered the area in the second century B.C., associated the stone barrier with Janus - the Roman god of doors, gates and transitions - given how superstitious they were, Heritage Daily added.

'This type of gate was characteristic of Punic culture, and it was used as a defense system to protect against possible sieges by the Romans,' the statement from the university explained.

'Roman soldiers were very superstitious and used to perform these rites. At that time, the world of gates was charged with magic. The Romans gave a sacred value to the gates of the cities, and sealing one definitively would entail certain actions of a magical nature.'

The dig leader, Fernando Prados, suggested it was the Roman superstitions that may have led to the discoveries being in such good condition, as the soldiers believed they had a 'magical protective character ... against evil spirits when sealing doors.'

'The conservation of the entire perimeter of the wall at Son Catlar makes the site a source of great value, as it provides a great deal of scope for studying the archaeology of conflict and war,' Prados added in the statement.

The wall also has sentry boxes and square towers known as Talayots, which gives the region its name, according to the World Heritage Convention. It was built using cyclonic masonry, which according to the WHC, meant it was constructed 'without mortar,' only using the blocks themselves.

The wall was later strengthened, possibly due to the Roman conquest of the territory or the Punic Wars, the university added.

The Punic Wars took place from 264 to 146 B.C., and artifacts stemming from these times have been recovered in recent years.

In 2013, archaeologists found a treasure trove of items, including helmets, weapons and ancient bronze battle rams found off the Sicilian coast in 2013, from the first Punic War.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cell phone footage shows the moment that a Tesla's Autopilot system brought a Model S to a stop after its allegedly drunk driver fell asleep at the wheel on a highway in Norway.

The high tech system detected that the 24-year-old driver was no longer responsive after he nodded off - allegedly after a night of drinking.

Cell phone footage shot by another motorist shows the man slumped over in the driver's seat as the car drives itself.

The Autopilot system kept the car in its lane and away from other vehicles on the road before coming to a stop in a tunnel.

The Eastern Police District released a statement on its Twitter account saying the man was drunk and denied driving ‘although there is video of him in the car.’

Scroll down for videos

Tesla’s Autopilot may have prevented a deadly crash when the technology brought a Model S to stop after detecting the driver, who was intoxicated, was no longer responsive

Tesla owner in Norway suffers unconsciousness while driving, Tesla autopilot detects it, slows, comes to a stop so EMS can help @elonmusk @Tesla ❤️‍🩹🚑



pic.twitter.com/kl1CEeiHDi — Austin Tesla Club (@AustinTeslaClub) July 31, 2021

Tesla’s Autopilot is an advanced driver assistance system that matches the speed of the Tesla with surrounding traffic, keeps the vehicle in its lane and guides the car through lane changes and ramps.

The technology also automatically engages the turn signal and takes the correct exit – all of these functions may have saved the life of the Norwegian man and those in surrounding vehicles.

The video of the intoxicated driver, who's identity has yet to be revealed, was published on Twitter, which shows him in the front seat of a white Model S driving down the highway and toward the Nøstvet tunnel, according to Electrek.

Once inside the tunnel, the Autopilot stops the vehicle and turns on its hazard lights, all while the drive is still asleep at the wheel.

The incident occurred on a highway in Norway on Friday, when a 24-year-old man got behind the wheel after a night of drinking and feel asleep while the vehicle was still in motion

The video of the intoxicated drive was published on Twitter, which shows him in the front seat of a white Model S that is driving down the highway and toward the Nøstvet tunnel

This is not the first such incident when an intoxicated driver was found asleep inside a moving Tesla.

A California man was arrested in November 2018 in Palo Alto while in his gray Model S after police officers found him passed out at the wheel.

Cops followed the car after spotting the Tesla driving south on Highway 101 at 70 mph while it looked like the driver was passed out behind the wheel.

In order to get the car to stop a California Highway Patrol officer had to get in front of the Tesla to make it slow down and eventually pull over at a gas station.

Although the Autopilot system worked as it should during these potentially fatal incidents, another Tesla driver had a bizarre experience last month when the system mistook the moon for an amber traffic light and slowed the car down as a response.

Once inside the tunnel, the Autopilot stops the vehicle and turns on its hazard lights, all while the drive is still asleep at the wheel

Jordan Nelson posted a video on Twitter showing the flaw in action during an evening drive in Granite Falls, North Carolina. It remains unclear which model of Tesla he drives.

In the video, the moon can be seen low, bright and yellow in the night sky.

However, the console on the dashboard shows an amber traffic light flickering on the screen, indicating the Autopilot system has been tricked.

He wrote: 'Hey Elon Musk, you might want to have your team look into the moon tricking the autopilot system.

'The car thinks the moon is a yellow traffic light and wanted to keep slowing down.'

Musk, who is the co-founder of Tesla, is yet to reply to the tweet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA's Ingenuity helicopter is preparing for its 11th flight on Mars, but the flying robot recently took pictures of an area known as 'Raised Ridges' that is catching the attention of some in the scientific community.

The helicopter took the images of the ridges, which may have been caused by wind and dust or possibly water that once flowed in the now-dry Jezero Crater, on its July 24 flight, according to the US space agency.

'But along with its immersive beauty, the image provides great detail,' Kevin Hand, a scientist at NASA's JPL said in a statement.

NASA's Ingenuity helicopter took pictures of the 'Raised Ridges' area on Mars. The ridges may have been caused by wind and dust or possibly water that once flowed in the now-dry Jezero Crater

'If you look closely, you can see some curious lines across the surfaces of several rocks. Are these just made by eons of wind and dust blowing over the rocks, or might those features tell the story of water? We just don't know yet.'

Thanks to Ingenuity, NASA is effectively able to be in 'two in places at once' with its Perseverance mission, both at the Crater Floor Fractured Rough and Ingenuity flying close by, Hand added.

'Ingenuity is providing a detailed preview of a potentially intriguing geologic features hundreds of meters away from us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After pausing purchases with Bitcoin earlier this year, Tesla CEO Elon Musk reiterated on Wednesday that the electric vehicle maker may start allowing car buyers to pay with the cryptocurrency once the tech exec is more comfortable with its energy usage.

'It looks like Bitcoin is shifting a lot more toward renewables and a bunch of the heavy-duty coal plants that were being used...have been shut down, especially in China,' Musk, 50, said on Wednesday at The B-Word conference, a cryptocurrency event that included Twitter and Square CEO Jack Dorsey and Ark Invest CEO/CIO Cathie Wood.

Tesla CEO Elon Musk said Wednesday the electric vehicle maker may allow car buyers to pay with Bitcoin once he is more comfortable with its energy usage. Musk wants to confirm the percentage of renewable energy is near or higher than 50 percent and the trend is increasing

Musk added that he wants to confirm the percentage of renewable energy is near or higher than 50 percent and if the trend is increasing, 'Tesla will most likely resume accepting Bitcoin.'

During the lengthy conversation, Musk also confirmed that in addition to owning shares of the companies he has founded - Tesla, SpaceX, Neuralink and The Boring Company - he also owns Bitcoin, Dogecoin and Ethereum.

Musk confirmed that he owns Bitcoin, Dogecoin and Ethereum. The price of Bitcoin rose nearly 8 percent to over $32,000 on back of the news, but was more recently trading at $31,678.71

The price of Bitcoin rose nearly 8 percent to over $32,000 on back of the news, but was more recently trading at $31,678.71 late Wednesday, according to Coindesk.

Ethereum also gained following the disclosure, gaining nearly 12 percent. More recently, it was up almost 8 percent to $1,939.18 a coin.

Ethereum also gained following the disclosure, gaining nearly 12 percent. More recently, it was up almost 8 percent to $1,939.18 a coin

THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF BITCOIN Earlier this year, billionaire Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates highlighted the negative impact mining Bitcoin has on the environment. 'Bitcoin uses more electricity per transaction than any other method known to mankind,' Gates said, speaking to the The New York Times. 'It's not a great climate thing.' The cryptocurrency is 'mined' by high-powered computers that continuously solve computational math puzzles, the complexity of which means the processors require huge amounts of energy. Currently fossil fuels, through connection to national grids, are the primary source of power for many of these mining farms. A 2018 study published in Nature found huge farms of computers used to mine Bitcoin could produce enough greenhouse gases to raise global temperatures 3.6°F (2°C) in less than three decades. Studies have shown that the annual carbon emissions from the electricity generated to mine and process the cryptocurrency is equal to the amount emitted by whole countries, including New Zealand and Argentina. There are calls, and some efforts, to switch to full renewable power generation for these facilities. Advertisement

Musk also said that SpaceX owns Bitcoin, but did not disclose how much of the cryptocurrency the space exploration company owns.

Like other cryptocurrencies including Ethereum and the aforementioned dogecoin, bitcoin is not yet widely accepted for commerce in major economies, hampered by its volatility and relatively costly and slow processing times.

During Wednesday's talk, Musk said that 'bitcoin by itself simply can not scale to replace the monetary system of the world at the base layer. But with a second layer, it's possible, depending upon how that's implemented.'

Musk's comments are a reiteration of what he said in June, when the world's second-richest man tweeted that Tesla would start taking Bitcoin payments for cars when miners can ensure 'reasonable clean energy usage.'

'When there's confirmation of reasonable (~50%) clean energy usage by miners with positive future trend, Tesla will resume allowing Bitcoin transactions,' Musk tweeted on June 13.

Musk had announced in May that Tesla would no longer accept bitcoin for car purchases, citing long-brewing environmental concerns for a swift reversal in the company's position on the cryptocurrency.

Musk had tweeted in May that Tesla 'will not be selling any bitcoin' and 'has not sold any bitcoin.'

The tech exec took issue with the vast computing power required to process bitcoin transactions and in posted messages appeared to lament a breakup with bitcoin.

Tesla shares are down roughly 30 percent since it disclosed in February that it had purchased $1.5 billion worth of bitcoin.

Bitcoin, the world's most popular cryptocurrency, was launched back in 2009.

In May, Tesla said it would no longer accept Bitcoin for purchases, citing environmental concerns In February, Tesla disclosed that it had purchased $1.5 billion worth of Bitcoin

The problem with bitcoin is the energy involved in mining new coins and verifying existing value, according to billionaire Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates.

It uses more electricity per transaction than any other method or currency known to humanity due to the way it is mined by high-powered computers.

The machines continuously solve math puzzles that require fast, expensive processors that use huge amounts of energy to run and keep cool.

These farms are often connected to the electricity grid, and in most countries fossil fuels, especially coal, are the main source of energy for these national grids.

A 2018 study published in Nature found huge farms of computers used to mine Bitcoin could produce enough greenhouse gases to raise global temperatures 3.6°F (2°C) in less than three decades.

Studies have shown that the annual carbon emissions from the electricity generated to mine and process the cryptocurrency is equal to the amount emitted by whole countries, including New Zealand and Argentina.

The main cost of sourcing new bitcoins is in the cost of electricity.

In the earliest days of Bitcoin, a miner could earn 50 BTC every few minutes, but the more bitcoin are uncovered, the harder it is to find them, creating a scarcity.

Today a dedicated $2,000 (£1,419) bitcoin miner will generate about $8 (£5.68) in bitcoin revenue per day, not including the cost of electricity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cannabis is among one of the oldest cultivated plants in the world, having been domesticated in China some 12,000 years ago, a study has concluded.

Researchers led from the University of Lausanne analysed the whole genome sequences of 110 Cannabis sativa to discover where the plants have their roots.

Their investigation revealed that cannabis — as we would be familiar with it — emerged in China by the Neolithic period.

Despite having long been an important source of fibre as well as both medicinal and recreational drugs, much has been unknown about Cannabis' domestication history.

This is because legal restrictions around the plant make collecting samples for analysis difficult, the team explained.

Cannabis is among one of the oldest cultivated plants in the world, having been domesticated in China some 12,000 years ago, a study has concluded. Pictured: Cannabis landraces seen growing in Qinghai province, central China

Researchers led from the University of Lausanne analysed the whole genome sequences of 110 Cannabis sativa from across the globe (pictured) to discover where the plants have their roots

CANNABIS: THE FACTS Cannabis is a Class B illegal drug in the UK, meaning possession can result in a five year prison sentence and those who supply the drug face up to 14 years in jail. The drug is widely used for recreational purposes and can make users feel relaxed and happy, but smoking it can also lead to feelings of panic, anxiety or paranoia. Scientific studies have shown the drug can alleviate depression, anxiety and stress, but heavy use may worsen depression in the long term by reducing the brain's ability to let go of bad memories. It can also contribute to mental health problems among people who already have them, or increase users' risk of psychosis or schizophrenia, according to research. Advertisement

The study was undertaken by molecular ecologist Guangpeng Ren of the University of Lausanne, Switzerland and colleagues.

'Cannabis sativa has long been an important source of fibre extracted from hemp and both medicinal and recreational drugs based on cannabinoid compounds,' the researchers wrote in their paper.

'Here, we investigated its poorly known domestication history.

'We show that C. sativa was first domesticated in early Neolithic times in East Asia and that all current hemp and drug cultivars diverged from an ancestral gene pool currently represented by feral plants and landraces in China.'

(A landrace is a locally adapted, traditional variety of a plant that develops distinctive characteristics over the course of time following isolation from other populations of the same species and the impacts of agriculture.)

In their study, Dr Ren and colleagues compiled 110 whole cannabis genomes from across the globe — including both 28 existing, publicly-available genomes and 82 new ones which the team sequenced.

Together, the team explained, these genomes cover the full spectrum of wild-growing feral plants, landraces, historical cultivars and modern hybrids from both the hemp and drug types.

Analysing the genomes they had collected, the team were able to characterise the genetic relationships between 104 different genetically unique cannabis plants.

They found that these so-called accessions were clustered into four genetic groups — basal cannabis (plants from China and the US), drug-type feral (from southern China, India and Pakistan) and Hemp-type and drug-type (both distributed globally).

Furthermore, the researchers concluded that the early domesticated ancestors of both the drug and hemp types diverged from basal cannabis some 12,000 years ago.

The analysis also indicated that the closest descendants of the ancestors of hemp and marijuana are the feral cannabis plants and landraces seen in China today — while the pure wild progenitors of C. sativa have may now be extinct.

'Contrary to a widely accepted view, which associates Cannabis with a Central Asian centre of crop domestication […] our results are consistent with a single domestication origin of C. sativa in East Asia,' the researchers wrote.

This, they added, is 'in line with early archaeological evidence.'

Analysing the genomes they had collected, the team were able to characterise the genetic relationships between 104 different genetically unique cannabis plants. They found that these so-called accessions were clustered into four genetic groups — basal cannabis (plants from China and the US), drug-type feral (from southern China, India and Pakistan) and Hemp-type and drug-type (both distributed globally)

The team identified several genes that may well have been selected for during the cultivation of cannabis. These included those relating to branch formation, the timing of flowering, cannabinoid biosynthesis and potency and lignin formation.

These genes, for example, are what distinguish current varieties used for hemp from those used to manufacture drugs — which, according to the genetic analysis, split some 4,000 years ago.

Hemp varieties have been cultivated to grow tall and non-branched, with lots of fibre, while shorter, branched drug strains have been selected to generate more resin with psychoactive effects.

The researchers concluded that the early domesticated ancestors of both the drug and hemp types diverged from basal cannabis some 12,000 years ago. Pictured: A feral cannabis plant growing in the middle of a grassland in Qinghai province, central China

'Our study […] provides new insights into the domestication and global spread of a plant with divergent structural and biochemical products at a time in which there is a resurgence of interest in its use,' the researchers wrote.

This interest, they added, is 'reflecting changing social attitudes and corresponding challenges to its legal status in many countries.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Science Advances.

Despite having long been an important source of fibre as well as both medicinal and recreational drugs, much has been unknown about Cannabis' domestication history. Pictured: Cannabis plants seen today growing in a corn field in northeast China
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists are working to mass-produce the 'holy grail' of blood sugar testing to make it easier for diabetics to check their blood sugar levels.

The researchers, at the University of Newcastle in Australia, have created a non-invasive, convenient and pain-free strip that checks glucose levels in the saliva.

If rolled out, the strip would mean people with diabetes would no longer have to prick their finger to draw blood during their daily checks.

They could just place the strip on their tongue, wait a few minutes and then see the results on a smartphone app.

The project has secured AU$6.3 million (£3.4 million) in funding from the Australian government to establish a facility to mass-produce the test kits should clinical trials be passed.

Construction of the facility will begin this year, with the first devices due to roll off the production line by 2023.

Individual testing strips could then be purchased in bulk in pharmacies for only about a penny each.

Scroll down for video

A non-invasive, printable saliva test strip for diabetics is seen at the University of Newcastle in Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia

The project has been led by Paul Dastoor, a professor of physics at the University of Newcastle in New South Wales.

Professor Dastoor was inspired by his wife, a primary school teacher who has helped young children to monitor their blood glucose levels.

'It's a heartbreaking scenario when the lunch bell rings and everyone runs to the playground, bar an unfortunate few who stay back to surrender their finger for blood testing at every meal time,' he said.

Paul Dastoor, physicist and research leader at the University of Newcastle, holds non-invasive, printable saliva test strips for diabetics

WHAT IS A BIOSENSOR? A biosensor is a device that monitors and transmits information about a biological process. Biosensors use 'biomarkers' that are indicators of a disease or condition in bodily fluids (blood, urine, saliva, sweat). As well as disease, biosensors are employed in applications like detection of pollutants and disease-causing microorganisms. Advertisement

'Our vision was to create a world where no one needs to bleed in order to eat.

'[This test] really does open up the prospect of pain-free, low-cost glucose testing and hopefully much better outcomes for diabetes sufferers.

'The exciting prospect is that in the future we might have a test for diabetes that doesn't involve stabbing yourself four to six times a day.'

Glucose in saliva exists in minute concentrations, so an 'incredibly powerful platform' is needed to detect it.

'Saliva also contains a plethora of other substances, so you've then got to tune out a lot of 'noise' to ensure results are accurate,' Professor Dastoor said.

The strip is a biosensor, meaning it measures biological or chemical reactions by generating signals.

It's similar in size to a stick of chewing gum, but considerably thinner.

The strip consists of a very thin transistor that contains an enzyme called glucose oxidase.

When placed on the tongue, the glucose oxidase reacts with glucose in the saliva to form hydrogen peroxide.

This hydrogen peroxide is then 'decomposed' into hydrogen ions that generate an electrical signal, which can be picked up, processed and displayed by a smartphone app.

The device is a biosensor, meaning it measures biological or chemical reactions by generating signals. The strips could be mass-produced at low cost

Amazingly, the electronic materials in the transistor are inks, meaning the test could be made through printing at a low cost.

The paint, or ink, used in the tests has semiconducting particles, so electronic designs can be downloaded and printed from an inkjet printer.

'Imagine being able to have your own ink at home, allowing you to print your own glucose test,' Professor Dastoor said.

According to Professor Dastoor, the technology could also be transferred to Covid-19 testing and allergen, hormone and cancer testing.

The university is already working with Harvard University on a test for Covid-19 using the same technology.

'The holy grail of glucose testing has been something that is non-invasive,' he said.

For diabetics, managing their blood sugar levels typically means pricking their fingers multiple times a day with a lancet and then placing a drop of blood on a testing strip. Understandably, some diabetes sufferers avoid the painful process by minimising their tests (stock image)

'I think its going to radically change the way we think about medical devices and in particular sensors because we can print these at remarkably low cost.'

Diabetes is predicted to become the most common disease in Australia by 2023, ahead of cancer and heart disease.

Globally, the condition affects more than 460 million adults across the world, and is the seventh leading cause of disability.

It accounts for more than $320 billion (£250 million) in health care costs in the US alone.

More than four million people in the UK have diabetes, with 90 per cent of these cases classified as type 2. The figure is set to rise to 5 million by 2025 because of the obesity epidemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA has captured images of a 'spectacular' set of rings around a black hole that looks like a stargate, 7,800 light-years from Earth.

The black hole and its corresponding star system, known as V404 Cygni, were photographed by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory and the Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory.

The black hole is pulling material away from the star in the system, which has roughly half the mass of the sun, an event that created the rings visible only in X-rays.

Scroll down for video

NASA took images of a 'spectacular' set of rings around a black hole 7,800 light-years from Earth. The black hole and its star system, V404 Cygni, were photographed by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory and Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory. The black hole is pulling material from the star, which creates the rings visible only in X-rays

'The rings tell astronomers not only about the black hole's behavior, but also about the landscape between V404 Cygni and Earth,' researchers at the Chandra X-Ray Observatory wrote in a statement.

'For example, the diameter of the rings in X-rays reveals the distances to the intervening dust clouds the light ricocheted off. If the cloud is closer to Earth, the ring appears to be larger, and vice versa. The light echoes appear as narrow rings rather than wide rings or haloes because the X-ray burst lasted only a relatively short period of time.'

The rings are created by light echoes, similar to what happens on Earth when sound waves bounce off hard surfaces.

'Instead of sound waves bouncing off a canyon wall, the light echoes around V404 Cygni were produced when a burst of X-rays from the black hole system bounced off of dust clouds between V404 Cygni and Earth,' the statement added.

'Cosmic dust is not like household dust but is more like smoke, and consists of tiny, solid particles.'

The rings are created by light echoes, similar to when sound waves bounce off hard surfaces on Earth The X-ray burst from the star system was first detected in June 2015

The rings are helpful to scientists to understand the black hole in greater detail, as well as the distance between V404 Cygni and Earth, the statement added.

'For example, the diameter of the rings in X-rays reveals the distances to the intervening dust clouds the light ricocheted off. If the cloud is closer to Earth, the ring appears to be larger, and vice versa. The light echoes appear as narrow rings rather than wide rings or haloes because the X-ray burst lasted only a relatively short period of time.'

The X-ray burst from the star system was first detected in June 2015, but it wasn't until recently that images were released.

The composite image is a combination of the X-rays that were seen by the Chandra Observatory and data from the Pan-STARRS telescope in Hawaii that show the stars in the field of view.

The composite image is a combination of the X-rays that were seen by the Chandra Observatory and data from the Pan-STARRS telescope in Hawaii

Chandra watched the system between July 11 and 25, 2015, while Swift made 50 observations of it between June 30 and August, 25, 2015.

The Swift Observatory was launched into space 17 years ago and the Chandra X-ray Observatory was launched into space July 23, 1999.

A study of the X-ray burst was published in July 2016 in The Astrophysical Journal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs and the majority of life on Earth 66 million years ago left sharks unscathed, according to a new analysis of ancient teeth.

Sharks are nature's ultimate survivors, according to new research into the ancient fish species teeth by a team from Uppsala University in Sweden.

The city-sized asteroid that smashed into the Gulf of Mexico 66 million years ago wiped out almost all life on land and in the water, including the dinosaurs.

However, the new research, that involved analysing shark teeth to look for genetic diversity over time, revealed they were left unscathed by the catastrophic event.

They analysed 1,239 fossil shark teeth from nine different species, including eight currently alive and one extinct, spanning a 27 million year period.

Some shark species were in decline before the asteroid hit, but others began to thrive after the event and their ability to repair DNA damage may be why the apex predators were able to push through and go on to thrive to this day.

The asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs and the majority of life on Earth 66 million years ago left sharks unscathed, according to a new analysis of ancient teeth

However, the new research, that involved analysing shark teeth to look for genetic diversity over time, revealed they were left unscathed by the catastrophic event

KEY FINDINGS: SHARK SPECIES CAME OUT OF GREAT EXTINCTION UNSCATHED Researchers analysed 1,239 fossil shark teeth, including species in eight existing orders and one extinct order. The teeth span a 27-million-year period from the late Cretaceous 83.6 million years ago to the early Paleogene 56 million years ago. This covers the so-called K-Pg boundary that brought the age of the dinosaurs to an end. The scientists found that shark dental diversity was already declining prior to the K-Pg boundary, but remained relatively constant during the mass-extinction event itself. Some groups of apex predators, particularly those with triangular blade-like teeth, did suffer selective extinctions during the period studied, which may have been linked to the extinction of their prey species. However, other shark lineages increased in dental diversity after the K-Pg boundary. Advertisement

Lead author Mohamad Bazzi said the explosive event, that left a 93 mile diameter crater, was 'not as dramatic for sharks as it was most other vertebrate lineages.'

The finding adds to evidence the iconic Great White and its cousins are the hardiest creatures on the planet, with an ability to repair its own DNA.

Great White sharks also have stronger immune systems than humans, enabling them to fight off a host of potentially deadly infections.

Sharks have been around for at least 450 million years - and have been dubbed 'living fossils' due to their extensive longevity.

'Sharks are iconic marine predators that have survived multiple mass extinctions over geologic time,' said Bazzi.

Few shark skeletons have been unearthed as they are made of cartilage, which is much softer than bone, and so rarely survives fossilisation.

Mr Bazzi said their prolific fossil record is represented mainly by isolated shed teeth, rather than bones as found in other ancient creatures.

The Swedish team scanned 1,239 teeth from nine species spanning 27 million-years, dating back to between the late Cretacious 83.6 million years ago and the early Paleogene 56 million years ago - after the asteroid hit the Earth.

Some groups of apex predators - particularly those with triangular blade-like teeth - suffered selective extinctions during the period.

It could have been due to the marine animals that they preyed upon dying out, but this was offset by other lineages increasing over time.

They included mackerel sharks in the Odontaspididae family - such as today's Great White which evolved much later.

They are known for razor-sharp, fang-like teeth adapted for feeding on fish and their expansion coincided with the emergence of finned fish in the early Paleogene.

'This pattern of selective extinctions may reflect an ecological shift from specialist tetrapod predators to more general bony fish diets,' said Bazzi.

The study in PLOS Biology is the first global investigation of teeth shapes in multiple shark groups across the end Cretaceous mass extinction.

Mr Bazzi said: 'Shark diversity was unaffected when the dinosaurs were wiped out.'

Some shark species were in decline before the asteroid hit, but others began to thrive after the event and their ability to repair DNA damage may be why the apex predators were able to push through and go on to thrive to this day

Mapping of the Great White's genome has revealed mutations that protect it against cancer and other illnesses and scientists hope more research could one day allow these findings to be applied to treating illnesses in humans.

Unstable genes are what make us vulnerable to aged-related diseases, and sharks have been around for so long their DNA is more tolerant to damage over time.

Sharks could also help wound-healing and blood-clotting because of their ability to recover quickly from serious injuries.

Mr Bazzi added: 'Ultimately, our study reveals a complicated morphological response to the end Cretaceous mass extinction.

'It highlights an event that influenced the evolution of modern sharks.'

The findings have been published in the journal PLOS Biology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple's next iPhones, set to be announced in the next several weeks, will have major upgrades to both its photo and video taking capabilities and a smaller notch, according to a new report.

The new devices are expected to let users take videos in a portrait mode, similar to how they take photos now, using a higher-quality format known as ProRes, according to Bloomberg.

Apple's next iPhones will have major upgrades for photos and videos. The new devices may allow users take videos in a portrait mode and blur the background

The Portrait mode, first introduced five years ago, lets users take photos and blur the background to focus on people or objects in the foreground.

This feature is coming to video in the new iPhones, which Apple reportedly calls Cinematic Video.

The ProRes feature will allow iPhone users to take higher-quality videos, including in HD and 4K formats, and allow professional filmmakers more editing capabilities in post-production work.

In addition, the devices will use machine learning to improve the look and color of photos with a new filter system.

The filter system for the new iPhones will let people control the look of colors and highlights, adding capabilities to view them in warmer or cooler temperatures, as well as other features, such as deeper shadows.

Although Apple has incorporated filters in its Camera app since 2013, which put it in competition with Instagram, the new feature will use machine learning and apple changes to select objects in the photos, as opposed to the entire picture.

Both updates are expected to be part of the primary selling points of the next iPhone, which has not been named just yet.

Apple's next iPhones will have a smaller camera notch, something that many consumers have complained about in the past

In addition to the camera upgrades, the next iPhones will use Apple's new, faster A15 chip and have a smaller notch at the top, something that many consumers have complained about in the past.

In Apple's most recent quarter, the Cupertino, California-based tech giant reported $63.95 billion in product-related revenue, including $39.6 billion from the iPhone.

Many consumers have upgraded their devices, including smartphones and laptops, during the COVID-19 pandemic, as many employees have worked from home for a significant portion of the past 18 months.

Apple has not yet responded to a request for comment from DailyMail.com.

All of the new devices are expected to retain the same screen sizes as the iPhone 12 models, including 5.4-inch and 6.1-inch for the regular models and 6.1-inch and 6.7-inch for the Pro models and be made of the same material as previous devices, something that may change with the 2022 iPhone model.

In July, leaked images posted to social media in China suggested that the next iPhone would have a larger camera bump with lenses laid out diagonally, allowing users to take better wide-angle and zoomed-in photos.

A recent survey conducted by the used-phone site SellCell found that almost 75 percent of respondents thought Apple would avoid labeling its next-gen smartphone with the number '13,' considered unlucky in some cultures.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With their black and white bodies and stately demeanor, Emperor penguins are without a doubt one of the most majestic creatures in the animal kingdom.

But a new study has warned that the birds are on the pathway to extinction, with a whopping 98 per cent of colonies expected to be wiped out by 2100 if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise at levels similar to today.

Carbon emissions have previously been linked with an increase in extreme climate events, such as glacial calving and sea ice loss in the Antarctic, where Emperor penguins live.

Emperor penguins currently number about 270,000 to 280,000 breeding pairs, or 625,000 to 650,000 individuals.

This means that there could be just 13,000 individual birds left by 2100.

Following the study, led by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts, the US Fish and Wildlife Service has announced a proposal to list the species as threatened under the Endangered Species Act.

Scroll down for video

A new study has warned that Emperor penguins are on the pathway to extinction, with with a whopping 98 per cent of colonies expected to be wiped out by 2100 if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise at levels similar to today

Why do greenhouse gas emissions affect penguins? Emperor penguins breed exclusively in Antarctica during winter. They endure temperatures of -80°F (-62°C) and wind speeds approaching 90mph (144kph) by huddling together in groups of several thousand birds. But the birds can't survive without sufficient sea ice. 'Emperor penguins live in a delicate balance with their environment, there is a sea ice 'Goldilocks' zone', said Ms Jenouvrier. 'If there is too little sea ice, chicks can drown when sea ice breaks up early; if there is too much sea ice, foraging trips become too long and more arduous, and the chicks may starve. Advertisement

'The lifecycle of Emperor penguins is tied to having stable sea ice, which they need to breed, to feed and to molt,' said Stephanie Jenouvrier, a penguin ecologist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

In the study, the team analysed the projected dynamics of all known emperor penguin colonies under different greenhouse gas emission scenarios using a climate‐dependent meta-population model.

The analysis found that by 2100, 98 per cent of Emperor penguin colonies may be pushed to the brink of extinction, if no changes are made to current rates of carbon emissions and climate change, and global temperatures increase by 4°C.

Meanwhile, around 70 per cent of colonies will be in danger sooner, by 2050, according to the research.

The new study looked at overall warming trends and the increasing likelihood of extreme weather fluctuations due to global warming.

And it noted that extremely low levels of sea ice in 2016 led to a massive breeding failure of an Emperor penguin colony in Antarctica's Halley Bay.

That year, seasonal sea ice broke up before penguin chicks had time to develop waterproof adult feathers, and about 10,000 baby birds drowned, Jenouvrier said.

The colony did not recover afterward.

Emperor penguins breed exclusively in Antarctica during winter.

They endure temperatures of -80°F (-62°C) and wind speeds approaching 90mph (144kph) by huddling together in groups of several thousand birds.

But the birds can't survive without sufficient sea ice.

The analysis found that by 2100, 98 per cent of Emperor penguin colonies may be pushed to the brink of extinction, if no changes are made to current rates of carbon emissions and climate change, and global temperatures increase by 4°C

'Emperor penguins live in a delicate balance with their environment, there is a sea ice "Goldilocks" zone', said Ms Jenouvrier.

'If there is too little sea ice, chicks can drown when sea ice breaks up early; if there is too much sea ice, foraging trips become too long and more arduous, and the chicks may starve.'

Emperor penguins - the world's largest penguins - currently number about 270,000 to 280,000 breeding pairs, or 625,000 to 650,000 individuals.

Emperor penguins breed exclusively in Antarctica during winter.Pictured is a map showing the colonies most at risk due to melting sea ice

'Given the species' reliance upon sea ice for breeding, molting, and feeding, the most important threat for emperor penguins is climate change, which would lead to Antarctic Sea ice losses over this century,' explained Marika Holland a climate scientist with the National Center for Atmospheric Research.

'Trends in warming and consequential sea ice losses through the end of the century are clear and unidirectional under all projections from all climate models.'

The team hopes their findings will spur on global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Phil Trathan, the head of conservation biology with the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), added: 'The future of emperor penguins ultimately depends upon decisions made today.

'The most important action is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to limit further warming.

'We hope that global society will listen to science and meet the moment. Protecting these systems requires legal frameworks that must be appropriately founded and based on the best available scientific evidence.

'Building an international framework will be key, but in the meantime immediate efforts should focus on those tools already in place, such as the ESA.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA's incredible supersonic aircraft dubbed the 'son of Concorde' is taking shape as it gears up for its first test flight next year.

The American space agency shared a time lapse video of the X-59 Quiet SuperSonic Technology's (QueSST) construction for the craft, which is taking place at Lockheed Martin Skunk Works in Palmdale, California.

The craft is designed to prevent a startling sonic boom from being heard on the ground when it cruises at Mach 1.4, or 1,074 miles per hour. For comparison purposes, the speed of sound is 767mph.

The short 43-second clip shows the development of the fuselage that houses the cockpit, and the 29.5-foot-wide wing that holds the fuel systems and parts of the control systems.

At the end of the video, viewers see the tail assembly coming together.

This section is built with heat resistant materials that protect the aircraft from the heat given off by the X-59's GE F414 engine, which sits in the upper section of the craft.

This is one of many purposeful design elements that ensure the aircraft is shaped as desired to produce a quieter noise to people below.

Also nearing completion is the tail designed with heat resistant materials, which will contain the engine compartment.

Scroll down for videos

NASA's incredible supersonic aircraft that will travel faster than the speed of sound, which is 767 miles per hour, is taking shape as it gears up for its first test flight next year

Jay Brandon, NASA chief engineer for the Low Boom Flight Demonstrator (LBFD) project, said in a statement: 'We've now transitioned from being a bunch of separate parts sitting around on different parts of the production floor to an airplane.'

X-59, first announced in 2018, is being made in collaboration with Lockheed Martin, which said the move 'marks a milestone to bring supersonic commercial travel over land one step closer to reality.'

NASA awarded the American aerospace and defense company a $247.5 million contract to build the X-59, which is set to finish development this year and begin test flights in 2022.

The team began the venture by creating laser projects of the aircraft's wing, tail assembly and fuselage to ensure their designs fit perfectly.

The American space agency shared a timelapse of the X-59 Quiet SuperSonic Technology's (QueSST) construction for the craft dubbed the 'son of Concorde,' which is taking place at Lockheed Martin Skunk Works in Palmdale, California

The short clip shows the development of the fuselage that houses the cockpit and the 29.5-foot-wide wing that holds the fuel systems and parts of the control systems

As the project has progressed, Lockheed and NASA have started to put the pieces together, with Lockheed Martin's program director David Richardson likening it to Legos.

'The extensive use of features and pre-drilled, full-size fastener holes has significantly reduced the time it takes to locate and fit parts, especially mating large assemblies like this,' Richardson said in a statement.

'It is sort of like how Legos go together. We used the laser tracker to make sure it is all aligned per the engineering specs before we permanently bolted it all together.'

The team celebrated when they confirmed all the hardware would fit in the real craft.

Dave Richwine, NASA's LBFD deputy project manager for technology, said: 'A milestone like this - seeing the airplane coming together as a single unit - really reinvigorates and motivates the team.'

Also nearing completion is the tail designed with heat resistant materials, which will contain the engine compartment

The front part of the craft, known as the fuselage, helps form the entire shape of the supersonic craft. This area will soon get its 30-foot-long nose that is specifically designed to minimize resistance associate with shock from the craft traveling faster than the speed of sound.

The fuselage (the front part of the craft) helps form the entire shape of the supersonic craft.

This portion of the craft will soon get its 30-foot-long nose that is specifically designed to minimize resistance associated with shock from the craft traveling faster than the speed of sound.

According to NASA, the cockpit will look more like an office with its cutting-edge technology that helps pilots navigate the powerful aircraft.

The cockpit will contain the forward-facing 'window' the eXternal Vision System (XVS), which consists of two cameras mounted above and below the X-59's nose.

The XVS serves as an additional safety aid to help the pilot maneuver safely through the skies; it's also the only system that will fit in the cockpit – other variations would protrude through the canopy, according to NASA.

The video also shows the wing, what NASA says is the 'most recognizable part of the airplane.

Later this year, Lockheed Martin plans to ship the X-59 to a sister facility in Ft. Worth, Texas, where ground testing will be done to ensure the aircraft can withstand the loads and stresses that typically occur during flight

Dubbed the 'son of Concorde,' the craft is designed to prevent a startling sonic boom from being heard on the ground when it cruises at Mach 1.4 (925mph)

Richwine explained that this was 'the most complicated section and first section of the X-59 that was fabricated by Lockheed Martin.'

'The Lockheed Martin team used robotic machines with names that sound like pilot call signs – Mongoose and COBRA – to manufacture the wing before its mate to the tail assembly and fuselage,' NASA shared in the statement.

'Mongoose is a tool with the ability to weave together composite wing skins using ultraviolet light to bind the composite material COBRA - Combined Operation: Bolting and Robotic AutoDrill – efficiently created holes that allowed the team to attach the wing skins to the wing frame.'

Later this year, Lockheed Martin plans to ship the X-59 to a sister facility in Ft. Worth, Texas, where ground testing will be done to ensure the aircraft can withstand the loads and stresses that typically occur during flight.

The team will also calibrate and test the fuel systems, sending the X-59 back to California for more tests before it hits the skies for its first test flight sometime in 2022.

In 2024, NASA will fly the X-59 over several communities around the nation to gauge people's response to the sonic thump sound produced by the aircraft – if they hear anything at all

If the test flight is successful, NASA plans to fly X-59 over the test range at the agency's Armstrong Flight Research Center in California in 2023 to prove it can produce a quieter sonic thump and is safe to operate in the National Airspace System.

In 2024, NASA will fly the X-59 over several communities around the nation to gauge people's response to the sonic thump sound produced by the aircraft – if they hear anything at all.

'The data collected will be given to the Federal Aviation Administration and the International Civil Aviation Organization for their consideration in changing the existing bans on supersonic flight over land,' according to NASA.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA Administrator and former astronaut Bill Nelson believes it's likely that humans will get some kind of indication that intelligent life outside of our own exists in the universe.

The 78-year-old former US Senator told CNBC's Shepard Smith that it's likely that life exists in the universe, pointing to its age and expanse as potential reasons for intelligent life to exist.

'If you have a universe that is 13.5 billion years - it is so big - is there another chance for another sun and another planet that has an atmosphere like ours?' Nelson said.

'I would say yes, so I think we're gonna get some indication that there is intelligent life out there.'

He added that NASA has been 'involved for years' looking for life, referring to NASA's Astrobiology program.

'We're looking for life on Mars, on the other planets, in the cosmos, trying to determine other suns that have planets with a habitable atmosphere,' Nelson pointed out.

NASA Administrator Bill Nelson believes it's likely that we will get some kind of indication that intelligent life outside of our own exists in the universe, the 78-year-old former astronaut said on Tuesday

NASA's Perseverance rover - along with its Ingenuity helicopter - are currently on the Red Planet, looking for fossilized evidence of life as one of the mission's goals.

Nelson's comments on the subject are the second time in less than two weeks he has said humans may not be alone in the universe.

After the release of the Pentagon's report on unidentified aerial phenomena last month, Nelson said that he had seen the classified version and believes 'there is clearly something there.'

'We don’t think [it is an adversary], but when it comes to universe, remember the universe is so large, we have a program in NASA called the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence,' Nelson told CNN in late June.

'But thus far, we don’t have any receipt communication from something that’s intelligent.'

Nelson's comments are the second time in less than two weeks he has said humans may not be alone in the universe. After the release of the Pentagon's report on unidentified aerial phenomena last month, he said that he had seen the classified version and believes 'there is clearly something there'

In June, the Pentagon said it had no explanation for 143 of the 144 unidentified aerial phenomenon observations dating back to 2004

The declassified report, which came from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, added that it lacks sufficient data to determine the nature of mysterious flying objects

'In 18 incidents, described in 21 reports, observers reported unusual UAP movement patterns or flight characteristics'

June's long-awaited report from the Pentagon on the subject of 'unidentified aerial phenomenon' (UAPs) offered no explanation for 143 of the 144 observations dating back to 2004.

The declassified report, which came from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, added that it lacks sufficient data to determine the nature of mysterious flying objects.

'In 18 incidents, described in 21 reports, observers reported unusual UAP movement patterns or flight characteristics,' the report reads.

'Some UAP appeared to remain stationary in winds aloft, move against the wind, maneuver abruptly, or move at considerable speed, without discernable means of propulsion. In a small number of cases, military aircraft systems processed radio frequency (RF) energy associated with UAP sightings.

'The UAPTF holds a small amount of data that appear to show UAP demonstrating acceleration or a degree of signature management. Additional rigorous analysis are necessary by multiple teams or groups of technical experts to determine the nature and validity of these data.

'We are conducting further analysis to determine if breakthrough technologies were demonstrated.'

One of the videos was captured off the coast of Jacksonville, Florida, in 2015 (pictured)

The other video shows the notorious 2004 'Tic Tac' incident (pictured) that was recorded over the Pacific Ocean

The term UFO has been more recently replaced by unidentified aerial phenomenon, especially in light of the U.S. Pentagon declassifying three videos in April 2020.

The footage had been previously acknowledged as real by the Navy, and captured what pilots recorded on their video sensors during training flights in 2004 and 2015.

Two of the clips were first published in 2017 by the New York Times and the third by the To The Stars Academy in 2018 - a group that specializes in unexplained phenomenon and was founded by Blink-182 guitarist Tom DeLonge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Furniture giant IKEA has come under criticism for poor quality and suspect craftsmanship, which has result in many items finding their way to landfills instead of being reused.

However, the company's Canadian arm is working hard to change that mindset, creating instructions on how to repurpose some of its products for other uses, similar to Game of Thrones using rugs for costumes.

The company says its new Repurposeful Instructions adds to the company's commitment to sustainability, turning items such as an IVAR cabinet into a beehive or a FABRIKÖR into a terrarium or even its 79 cent shopping bags into a hanging garden.

IKEA created instructions to repurpose some of its products for other uses. Cabinets can be turned into a beehive, a FABRIKÖR into a terrarium and shopping bags into a hanging garden

Scroll down for video

'We really believe in the power of small, sustainable acts that people can take in their daily lives,' said Ami Warrington, Marketing Communications Specialist, IKEA Canada, in the statement.

'In addition to becoming a fully circular business by 2030, IKEA is committed to helping our customers and co-workers make lots of little changes, like with Repurposeful Instructions, to live more sustainably in easy and inspiring ways.'

Last year, IKEA Australia transformed its blue shopping bags into a bucket hat.

The new Repurposeful Instructions add to IKEA's commitment to sustainability and its 2030 plan, previously outlined

IKEA created three tiers of instructions: beginner, intermediate and advanced. Instructions range between 4 and 12 pages for all three tiers

IKEA Canada has created three tiers of instructions for items that can be repurposed: beginner projects, which it says are 'quick and easy;' intermediate projects, that are 'a little trickier, but still manageable for most;' and advanced projects, which require power tools and 'more elbow grease.'

Instructions for the beginner products range between four and eight pages, as do the three intermediate projects, which include a hanging garden and a shoe drawer.

Instructions for the beginner products range between four and eight pages, as do the three intermediate projects, which include a hanging garden and shoe drawer

The two advanced projects, the beehive and a birdhouse, have instruction manuals that are 12 and 8 pages, respectively.

This is not the first sustainable action IKEA has taken in recent memory. In June, IKEA Norway launched 'The Trash Collection' to reuse broken and discarded furniture, according to Fast Company.

The announcement from the Swedish furniture giant is in line with its 2030 sustainability plan to give furniture a second life, help eradicate inequality and alter climate change.

The new actions come in light of the United Nation's damning report that said global warming is already causing extreme weather and the world will see a temperature increase of 2.7F by 2040, compared to a previous forecast between 2030 and 2052.

It is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land,' the report warned.

The lengthy report added that it is virtually certain' heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions' and a rise in sea levels approaching 6 feet by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The world's rarest rabbit, a Sumatran striped rabbit, has been saved by Indonesian wildlife officials after it was spotted by happenstance on Facebook.

The rabbit, known only because there are 12 specimens in a Dutch museum, was spotted on the social network by a tipster who saw a post that the rabbit was going to be sold.

The tipster contacted authorities at Indonesia's Kerinci Seblat National Park, who tracked down the seller and rescued the rabbit, holding it until it was eventually released into the wild at the park.

'While Kerinci Seblat is world famous for its biodiversity, it is the larger charismatic animals like tigers, elephants and helmeted hornbills that usually make the headlines,' director of the national park, Tamen Sitorus, said in a release.

'People so often forget this park also protects rare species like the Sumatran striped rabbit and its habitat; we have the highest peat swamp forests in Asia, for instance—and amazing moss forests.'

A Sumatran striped rabbit, the world's rarest rabbit, was saved by Indonesian wildlife officials after it was spotted for sale on Facebook

An anonymous tipster saw the rabbit was to be sold and contacted Kerinci Seblat National Park authorities, who rescued the rabbit. The rabbit was held, analyzed and eventually released into the wild at Kerinci Seblat National Park

One person who has interacted with the rare rabbit in the past, Deborah Martyr, who advises Kerinci's Tiger Protection & Conservation units, added that the rabbit 'shows a marked preference for mossy hill and submontane forest,' but it has never been seen in Indonesia.

The rabbit was luckily captured by a local farmer near the park, close to a river that had recently flooded.

Once the rabbit was taken back by wildlife officials, it was released safely back into the forest, near existing camera traps, Martyr explained.

Officials hope that by placing it near the cameras, they will be able to learn more about it.

'I hope the samples taken and other data collected will be useful to Indonesian scientists in building knowledge of this little-known animal,' Sitorus added.

After it was released, the rabbit started to eat leaves and seemed 'very relaxed,' officials explained.

The closest known species to the rabbit is the Annamite striped rabbit, which lives in the mountains near the Laos-Vietnam border and is considered endangered.

Conversely, the Sumatran striped rabbit, is believed to live in the Barisan mountains in western Sumatra.

The first time a Sumatran striped rabbit was photographed in the wild was 1997.

Very little is known about the rabbit, which is categorized as Data Deficient on the IUCN Red List.

A study published in 2010 confirmed that a rabbit was seen in June 2009 approximately 9 miles northeast of Krui, Sumatra.

Little is known about the rabbit and it is categorized as Data Deficient on the IUCN Red List

This rabbit was less than 40 centimeters (15.8in) in length and had gray fur and its trademark black stripes, along with orange eyeshine as it was spotted at night by a car. The encounter was too brief for a photograph, however.

The Sumatran stripped rabbit was first discovered in 1972, but it was not until 2000, when it was first photographed, also near the Laos-Vietnam border.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SpaceX's Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20), which is set for an orbital launch later this year, has rolled out to the firm's testing facility in Boca Chica, Texas, a day after the Super Heavy booster was lowered onto the launch pad.

CEO Elon Musk tweeted three pictures Wednesday of a giant crane hoisting the booster, including its 29 massive Raptor engines, onto the pad, noting 'Mechazilla will do this for future rockets, but it's not quite ready.'

Mechazilla will eventually be the Starship tower that catches the giant booster following a launch.

On Thursday, SN20 appeared on the launch site with its nose cone pointed directly at the stars.

Super Heavy is the first stage of SpaceX's two-stage, fully reusable Starship system, which will be used to send people and cargo to Mars and other distant planets.

The upper, or second stage, is the 165-foot-tall Starship.

Musk has calculated that to reach his goal of putting one million humans on Mars by 2025, his Starship rockets would need to conduct around three flights a day and a total of 1,000 flights a year.

Scroll down for video

SpaceX's Starship Serial Number 20 (SN20), which is set for an ambitious orbital launch has been rolled out to the firm's in Boca testing facility in Chica, Texas a day after the Super Heavy was lowered onto the launch pad

The Super Heavy, also known as Booster 4, is set to perform a series of pressurization and engine tests, and if all goes to plan, will eventually launch with SN20 at its helm, Space.com reports.

SpaceX has yet to announce a date for the launch, but a filing with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) states it is targeting a six-month period as of June 20.

However, the Musk-led firm is still waiting on an environmental review from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), which could take months to be cleared.

The filing also revealed how the orbital launch would play out, starting with the Super Heavy Booster taking off and firing for 169 seconds, before allowing Starship to take its own journey, SpaceNews reports.

CEO Elon Musk proudly shared three pictures Wednesday of a giant crane hoisting the booster, including its 29 massive Raptor engines, onto the pad

The booster would 'softly land' in the Gulf of Mexico, about 20 miles from the shore.

Starship would use its Raptor engines to soar into orbit and splash down in the Pacific Ocean, 62 miles northwest of the Hawaiian island of Kauai.

Musk's dream, however, is on hold until SpaceX receives approval from the FAA, but that has not stopped the billionaire from preparing for the mission.

SpaceX has completed several tests on the 160-foot Starship upper stage, with the most recent, SN15, landing on the launch pad after a short high-altitude flight.

However, this will be the first test of the full Starship system, including the booster stage.

Super Heavy is the first stage of SpaceX's two-stage, fully reusable Starship system, which is will be used to send people and cargo to Mars and other distant planets - and the upper stage is a 165-foot-tall Starship

In 2020, Elon Musk told SpaceX employees that Starship progress was a top priority, with progress accelerating 'dramatically and immediately.'

That resulted in a rapid increase in Starship prototypes being built, often with a new prototype ready before the previous one had even been tested.

The test flights have ranged from static firing the engines, to launching up to six miles into the air and attempting to land back down on the launch pad.

SpaceX is working with the FCC, US Air Force, NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration for the flight to arrange the safest time to launch.

One of SpaceX's key goals is to ensure that the Starship rockets are reusable, and future tests will see both stages return to the launch pad, rather than the ocean.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have altered the genes of the animals colloquially known as daddy long legs and turned them into 'daddy short legs.'

Utilizing RNA interference, researchers at the University of Wisconsin Madison were able to sequence the genome of Phalangium opilio and modify six of the arachnids' eight legs and turn them into half their normal size.

Known as Opiliones or harvestmen, these animals - which are not spiders, though they are closely related - saw their long legs transformed into pedipalps (used for food) as a result of the genetic transformation.

Scientists altered the genes of daddy long legs and shortened their legs, according to a new study

They use RNA interference to sequence the genome and turn six of eight legs into half their normal size (pictured in Q). The legs were transformed into appendages known as pedipalps, used for food

'We've shown… how the combinations of these genes create a blueprint in the embryo to differentiate between what's going to be a leg that is used for walking and what is going to be a pedipalp, which can be used to manipulate food and assess the surroundings,' the study's lead author, Guilherme Gainett at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said in an interview with New Scientist.

Daddy long legs are harvestmen and not spiders, though they are closely related

Harvestmen have been on Earth for around 400 million and there are 6,500 species. However, not much is known about them. Experts believe their genome could help unlock the secrets to understanding them

Although harvestmen have been on Earth for around 400 million years and there are a great number of species (almost 6,500), researchers still have a number of questions about them, including why they cluster together.

They also have pores that give off chemicals that are used to drive enemies away, which Ignacio Escalante, a harvestman biologist at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, told the Atlantic 'can have a sweet, gasoline smell.'

Like cats, these long-limbed arachnids also groom themselves with their mouths.

Unlike spiders, they do not produce silk, have one pair of eyes and are not venomous, according to the US Department of Energy.

If their long legs are injured or plucked off by a predator, they do not grow back.

It's also unclear what their reproductive cycles are or if they are predators or scavengers, despite appearing on every continent except Antarctica.

The majority of harvestmen use their longest pairs of legs to touch and wave around, looking for food, while using the other six to walk and evade predators.

Leg length has also been used for mating, with Gainett telling the Atlantic that 'whichever male has the longest leg wins, and it's the one that is going to mate.'

Researchers believe their genome could help unlock some of these questions and more, including why their legs are so long.

'The genome of the daddy long legs holds great potential to clarify the complex history of arachnid genome evolution and body plan, as well as to reveal how daddy long legs make their unique long legs,' Gainett told CNET.

The research has been published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's been an incredibly successful year for the video game Fortnite, which has brought in a whopping $3billion profit.

Fortnite creator Epic Games grossed the $3billion profit in 2018 for the game that was created just last year.

Fortnite is free but makes money by selling a $10 seasonal Battle Pass and digital items such as clothes, weapons, dances and reactions for players.

Zombie-hunting video game Fortnite has reaped a $3billion profit for Epic Games in 2018

The game has also racked up 125million players, a majority of whom spend some money on the game, according to Forbes.

A November study conducted by app data firm Sensor Tower found that iPhone users alone spent $1.23million every day on Fortnite purchases. That means the game made nearly $40million a month from iPhone users, according to the New York Post.

The game skyrocketed to success because Fortnite is played on all its platforms including PS4, Oxbox One, PC, Nintendo Switch, Android and iOS.

In September Epic Games recorded a value of nearly $15billion.

The game makes money selling a $10 seasonal Battle Pass and digital items such as clothes, weapons, dances and reactions for players. A Fortnite exhibit at the Electronic Entertainment Expo E3 in Los Angeles pictured above in June

Its skyrocketing value saw investors like KKR, Kleiner Perkins, and Lightspeed try and cash in on a $1.25billion slice of the company, according to TechCrunch.

Epic Game was founded in 1991 and they haven't given revenues for Fortnite, however their massive profit gives an idea of the game's success.

Epic Games hasn't commented on the $3billion profit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Astronauts on board the International Space Station have released hilarious clips from the unofficial 'Space Olympics' they held in the weightlessness of Earth's orbit.

Friday's celestial championship featured four novel events: the lack-of-floor routine, no-handball, synchronized space swimming and “weightless sharpshooting.

Footage of the fun was uploaded to Twitter by the French flight engineer Thomas Pesquet, one of the seven crew making up the present 'Expedition 65' on the ISS.

Scroll down for videos

Astronauts on board the International Space Station have released hilarious clips from the unofficial 'Space Olympics' they held in the weightlessness of Earth's orbit. Pictured: a synchronised space swimming routine is performed on the orbiting laboratory

Friday's celestial championship featured four novel events: the lack-of-floor routine, no-handball, synchronized space swimming and “weightless sharpshooting. Pictured: the ISS

THE CREW OF THE ISS EXPEDITION 65 Pyotr Dubrov (Roscosmos) Akihiko Hoshide (JAXA) Shane Kimbrough (NASA) Megan McArthur (NASA) Oleg Novitskiy (Roscosmos) Thomas Pesquet (ESA) Mark Vande Hei (NASA) Advertisement

Just like the recent Earth-bound events, the astronauts' sporting showcase featured an international team of athletes — with the expedition 65 crew hailing from Belarus, France, Japan, Russia and the United States.

Also like the Tokyo Olympics, it called upon the qualities of excellence, sportsmanship and teamwork.

In fact, as Mr Pesquet tweeted, synchronised space swimming in particular — which featured impressively coordinated spinning and rolling — was 'an opportunity to show teamwork and crew cohesion.'

Weightless sharpshooting — a sport Mr Pesquet dubbed a game of 'concentration and skill (or luck)' — saw the astronauts fire elastic bands at a target suspended halfway across one of the orbiting laboratory's modules.

The 'no handball' match, meanwhile, involved two teams of two attempting to blow a ping pong ball through one of the hatches inside the space station — a game won by the Soyuz crew team in a 1:0 victory.

Last but not least, the lack-of-floor routine was a glorious extravaganza of gymnastic gyrations. Russian flight engineer Pyotr Dubrov was commended 'for completing his routine without touching anything — a difficult feat!'

Footage of the fun was uploaded to Twitter by the French flight engineer Thomas Pesquet (pictured), one of the seven crew making up the present ' Expedition 65 ' on the ISS

Weightless sharpshooting — a sport Mr Pesquet dubbed a game of 'concentration and skill (or luck)' — saw the astronauts fire elastic bands at a target suspended halfway across one of the orbiting laboratory's modules, as pictured

Alongside competing their own space sports, the Expedition 65 crew are also working to conduct a number of research experiments and to upgrade the ISS with a new solar power system that was first tested on the station back in 2017.

Among the experiments being conducted is an investigation into how the root systems of cotton plants grow without gravity to guide them — which could help identify varieties than require less water and pesticides to grow.

The team will also be trialling a portable ultrasound system that could be used in future space exploration missions and conducting tests on 'tissue chips', which are small models of human organs that can help identify new drugs and vaccines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Global temperatures will be double UN climate targets due to clouds reflecting less solar radiation and enhancing the greenhouse effect, a new study warns.

Satellite observations of clouds, and their linked temperature, humidly and wind conditions, led experts from Imperial College London to make their dire prediction.

The researchers said the results mean the climate is unlikely to warm below the UN 3.6F target by 2100, and is more likely to increase by 5.4F as a global average.

Pre-industrial CO2 levels were around 280 parts per million (ppm), but current levels are approaching 420 ppm, and could approach double the pre-industrial amount by mid-century if significant emissions cuts are not made, the researchers warned.

There is a greater than 97 per cent chance that clouds will amplify global heating, by both reflecting less solar radiation and enhancing the greenhouse effect, they found.

This will result in a doubling CO2 concentrations, further increasing temperatures and leading to more extreme weather events such as floods, fires and heatwaves.

Global temperatures will be double UN climate targets due to clouds reflecting less solar radiation and enhancing the greenhouse effect, a new study warns

Satellite observations of clouds, and their linked temperature, humidly and wind conditions, led experts from Imperial College London to make their dire prediction

KEY GOALS OF THE PARIS CLIMATE AGREEMENT The Paris Agreement on Climate Change has four main goals with regards to reducing emissions: A long-term goal of keeping the increase in global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels To aim to limit the increase to 1.5°C, since this would significantly reduce risks and the impacts of climate change Governments agreed on the need for global emissions to peak as soon as possible, recognising that this will take longer for developing countries To undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with the best available science Source: European Commission Advertisement

The amount of climate warming predicted from a doubling of pre-industrial CO2 levels is known as the 'climate sensitivity,' the authors of the study explained.

This is a measure of how strongly our climate will react to such a change, but the largest uncertainty in climate sensitivity predictions is the influence of clouds.

Particularly how clouds may change in the future in relation to other climate changes, the researchers explained.

This, they say, is because clouds can either enhance or dampen warming, depending on properties such as their density and height in the atmosphere.

Low clouds tend to have a cooling effect, as they block the sun from reaching the ground, but high clouds have a warming effect as they let solar energy through and reflect it back at the Earth.

This energy can be trapped by the clouds, enhancing the greenhouse effect.

Using their new method, which uses artificial intelligence to analyse the data, the team were able to better analyse how clouds will change as the Earth warms.

Dr Paulo Ceppi, co-author of the study, said climate sensitivity is a difficult one to consider in climate models.

:"The value of the climate sensitivity is highly uncertain, and this translates into uncertainty in future global warming projections and in the remaining 'carbon budget,' he explained.

This 'carbon budget' is how much we can emit before we reach common targets of 2.7F or 3.6C of global warming by 2100 set by the UN.

"There is therefore a critical need to more accurately quantify how clouds will affect future global warming,' said Dr Ceppi.

'Our results will mean we are more confident in climate projections and we can get a clearer picture of the severity of future climate change.'

'This should help us know our limits - and take action to stay within them,' he added.

The researchers said the results mean the climate is unlikely to warm below the UN 3.6F target by 2100, and is more likely to increase by 5.4F as a global average

These results also suggest that a doubling of CO2 concentrations will lead to around 5.4 degree Fahrenheit of warming.

The team say they have the highest confidence of any study so far - based on data from global observations, rather than local regions or specific cloud types.

Co-author Dr Peer Nowack, said there's been a growing amount of evidence that clouds probably have an amplifying effect on global warming.

Pre-industrial CO2 levels were around 280 parts per million (ppm), but current levels are approaching 420 ppm, and could approach double the pre-industrial amount by mid-century if significant emissions cuts are not made, the researchers warned

'However, our new approach allowed us for the first time to derive a global value for this feedback effect using only the highest quality satellite data as our preferred line of evidence,' the University of East Anglia researcher confirmed.

'Our paper makes a major step towards narrowing the most important uncertainty factor in climate sensitivity projections.

'As such, our work also highlights a new pathway in which machine learning can help us constrain the key remaining uncertainty factors in climate science.'

The findings have been published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Scientists.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From falcon-wing doors to in-car games, Tesla cars are known for their impressive, futuristic features.

But it seems that one of Tesla's most popular features, Autopilot, is struggling to cope with a fairly basic obstacle – the moon.

Tesla cars come standard with advanced hardware capable of providing Autopilot, enabling the vehicle to steer, accelerate and brake automatically within its lane.

However, one frustrated Tesla driver has revealed that the Autopilot system in his Tesla has been mistaking the moon for an amber traffic light, and has been slowing the car down in response.

Jordan Nelson posted a video on Twitter showing the flaw in action during an evening drive in Granite Falls, North Carolina. It remains unclear which model of Tesla he drives.

In the video, the moon can be seen low, bright and yellow in the night sky.

However, the console on the dashboard shows an amber traffic light flickering on the screen, indicating the Autopilot system has been tricked.

Jordan Nelson posted a video on Twitter showing the flaw in action during an evening drive in Granite Falls, North Carolina. It remains unclear which model of Tesla he drives

He wrote: 'Hey Elon Musk, you might want to have your team look into the moon tricking the autopilot system.

'The car thinks the moon is a yellow traffic light and wanted to keep slowing down.'

Musk, who is the founder of Tesla, is yet to reply to the tweet.

However, one user suggested that there may be an easy fix, if Tesla could add moon trajectory data to its neural network.

'Can be easily solved by adding future moon trajectory data directly to the neural network,' the user replied to Mr Nelson's video.

'Then depending on the car's orientation, it'll know where the moon should be at any given time of day.'

While Autopilot is designed to assist drivers with their driving, Tesla maintains that the system does not make its cars autonomous.

It explained: 'Autopilot enables your car to steer, accelerate and brake automatically within its lane.

'Current Autopilot features require active driver supervision and do not make the vehicle autonomous.'

MailOnline has contacted Tesla for comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Members of Generation Z – those 20 and younger who grew up with smartphones and the internet – fall much faster for online scams than their grandparents do, a new study finds.

Social Catfish, an online identify-verification service, found cyber-fraud among this group, which is supposed be tech savvy, surged 156 percent since 2017, compared to the 112 percent rise among those age 60 or older.

Complaints from the under-20s to the FBI's Internet Crime Complaint Center amounted to about 23,200 last year, a huge increase from 9,000 in 2017.

It also cost Generation Z roughly $71 million in losses - compared to $8.3 million in 2017.

However, the boomer generation still had the most complaints - 105,300 - that collectively cost the 60 or older group $966 million.

Though the two generations are at the top of the list, the study found Americans of all ages were scammed out of $4.2 billion in 2020, with those living in California losing the most.

Scroll down for video

Social Catfish , an online identify-verification service, found cyber-fraud among this group, which should be tech savvy, surged 156 percent since 2017, compared to the 112 percent among those age 60 or older

This may be due to many spending extra time online due to some type of stay-at-home order last year that was caused by the still lingering coronavirus pandemic.

'Scammers create a variety of tricks to scam people out of their hard-earned money,' Social Catfish noted in its study.

'They create fake profiles and go onto social media platforms, dating sites and online gaming apps to start conversations with their victims.

'They use a pre-made script to talk to their victims called the scammer's playbook.'

Complaints from the under-20s to the FBI's Internet Crime Complaint Center amounted to about 23,200 last year, a huge increase from 9,000 in 2017, which also cost them roughly $71 million in losses - compared to $8.3 million in 2017

However, what may come as shock to most is Generation Z falling of such tricks.

David McClellan, president of Social Catfish, told CNBC: 'It is alarming.

'The generation we think of as being the most savvy with the internet ... is where the numbers are growing the fastest when it comes to scams.'

'This age group is very comfortable being online and being very public about their lives.

'So that makes them very trusting when they're on the Internet.'

Social Catfish study shows Facebook, Google Hangouts, Instagram, and WhatsApp are the top four platforms where users are scammed and all are used by Generation Z

Although the two generations are at the top of the list, the study found Americans were scammed out of $4.2 billion in 2020, with California losing the most. This may be due to many spending extra time online due to some type of stay-at-home order last year that was caused by the still lingering coronavirus pandemic

The report found dating apps are also filled with fraudsters who get 'their victims off the app and communicate with them via Google Hangouts to avoid getting reported on the dating app.'

Scammers will also unleashing a technique called phishing, or the act of sending emails and text messages that appear to come from official sources or companies asking victims to share personal information.

The emails are typically sent with fake email addresses that are close to authentic addresses, and include photos and logos that look just like those from real companies.

Most scammers are from Nigeria, China, India, Romania and Mexico, according to Social Catfish.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mutations in the sperm of older men can be passed down to their children and cause health disorders, such as heart disease or autism, a new study suggests.

Researchers from the Rady Children's Institute of Genomic Medicine and University of California San Diego School of Medicine found that 1 in 15 men, notably older men, are more at risk from passing on negative mutations to their children than younger men.

The mutation of the cells, known as mosaicism (where different cells in the same person have different genetic makeup), occurs in almost everyone. However, if abnormal cells outnumber normal cells, disease can occur.

Mutations in the sperm of older men can be passed down to their children and cause health disorders, such as heart disease or autism

'Our earlier studies told us that sperm mutations contribute to the cause of disorders, such as autism and epilepsy, but the implications in men without a family history of disease was completely unknown,' said study co-author, Dr. Joseph Gleeson, in a statement.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder in which sufferers have a hard time communicating and with behavior.

It encompasses several conditions - including autism and Asperger's syndrome - and symptoms can range from mild to severe.

Children are usually diagnosed by age two after they exhibit signs such as reduced eye contact, not responding to their name and performing repetitive movements.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about one in 59 children has ASD.

Boys are much more likely - up to four times - to have the condition than girls.

One in 15 men are at risk from passing on negative mutations to their children, with older men more at risk than younger men

These mutations can result in 15% of ASD cases, congenital heart disease and severe pediatric diseases.' Boys are much more likely - up to four times - to have ASD than girls

Despite decades of research, the causes of ASD remain a mystery. Both genetics and environmental factors are believed to play a role.

However, recent studies have suggested that de novo mutations may be the cause of between 10 and 30 percent of ASD cases.

The study added that with sperm, unlike blood, mosaicism does not change with age.

'Surprisingly, the comparison between the old and young men showed few differences in mutations, telling us that these mutations probably arose when the father was an embryo, where the mutations could reside undetected until the man has children,' said the study's lead author, Dr Martin Breuss.

The researchers uncovered a new way to observe and count the mutations, while using the data to predict the possible impact on any future offspring.

They also found the mutations did not differ in number, leading the researchers to believe there is a 'stable risk' of disease in children. They also found that mutations are likely to happen in single sperm cells, which are presently below levels of detection.

They sequenced multiple samples hundreds of times across their genomes to find that the mutations were only in a small number of cells.

'We found that each ejaculate from a man shows an average of 30 mutations,' study co-author, Dr Xiaoxu Yang added.

'Almost all of these were found in serial sampling from a period of six to 12 months, whereas most of the mutations were completely absent from a saliva or blood sample.' The data, said Yang, indicates the mutations are restricted to sperm cells, and also validates their detection method.

Though concerning, the researchers added that since these sperm cells are in a stem niche, that should limit the chances for the health problems to be passed on.

'We think that these mutations contribute a substantial burden on human health, potentially causing 15 percent of ASD cases, congenital heart disease and severe pediatric diseases,' said Gleeson. 'But we are hopeful that by identifying men at risk, future cases of disease can be avoided.'

The research was published earlier this week in the scientific journal Cell.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vintage home video games continue to break auction house records, as a never-opened copy of 1985's Super Mario Bros just sold for $2 million.

The buyer of the Nintendo console game is being kept anonymous, according to The New York Times.

The video game had a 9.8 A+ rating on the Wata scale, meaning it was in 'exceptional' condition.

'A seal that is in near mint condition, but has a few small flaws that are not very distracting, according to Wata games. 'Can have light scuffs or other small detracting marks, but no holes.'

The combination of pandemic lockdown and Gen X and Y-ers with discretionary income has made video games a lucrative market of late: In July 2020 an unopened copy of Super Mario Bros. set a record sale at $114,000 at auction.

By November, a copy of Super Mario 3 beat that by $42,000, hitting $156,000, followed by the sale of another copy of Super Mario Bros for $660,000 in April 2021.

Then the market really started heating up: This most recent sale comes less than a month after an unopened version of The Legend of Zelda went under the gavel for $870,000 and a mint copy of Super Mario 64 went for $1.56 million at Heritage Auctions.

Scroll down for video

A never-opened copy of 1985's Super Mario Bros (pictured) just sold for $2 million to an anonymous buyer

In the case of this multimillion Mario Bros sale, announced Friday, the physical game had previously been purchased by Rally, a company that snaps up valuable collectibles and sells shares in them, like a traditional stock—with investors earning a portion of profits from a resale.

Rally bought Super Mario Bros. for a relative steal, $140,000, in April 2020.

When the company was approached with a buyer offering $ 2 million, the investors were invited to vote on whether or not to sell.

A previous offer of $300,000 for the near-mint edition game was rejected last year, the Times reports.

The console game was bought by Rally in April 2020, with shares sold to investors who could decide whether or not to accept bids. Pictured: Screenplay from Super Mario Bros

Rally's investments span the gamut of collectibles, from a broadside copy of The Declaration of Independence, available for $25 a share, to a rare 1909 Honus Wagner baseball card, going for $52 share.

Law student Ed Converse, who initially invested $100 in 'stock' in the unopened Super Mario Bros, is netting nearly $1,000 from the seven-figure sale.

'It's pretty crazy to think that I made an investment in it because of the nostalgia of playing the video game when I was a kid and now it's selling for $2 million,' he told the Times.

An unopened copy of Nintendo's Super Mario 64 (above) sold at auction for $1.56 million on July 11, 2021

The $1.56 million Super Mario 64 was listed at a grade of 9.8 A by Wata Games, the highest possible rating for a game's condition.

'This is Mario's debut appearance in a 3D world, and it was the most popular - best-selling video game for the N64, Heritage video game specialist Valarie McLeckie said in a statement at the time.

'Considering this, and the fact that there are fewer than five sealed in this grade according to Wata, this copy is a true prize for any serious collector.'

Rally co-founder Rob Petrozzo says demand for well-preserved vintage games is just warming up.

'You'll start to see a lot more people paying attention and doing research,' he told the Times.

'I think that we're starting to see the natural progression of 'What else? What are the things that have appreciated in value from my childhood that have that nostalgia?'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The oldest example of applied geometry has been discovered on a 3,700-year-old clay tablet featuring maths attributed to Pythagoras 1,000 years later.

The tablet, known as Si.427 was discovered in the late 19th Century in central Iraq, but its significance had remained unknown until it was analysed in more detail by mathematicians from the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia.

The tablet dates from the Old Babylonian period, which was between 1900 to 1600 BC, and includes maths that was used by surveyors to define land boundaries.

Lead author Dr Daniel Mansfield described it as a 'significant object' due to the fact it includes an example of what is now known as 'Pythagorean triples', used to make accurate right angles, but 1,000 years before Pythagoras was alive.

The oldest example of applied geometry has been discovered on a 3,700-year-old clay tablet featuring maths usually attributed to Pythagoras

WHAT IS A PYTHAGOREAN TRIPLE? A Pythagorean triple is three positive numbers - a, b and c. Triples are commonly written as (a,b,c) and a common example is 3,4,5. It is derived from Pythagorean theorem where every right triangle has side lengths that satisfy a2 + b2 = c2. Other triples include (5,12,13), (7,24,25) and (8,15,17). While attributed to the Greek philosopher Pythagoras, they have been found on tablets from 1,000 years before he lived. They are widely used by engineers and architects in planning everything from a roof slope to engine position. Advertisement

'It's the only known example of a cadastral document from the Old Babylonian period, which is a plan used by surveyors to define land boundaries, said Dr Mansfield.

'In this case, it tells us legal and geometric details about a field that's split after some of it was sold off.'

He said the discovery and analysis of the tablet have important implications for the history of mathematics, putting geometry centuries earlier than first thought.

In 2017, Dr Mansfield found that another fascinating artefact from the same period, known as Plimpton 322, was a unique kind of trigonometric table.

He said: 'It is generally accepted that trigonometry - the branch of maths that is concerned with the study of triangles - was developed by the ancient Greeks studying the night sky in the 2nd Century BC.

'But the Babylonians developed their own alternative 'proto-trigonometry' to solve problems related to measuring the ground, not the sky.'

Si.427 is thought to have existed even before Plimpton 322 - in fact, surveying problems likely inspired Plimpton 322, according to Dr Mansfield.

He said: 'There is a whole zoo of right triangles with different shapes.

'But only a very small handful can be used by Babylonian surveyors. Plimpton 322 is a systematic study of this zoo to discover the useful shapes.'

Back in 2017, the research team speculated about the purpose of the Plimpton 322, hypothesising that it was likely to have had some practical purpose, possibly used to build palaces, temples, canals or survey fields.

Dr Mansfield said the new tablet reveals why they were interested in geometry when creating Plimpton 322 - to lay down precise land boundaries.

'This is from a period where land is starting to become private - people started thinking about land in terms of 'my land and your land', wanting to establish a proper boundary to have positive neighbourly relationships,' he said.

Lead author Dr Daniel Mansfield (pictured) described it as a 'significant object' due to the fact it includes an example of what is now known as 'Pythagorean triples', used to make accurate right angles, but 1,000 years before Pythagoras was alive

PYTHAGORAS: GREEK PHILOSOPHER Pythagoras of Samos was an ancient Ionian Greek philosopher famed for his work in geometry. He was the founder of the school of Pythagoreanism and was influenced by Plato and Aristotle. He was born around 570 BC and lived until about 495 BC, at about age 75. He was credited with mathematical and scientific discoveries. These included the Pythagorean theorem, the Theory of Proportions and the sphericity of the Earth. He also identified Venus and was the first to call himself a philosopher. A number of the discoveries attributed to Pythagoras may have been developed originally by Babylonians. Advertisement

'And this is what this tablet immediately says. It's a field being split, and new boundaries are made.'

Dr Mansfield says there are even clues hidden on other tablets from that time period about the stories behind the boundaries.

One refers to a dispute between Sin-bel-apli - a prominent individual mentioned on many tablets including Si.427 - and a wealthy female landowners.

The dispute is over valuable date palms on the border between their two properties. The local administrator agrees to send out a surveyor to resolve the dispute.

'It is easy to see how accuracy was important in resolving disputes between such powerful individuals,' said Dr Mansfield, adding the way boundaries are made reveals a real understanding of geometry.

'Nobody expected that the Babylonians were using Pythagorean triples in this way,' he added.

'It is more akin to pure mathematics, inspired by the practical problems of the time.'

Dr Mansfield explained that a simple way to make an accurate right angle is to make a rectangle with sides 3 and 4, and diagonal 5.

These special numbers form the 3-4-5 'Pythagorean triple' and a rectangle with those measurements has mathematically perfect right angles.

The tablet, known as Si.427 was discovered in the late 19th Century in central Iraq, but its significance had remained unknown until it was analysed in more detail by mathematicians from the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia

This was important to ancient surveyors and is still used thousands of years later.

'The ancient surveyors who made Si.427 did something even better: they used a variety of different Pythagorean triples, both as rectangles and right triangles, to construct accurate right angles,' said Dr Mansfield.

However, he said it is difficult to work with prime numbers bigger than five in the base 60 Babylonian number system.

'This raises a very particular issue - their unique base 60 number system means that only some Pythagorean shapes can be used,' he explained.

In 2017, Dr Mansfield found that another fascinating artefact from the same period, known as Plimpton 322 (pictured), was a unique kind of trigonometric table

WHAT IS THE PLIMPTON 322 TABLET? A trigonometric table allows people to use one known ratio of the sides of a right-angle triangle to determine the other two unknown ratios. Plimpton 322 uses a particular form of trigonometry to make these calculations. The tablet has four columns and 15 rows of numbers written on it in the cuneiform script of the time using a base 60, or sexagesimal, system. The 15 rows on the tablet describe a sequence of 15 right-angle triangles, which are steadily decreasing in inclination. This would have let builders quickly calculate how to build palaces, temples and canals. Researchers believe that there were originally six columns and that the tablet was meant to be completed with 38 rows. This would have allowed for an even greater number of calculations. Advertisement

'It seems that the author of Plimpton 322 went through all these Pythagorean shapes to find these useful ones.

'This deep and highly numerical understanding of the practical use of rectangles earns the name 'proto-trigonometry' but it is completely different to our modern trigonometry involving sin, cos, and tan.'

Dr Mansfield first learned about Si.427 when reading about it in excavation records - the tablet was dug up during the Sippar expedition of 1894, in what is the Baghdad province of Iraq today.

He added: 'It was a real challenge to trace the tablet from these records and physically find it - the report said that the tablet had gone to the Imperial Museum of Constantinople, a place that obviously doesn't exist anymore.

'Using that piece of information, I went on a quest to track it down, speaking to many people at Turkish government ministries and museums, until one day in mid 2018 a photo of Si.427 finally landed in my inbox.

'That's when I learned that it was actually on display at the museum.

'Even after locating the object it still took months to fully understand just how significant it is, and so it's really satisfying to finally be able to share that story.'

But one mystery remains, according to Dr Mansfield. On the back of the tablet, at the very bottom, it lists the sexagesimal number '25:29' in big font - think of it as 25 minutes and 29 seconds.

He added: 'I can't figure out what these numbers mean - it's an absolute enigma.

'I'm keen to discuss any leads with historians or mathematicians who might have a hunch as to what these numbers are trying to tell us.'

The findings have been published in the journal Foundations of Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Astronaut Thomas Pesquet watched from the International Space Station as Russia's Pirs module was discarded on June 26 and raced towards its death in Earth's atmosphere.

The stunning video shows Pirs break up into a 'shooting star' and slowly disappearing into a sea of ominous clouds hanging over our planet.

'Atmospheric reentry without a heat shield results in a nice fireball,' Pesquet wrote in a Facebook post, which also included a French description.

'You clearly see smaller pieces of melting metal floating away and adding to the fireworks.'

Although the video was sped up, Pesquet and a few other crew members watched Pirs break up above the clouds for six minutes.

'Next time you see a shooting star, it might be our ISS trash getting burnt up… Not sure it will be granted in that case, but you never know, I'd still advise to go ahead and make a wish, Pesquet joked in the post.

Scroll down for video

Astronaut Thomas Pesquet watched from the International Space Station as Russia's Pirs module was discarded and raced towards its death in Earth's atmosphere

The 16-foot-long by 8-foot-diameter Pirs began its decent into Earth's atmosphere at 10am EST after 20 years of service on the ISS, Space.com reported.

The module provided the ISS with a docking port for spacecraft, along with an airlock for astronauts to conduct spacewalks.

The removal of the module was to make room for Russia's 22-ton Nauka Multipurpose Laboratory Module, or Nauka for short, which docked with the ISS on June 29.

Nauka, which means 'science' in Russian' launched on July 21 atop a Russian Proton rocket. This rocket also carried the new European Robotic Arm, or ERA, a 16-foot-long two-handed robot that can move freely outside of the ISS.

Pirs's journey back to Earth started around 10:00am ET, which saw it back away from the ISS using its engines and then release itself toward our planet

The European Space Agency (ESA) astronaut captured the stunning video on June 26, which shows Pirs break up into a 'shooting star' and slowly disappearing into a sea of ominous clouds hanging over our planet

After eight days in free-flight, the uncrewed 43-foot-long module linked up to the port on the Earth-facing Russian segment of the ISS.

Nauka will be a new science facility, docking port and spacewalk airlock for future operations, along with providing additional crew quarters, a galley and a toilet.

However, the new module experienced a software glitch about three hours after docking, which inadvertently fired its thrusters about three hours after making contact with the massive ship.

NASA released new details today, saying the ISS backflipped and was left upside down when Nauka's jet thrusters misfired.

Although the video was sped up, Pesquet and a few other crew members watched Pirs break up above the clouds for six minutes

The removal of the module was to make room for Russia's 22-ton Nauka Multipurpose Laboratory Module, or Nauka for short, which docked with the ISS on June 29

The American space agency had previously said the ISS had moved out of its attitude – its orientation in relation to its direction of travel – by 45 degrees, or one-eighth of a complete circle.

However, the flight director who was in charge at the time has since revealed this was 'a little incorrectly reported' and the actual figure was closer to 540 degrees.

This means the ISS performed 1.5 backflips when it was sent spinning and required a 180-degree forward flip to regain its original position.

The station's position is key for getting power from its solar panels.

If this was lost, the ISS would 'decay', meaning it would get closer and closer to Earth before it came crashing down.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Researchers have extracted DNA from a brown bear that lived approximately 32,000 years ago which suggests the massive mammal once lived near present-day Tokyo, migrating from Honshu, Japan's largest island.

The DNA, which was taken from the skull that included the bear's right and left petrosals -- came from a bear found in a cave in the Gunma Prefecture, northwest of Tokyo.

In Japan, brown bears only exist on the island of Hokkaido.

The petrosals, which are found near the inner ear, were able to keep the bear's DNA from degrading in the hot and humid climate, as well as the acidic soil that has plagued researchers looking for ancient DNA in the country.

DNA taken from a brown bear that lived around 32,000 years ago suggests it once lived near present-day Tokyo

The bear migrated from Honshu, Japan's largest island. However, it's unclear why brown bears are no longer on Honshu, with the authors citing 'reasons unknown'

It's possible the bears crossed over the Tsugaru Strait between Hondu and Hokkaido, where brown bears still exist

'The number of brown bear fossils excavated from the Pleistocene in Japan is scarce, with less than ten incomplete specimens,' the study's lead author, Takahiro Segawa, told Live Science.

This brown bear is from the Pleistocene era and 32,500 years old, according to the study.

The DNA was compared to 95 other genetic sequences of brown bears, including ones from Hokkaido, where brown bears still reside in modern-day Japan.

The authors concluded that this brown bear is 'a previously unknown lineage sitting as a sister group to the southern Hokkaido brown bears.'

It's likely that the Honshu bear split from the Hokkai bears about 160,000 years ago and may have crossed over the Tsugaru Strait around that time.

According to LiveScience, other mammals, including Naumann's elephants and the giant deer crossed between Hokkaido and Honshu around 140,000 years ago, suggesting that the strait between the two islands was accessible to the brown bears due to shallow water levels.

The oldest brown bear fossil from Honshu is estimated to be 340,000 years old, according to the study, citing previous research.

Given the age discrepancy between these fossils, it's likely that brown bears came to Honshu at different times. For comparison purposes, humans arrive on the island roughly 30,000 years ago.

However, it's unclear why the brown bears are no longer on Honshu, with the authors citing 'reasons unknown.'

'Knowledge of the evolutionary history of these brown bears is crucial for understanding the occurrence and extinction of megafauna in the Japanese Archipelago because the bear is considered to be at the top of the food chain on the Archipelago.'

The research has been published in the journal Royal Society Open Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@History changed forever after Neil Armstrong said, 'The Eagle has landed,' but a new study suggests that part of the Apollo 11 'Eagle' Lunar Module (LM), once thought to have crashed on the moon, may still orbit the celestial satellite.

California space enthusiast James Meador ran simulations of the predicted orbit of the ascent stage of the LM using the General Mission Analysis Tool (GMAT), which was developed by NASA as part of the GRAIL spacecraft, and found that it may still orbit the moon at roughly 100 kilometers, the same distance it was left at.

'These results indicate that the "Eagle" might remain in lunar orbit today,' Meador wrote in the study.

The ascent stage of the Apollo 11 'Eagle' Lunar Module may still orbit the moon, according to a new study. It may orbit the moon at roughly 100 kilometers, the same distance it was left at

Meador's simulations show that the perilune altitude of the Eagle in the time periods of 1969-1970 and 2019-2020 were roughly the same.

Meador's simulations show that the perilune altitude of the Eagle in the time periods of 1969-1970 and 2019-2020 were roughly the same

On July 21, Armstrong and Aldrin used the ascent stage to rendezvous with the Columbia command module

It's assumed the lunar module crashed into the moon's surface, but its fate is unknown

Scroll down for video

He continued: 'Although catastrophic outcomes are possible, there exists some possibility that this machine might have reached an inert state, allowing it to remain in orbit to the present day. If so, it should be detectable by radar, similarly to the way that the Indian Moon orbiter Chandrayaan-1 was relocated in 2016 (JPL, 2017).

'A rough analysis indicates that Eagle would be more than 125 [kilometers] above the surface in about 25 [percent] of limb crossings. If one assumes radar is able to detect objects at this altitude, then four judiciously chosen 2-hour observation periods should provide sufficient coverage to possibly relocate one of the most important artifacts in the history of space exploration.'

The location of Apollo 11's lunar module is the only lunar module of the Apollo missions that is not known, according to the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum.

WHY WAS THE EAGLE LUNAR MODULE ASCENT STAGE SO IMPORTANT? The ascent stage of the Eagle Lunar Module (ELM) housed Aldrin and Armstrong, as well as instrument panels and flight controls. It had its own Ascent Propulsion System engine, as well as two hypergolic propellant tanks, so that it could return to lunar orbit and rendezvous with the Apollo command module. In addition, it had a Reaction Control System that let the astronauts control their attitude and translation, with 16 thrusters similar to what was used on the Service Module. It also had a forward EVA hatch that let Aldrin and Armstrong step down and up from the lunar surface. The overhead hatch and docking port provided access to and from the Command Module. Advertisement

DailyMail.com has reached out to NASA with a request for comment.

The ascent stage of the Eagle lander, an 'irregularly shaped unit approximately 2.8 [meters] high and 4.0 by 4.3 meters in width,' according to NASA, housed astronauts Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their descent to the moon and subsequent return.

On July 21, Armstrong and Aldrin left the surface of the moon, with their cargo of 22 kilograms of lunar rock, using the ascent stage to rendezvous with the Columbia command module and pilot Michael Collins, who died earlier this year at the age of 90.

From left to right: Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong, Command Module Pilot Michael Collins, and Lunar Module Pilot Edwin Aldrin

Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin (pictured) takes his last step off the Eagle lunar module onto the surface of the Moon

Once they boarded the command module, the ascent stage was discarded and long believed to have crash landed onto the surface of the moon.

According to NASA, it's assumed the lunar module crashed into the surface of the moon between one and four months after the mission ended.

However, its fate is unknown after it was jettisoned into lunar orbit on July 22, 1969, two days after Armstrong and Aldrin first stepped on the moon.

In an interview with New Scientist, Meador said that it would be incredible if the ascent stage of Apollo 11's Eagle Lunar Module still existed.

'A lot of people would be really excited to hear this thing still existed,' said Meador. 'It would be amazing to bring it back to Earth and put it in a museum.'

As exciting as a discovery like this would be, Meador cautioned, however, the ascent stage may have also been completely destroyed once Armstrong and Aldrin were safely with Collins, on their way back to Earth.

'It must be remembered that the Lunar Modules were designed for 10-day missions, and little consideration was given to long-term reliability,' Meader wrote in the study.

'For this reason, fuel leaks might have resulted in propulsive events or even complete destruction at any time after the craft was jettisoned.'

The study is available on the preprint arXiv server and can be read here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A polar bear that has been the cause of several incidents with people - including one earlier this week where it bit a person - may be shot dead next time it endangers someone, officials said on Tuesday.

A Danish Arctic military unit in Greenland said the bear - in search of food - put its head through a research station where a documentary team was filming and bit the hand of one of the three male members, AFP reports.

A 'problematic' polar bear that has caused 5 incidents with people may be shot dead the next time it endangers someone. The bear bit the hand of a documentary filmmaker after it stuck its head inside a research station in Greenland in search of food

The unnamed person was transported to Daneborg, Greenland and ultimately evacuated to Akureyri, Iceland to treat his injuries

The filmmakers used warning pistols and the bear scurried off, but not before the unnamed person had to be transported to Daneborg, Greenland, and ultimately evacuated to Akureyri, Iceland, to treat his injuries.

Scroll down for video

The bear came back and broke a window of the research station before it eventually left the area.

Given that it's now responsible for at least five incidents with humans, it has been labeled as 'problematic.'

'The local authorities have from now on categorized the bear as 'problematic,' which allows for it to be shot dead, if it returns,' the Danish military unit said.

The bear came back and broke a window of the research station, before it eventually left the area

The increase in incidents comes as the territory is experiencing a record heatwave and polar bear habitats continue to be impacted by climate change, causing them to wander further for food than they had previously.

Northeastern Greenland saw temperatures hit 23.4 degrees Celsius (74.2 Fahrenheit) in recent days.

On July 27, the mercury hit 68 degrees Fahrenheit, resulting in the Greenland ice sheet losing 8.5 billion tons of surface mass in a single day.

Since June, the island has lost more than 100 billion tons of ice.

According to the IUCN Red List, polar bears are considered a 'vulnerable' species and there are believed to be between 22,000 and 31,000 left on the planet.

In July 2020, a study suggested that climate change could wipe out the polar bear population in 80 years as a result of melting Arctic sea ices, pushing them away from their natural hunting grounds.

In April, a separate group of researchers found that polar bears are mating with grizzly bears in Alaska that may be more resilient to climate change and better suited for warmer temperatures.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sometimes, it's good to be a 'bird brain.'

Nearly 75 percent of all life on Earth, including the dinosaurs, were wiped out by the massive asteroid that hit the planet 66 million years ago, but a new study suggests that ancient birds may have survived the cataclysmic collision thanks to their evolving complex brains.

A new study suggests early birds may have survived the asteroid impact that killed the dinosaurs because of complex brains. A 70-million-year-old Ichthyornis fossil (pictured) shows the early bird had a small large forebrain, unlike modern-day birds

Ichthyornis' brain (pink) had more in common with nonavian dinosaurs than living birds

A newly discovered, well-preserved, Ichthyornis fossil shows that the early bird, had a small large forebrain, similar to Archaeopteryx, but dissimilar to modern-day birds, which have large forebrains.

'Living birds have brains more complex than any known animals except mammals,' said the study's lead author, Christopher Torres, in a statement.

'This new fossil finally lets us test the idea that those brains played a major role in their survival.'

'If a feature of the brain affected survivorship, we would expect it to be present in the survivors but absent in the casualties, like Ichthyornis,' Torres added. 'That's exactly what we see here.'

WHAT IS THE ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR? The Ichthyornis was a toothy, tern-like seabird with a 60-centimetre wingspan, which lived around 100 to 66 million years ago in what is now North America. Ichthyornis is uniquely situated in the fossil record, being closely related to modern birds but retaining many ancestral features, including sharp, curved teeth. Although it was first discovered back in 1870, the heads of the first specimens were incomplete and badly crushed. New fossils currently under study are much better preserved and three-dimensional, including one extraordinarily complete skull, experts say. The authors used high-resolution three-dimensional scans to reconstruct the head of the bird. This involved each bone being reconstructed by taking extremely thin cross-sectional images all the way through the bone. Advertisement

The 70-million-year-old fossil showed that Ichthyornis' brain had more in common with nonavian dinosaurs than living birds, as its cerebral hemispheres were considerably smaller.

A larger cerebral hemisphere likely allowed ancient birds to change their behavior in response to the asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs

The experts theorize that it's this key trait, the larger cerebral hemisphere, spread above the optic lobes, that may have helped modern birds stave off going extinct.

The earliest known bird was Archaeopteryx and there were roughly a dozen or so bird species that lived between the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction (K-Pg) event that caused the Chicxulub crater, but until now, scientists did not know how their brains operated.

The well-preserved 'nearly complete skull' Ichthyornis skull changes all that.

'Usually one of the first things that happens is the skull gets crushed,' Torres told ABC News. 'What makes our new specimen of Ichthyornis so special is that it preserves a nearly complete skull.'

It's likely there may have been other factors that helped the ancestors of modern birds survive, but a larger cerebral hemisphere likely allowed birds to change their behavior in response to the asteroid and the subsequent changes to the climate.

'Ichthyornis is key to unraveling that mystery,' said Julia Clarke, a professor at the UT Jackson School of Geosciences and co-author of the study.

'This fossil helps bring us much closer to answering some persistent questions concerning living birds and their survivorship among dinosaurs.'

The research was published last month in journal Science Advances.

In 2018, a 100-million-year-old Ichthyornis fossil revealed that the first bird beaks had teeth.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The COVID-19 pandemic caused life expectancy in the U.S. to decrease by 1.5 years, a new report suggests.

In 2019, life expectancy - or the average number of years a person lives - for the general American population was 78.8 years.

However, using provisional data and estimates, researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) found this figure fell to 77.3 years in 2020.

This represents the biggest drop seen since World War II.

While the decline in life expectancy is primarily due to the virus - which has killed more than 600,000 Americans so far - the team says there are other factors at play including a rise in drug overdoses and deaths from diabetes.

Life expectancy in the U.S. fell by 1.5 years from 78.8 years in 2019 to 77.3 years in 2020, a new CDC report finds, representing the biggest drop seen since World War II

Life expectancy among males dropped 1.8 years from 76.3 years to 74.5 years and fell 1.2 years for females from 81.4 years to 80.2 years.

For the report, published on Wednesday, the team used NCHS life tables to calculate life expectancy.

Estimates were simulated for 2020 by looking at provisional death counts because final death counts will not be available until late 2021.

Researchers found that between 2019 and 2020, U.S. life expectancy decreased by 1.5 years from 78.8 years to 77.3 years.

This is a drop not seen since World War II, when life expectancy declined by 2.9 years from 66.2 years in 1942 to 63.3 years in 1943, according to CDC data.

Both men and women saw declines in life expectancy, although the drop was steeper for men.

Hispanic Americans saw a decline of three years and black Americans saw 2.9 years bit white Americans saw a drop of just 1.2 years

Life expectancy among males dropped 1.8 years from 76.3 years to 74.5 years and fell 1.2 years for females from 81.4 years to 80.2 years.

This means that the difference in life expectancy between the sexes increased to 5.7 in 2020 from 5.1 in 2019.

When it came to looking at the declines in life expectancy by race and ethnicity, there were large disparities.

The smallest drop in life expectancy between 2019 and 2020 was among whites, falling just 1.2 years from 77.8 to 77.6, on part with the general population.

But the Hispanic and black populations saw declines that were three-fold greater.

Life expectancy among blacks fell by 2.9 years from 74.7 to 71.8 and fell three years for Hispanics from 81.8 to 78.8.

Hispanic Americans had enjoyed higher life expectancies than whites for many years, but that gap was almost completely erased by the pandemic.

Additionally, the life expectancy between whites and blacks had been narrowing, but the advantage of Caucasians over blacks increased by 45 percent between 2019 and 2020.

Researchers say the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to 74% of the decline but other factors include a rise in drug overdose deaths and homicides

More than 609,000 COVID-related deaths have occurred in the U.S. in total with 347,000 occurring last year

According to the researchers, the last time the gap in life expectancy between the two races was this large was in 1999.

The team states that the decline in life expectancy between 2019 and 2020 can primarily be attributed to COVID-19 deaths, which contributed to 74 percent of the drop.

In 2020, 347,341 people in the U.S. died due to COVID-19, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.

'Mortality due to COVID-19 had, by far, the single greatest effect on the decline in life expectancy at birth between 2019 and 2020, overall, among men and women, and for the three race and Hispanic-origin groups shown in this report,' the authors wrote.

What's more, drug overdose deaths in the U.S. increased nearly 30% and claimed a record 93,000 lives in 2020 also accounting for the rise.

Other factors contributing to the decline in life expectancy in 2020 include deaths from homicide, diabetes and chronic liver disease, the team said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taking part in physical activity like walking can have a positive effect of a person's brain as they age, a new study finds.

Researchers from Colorado State University (CSU) studied people over the age of 60 to see if physical activity had a positive effect on their brains ability to refresh its white matter, which connect cells in brains.

They found that going for 40 minute walks at least three times a week could help refresh the brain's white matter, and keep an elderly person cognitively strong.

The results of the research provide older people with a simple way to keep their brain healthy and active deeper into their lives.

Researchers found that members of the study that were over the age of 60 had more white matter and performed better on memory tests

White matter is the tissue at the largest and deepest part of the brain, which connects parts of the brain and spinal cord to nerve fibers.

Healthy white matter is tied to better memory, better problem-solving an increased cognitive abilities.

For the study, published in the journal NeuroImage, the team recruited 247 participants from old age communities.

Each of the participants was between ages 60 and 80, right handed, had at least 20/40 vision and performed little vigorous physical activity in their daily lives.

Researchers wanted to make sure the participants still had decent levels of cognitive ability despite their limited activity and then split them into three different groups.

One was the control group, in which participants were put in a program where they regularly stretched and performed other routines that require little physical exertion.

Another group would go for a 40 minute walk three times a week.

The final group took part in dancing exercises three times a week, the most physically and mentally exerting task of the bunch.

Participants underwent brain scans, in which the health and the function of their white matter was examined, and the start of the study and six months later.

Those who took part in the latter two groups showed healthier brains and bodies after taking part in the program for six months.

They had obviously become more physically fit.

Their white matter also seemingly renewed, the researchers found on MRI scans of their brains.

Those who were a part of the walking group showed the best results, and also performed the best on memory exams.

Researchers believe that the dancing group did not perform as well as the walking group because they spent a lot time standing in place taking instructions from the teacher, unlike the walking group, which was consistently active.

The group whose activity was the fairly stagnant stretching saw their white matter actually shrink, and they performed worse on some cognitive tests.

Remaining active late in life can keep people healthier and more cognitively sound

Dr Agnieszka Burzynska, co-author of the study and a professor of neuroscience and human development at CSU, told The New York Times that there has not been much research into white matter.

Gray matter is often the subject of much of the research performed on the brain, and further exploration into white matter has not been performed until fairly recently.

Many even believed white matter was passive, but scientists now know it affects many functions of the brain.

Some scientists did not even believe the structure of the brain could change throughout life until only a few decades ago.

Previously, it was the scientific consensus that after childhood, the brain would no longer adapt and create new cells - instead it would just decay as life went on.

Researchers are unsure whether the results of this study would translate to younger people as well, though they recommend people live an active lifestyle to remain healthy.

The findings offer 'a strong case for getting up and moving' to protect the brain's white matter, Burzynska told The Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple's latest iPhone could be compatible with a new 'reverse charger' that would let users charge their AirPods just by placing them on the phone while it charges.

EverythingApplePro's Max Weinbach reported Sunday that the phone will have a stronger array of magnets in the back to support the bulked-up MagSafe charger, which is wireless.

The rumored charger is also said to be better at keeping the phone from overheating, while allowing for a quicker recharge.

EverythingApplePro's website also postulates the jumbo coil could be used for reverse wireless charging—which essentially uses the energy from the phone to wireless charge another device.

That would be a first for the iPhone, but it likely wouldn’t be powerful enough to juice up another phone or iPad—more likely a pair of AirPods or an Air Tag.

According to FCC filings, current iPhones already have the ability to reverse wireless charge.

Apple could eventually release a wireless charger that could simultaneously power several devices at once, and from greater distances, but that ‘is likely several years away,’ Bloomberg reported.

Scroll down for video

The latest word on the upcoming iPhone 13 is that it will have a larger wireless charger coil, possibly to accommodate reverse wireless charging. The phone will also allegedly have a stronger array of magnets in the back to support MagSafe technology

In 2018, Apple announced plans for AirPower, a wireless charging mat that could charge up to three devices simultaneously, but it canceled those plans a year later.

One rumor being squashed is that the iPhone 13 would have an optional terabyte of storage space: TrendForce says the new release will maintain the same memory capacities as the iPhone 12.

TrendForce also reports the 13 will maintain the same pricing as the 12, too—landing at $699 for a 64GB Pro Mini up to $1,999 for a tricked out Pro Max.

Last week, images of devices purported to be the iPhone 13 were leaked on Chinese social media site Weibo.

Based on the pictures, it looks like the phone will have a larger camera bump with lenses laid out diagonally rather than vertically, allowing users to take better wide-angle and zoomed-in photos.

Other claims about the upcoming release include a slightly larger camera 'bump' to accommodate the diagonal layout, a 2.5x telephoto zoom, and an upgrade to the super wide-angle lens.

MacRumors reports the iPhone 13's camera will have a f1.8 aperture, lower than the current f2.4 on the iPhone 12.

Photos purported to be of dummy units of the upcoming iPhone 13 surfaced on Weibo, indicating camera will have a larger 'bump' and diagonal lens

A lower aperture allows more light to enter, useful for shooting under lower light, like at night, and for creating nice depth of field.

The improvement could come to all four rumored models, the site said, the iPhone 13, iPhone 13 Mini, iPhone 13 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro Max.

According to Tom's Guide, the lenses will also include automatic focus and sensor-shift optical image stabilization (OIS), which help counter shakiness.

Sensor-shift OIS debuted with the iPhone 12 Pro Max's telephoto lens, but with iPhone 13 Pro or Pro Max 'the sensor shift OIS will be on both the wide and ultra-wide lenses,' Tom's Guide reported. 'It's uncertain if the same technology will touch the front-facing camera.'

Experts predict the iPhone 13, perhaps touted instead as the '12 S' will be unveiled September 14. It will maintain the same storage capacity and pricing as the iPhone 12, according to reports

As for that thicker bump, it 'would allow the lenses to sit flush with the surface, rather than protruding out as they currently do,' CNET reports, and 'to allow for the wider aperture and sensor-shift stabilization that may be added.'

Weinbach’s newest comments supported earlier theories that the iPhone 13 will support Portrait mode in video.

While many are referring to the upcoming model as the iPhone 13, EverythingApplePro added to the chorus of speculation it will simply be designated the "12 S"—both because the upgrades are minor and to avoid the unlucky implications associated with the number 13 in some cultures.

Whatever the phone is called, official word will come from Cupertino in the third week of September, according to Wedbush Securities analyst Dan Ives —September 14, to be exact, if Apple holds to its traditional Tuesday reveal days.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newly leaked images of a device purported to be the iPhone 13 suggest it will have a larger camera bump with lenses laid out diagonally, allowing users to take better wide-angle and zoomed-in photos.

Snapshots of dummy units of the phones were posted on Chinese social media site Weibo Wednesday.

One of the models, a non-Pro, had the much-discussed diagonal lens. Previous models have been arranged vertically.

Other claims about the upcoming release, expected in the fall, include a slightly larger camera 'bump,' a 2.5x telephoto zoom, and an upgrade to the super wide-angle lens.

MacRumors reported the iPhone 13's camera will have a f1.8 aperture, lower than the f2.4 on the iPhone 12.

A lower aperture means more light enters, which creates dynamic photos and a nice depth of field. It's also useful for shooting under lower light, like at night.

The improvement could come to all four rumored models, the site said, the iPhone 13, iPhone 13 Mini, iPhone 13 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro Max.

Scroll down for video

Photos purported to be of dummy units of the upcoming iPhone 13 surfaced on Weibo this week. They indicate the camera will have a larger 'bump' and diagonal lens

According to Tom's Guide, the lenses will also include automatic focus and sensor-shift optical image stabilization (OIS), which help counter shakiness.

Sensor-shift OIS debuted with the iPhone 12 Pro Max's telephoto lens, but with iPhone 13 Pro or Pro Max 'the sensor shift OIS will be on both the wide and ultra-wide lenses,' Tom's Guide reported. 'It's uncertain if the same technology will touch the front-facing camera.'

As for that thicker bump, it 'would allow the lenses to sit flush with the surface, rather than protruding out as they currently do,' CNET reports.

'While this may be purely for aesthetic reasons it may be in part to allow for the wider aperture and sensor-shift stabilization that may be added.'

Tom's Guide also referenced a portrait mode for video and an astrophotography mode for shooting the night sky.

A wider camera bump would allow for the wider aperture and sensor-shift stabilization expected to be part of the new release

The next iPhone will allegedly have a lower aperture, which allows more light to enter— good for creating a nice depth of field and shooting under lower light. Pictured: A purported iPhone 13 Mini prototype

Of course, since Apple hasn't officially shared any specs, everything about the iPhone 13 is pure speculation—even its name: a survey conducted by the used-phone site SellCell found that almost 75 percent of respondents thought Apple would avoid labeling its next-gen smartphone with the number '13,' considered unlucky in some cultures.

Nearly one in five (18.3 percent) said they'd refuse to buy anything called the 'iPhone 13' because of the superstition.

In a January segment, Front Page Tech host Jon Prosser claimed he was told 'it was probably going to be called the iPhone 12s,' Cult of Mac reported.

Apple did follow up the iPhone 4 with the 4s, and the same with the iPhone 5 and 6, but it's largely avoided the convention since then.

The dummy unit shows a smaller notch on the iPhone 13. Other rumors include an astrophotography mode for shooting the night sky

'I was also told that we probably won't ever get an iPhone 13,' said Prosser.

As Cult of Mac points out, Apple did launch iOS 13 in 2019. And 13 is only bad luck in the West—in China, it denotes good fortune because it means 'assured growth' or 'definitely vibrant.'

Meanwhile the number 4 is considered terribly unlucky in China because it sounds like the word for 'death,' and Apple still rolled out the iPhone 4.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They're here. Again.

Asian giant hornets, colloquially known as murder hornets, are back in Washington state after a resident spotted a live insect, officials at the Washington State Department of Agriculture (WSDA) confirmed on Thursday.

The sighting occurred on August 11, near a rural area east of Blaine, in Whatcom County, Washington.

This is roughly two miles where the first Asian giant hornet nest, which contained 500 live specimens, including 200 queens, was eradicated in October 2020.

'This hornet is exhibiting the same behavior we saw last year – attacking paper wasp nests,' Sven Spichiger, WSDA managing entomologist said in a statement.

Murder hornets are back in Washington state after a resident spotted a live insect on August 11. This hornet was seen attacking paper wasp nests (pictured), similar to behavior seen last year

The sighting occurred near a rural area east of Blaine, in Whatcom County, Washington, roughly two miles where the first Asian giant hornet nest, which contained 500 live specimens, including 200 queens, was eradicated in October 2020

'If you have paper wasp nests on your property and live in the area, keep an eye on them and report any Asian giant hornets you see. Note the direction they fly off to as well.'

The WSDA said it will set live traps in an attempt to catch a live hornet, tag it and track it back to the nest.

In addition, the British Columbia government will set traps in Canada, roughly a half mile from the US-Canada border.

Those who spot the Asian giant hornet should report them online at agr.wa.gov/hornets, emailing hornets@agr.wa.gov or calling 1-800-443-6684.

Murder hornets kill honeybees, which are already under siege from mites, diseases and other factors. They have an extremely painful sting and are the world's largest hornet, at two inches

The discovery of the live Asian giant hornet follows news earlier this summer that a dead male Asian hornet was found in Snohomish County, Washington.

A Marysville resident found and reported the dead bug on June 4 via the agency's Hornet Watch Report Form.

Entomologists determined it was a male, but after they looked at its DNA and coloring, they believed it to be unrelated to the Whatcom County or Canadian murder hornets seen in 2019 and 2020.

The new finding highlights how important the public is to finding this invasive species, which can decimate entire hives of honeybees, which are already under siege from mites, diseases, pesticides and loss of food.

The Asian giant hornet, which has an extremely painful sting, is the world's largest hornet at two inches.

In March, Washington state said it was making plans for the 2021 murder hornet season, similar to last year's, emphasizing public outreach, reporting and trapping.

More than half of confirmed Asian giant hornet sightings in Washington and all in Canada came from the public, WSDA has previously stated.

The first confirmed detection of the hornet in the US was in December 2019 near Blaine and the first live hornet was trapped in July 2020

The first confirmed detection of the hornet in the US was in December 2019 near Blaine and the first live hornet was trapped in July 2020.

The invasive insect is normally found in China, Japan, Thailand, South Korea, Vietnam and other Asian countries.

'The hornets enter a "slaughter phase" where they kill bees by decapitating them. They then defend the hive as their own, taking the brood to feed their own young,' the WSDA has said previously.

The agency has already killed six or seven hives in Washington State.

Despite their nickname, the hornets kill at most a few dozen people a year in Asia, and experts say it is probably far less but they do deliver painful stings to humans.

Hornets, wasps and bees typically found in the US kill an average of 62 people a year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists may have uncovered the remains of a 13th century castle in Shropshire, England after stumbling upon a wall and blocks of wood on a dig.

Experts believe the castle, located in the town of Wem, could date as far back as 1250 AD, with site manager Nat Jackson, of Dig Ventures, calling the find 'just amazing.'

Archaeologists uncovered the remains of a 13th century castle in Shropshire, England. They found a wall and blocks of wood

The researchers made the discovery in Wem, England, a small town in Shropshire county

'We found what we think might possibly be a castle on the mound,' Jackson told BBC Radio.

'We've got a substantial wall and substantial blocks of wood dating to about the 13th to 15th century. It's very, very, exciting.'

The discovery was made on land which belongs to Elizabethan manor Soulton Hall (pictured), which dates to the 16th century.

The discovery was made on land which belongs to Elizabethan manor Soulton Hall, which dates to the 16th century.

Experts performed a test dig on the mound in 2019, but only returned this past July to continue excavating the area.

Tim Ashton (pictured), whose family has owned the land for nearly 100 years, said the family always wondered what the lumps were

Tim Ashton, whose family has owned the land for nearly 100 years, said the family always wondered what the lumps were.

'We've always had questions, my grandfather was born in the 1920s and always wondered what it was,' he said.

Ashton continued: 'The team is fairly comfortable in the time because of the objects we've been finding.

'The finds are all from that period, a pilgrims badge, ceramics, an ampulla which is medieval way of carrying holy water and it was not made for a great deal of time.

It's likely that the castle was 'quite a small one,' Jackson said, adding it's likely there was a moat around it, after the team found evidence of a bridge.

'The moat bridge is colossal and we can be confident of the dating on that,' Ashton added.

The bridge and moat have yet to be confirmed, as researchers are set to look into that next.

Dig Ventures is working with Cardiff University students on the dig, with some of them having unearthed items such as a medieval ampulla (pictured), used to hold holy water

Cardiff University also unearthed a medieval weight used for coins (pictured) and other items

Dig Ventures is working with Cardiff University students on the dig, with some of them having unearthed items such as a medieval ampulla (used to hold holy water), a medieval weight used for coins and other items.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Galactic said tickets for its space tourism trips to the edge of space will start at $450,000, nearly double what they sold in previous sales.

In a statement announcing the company's second-quarter earnings, the Las Cruces, New Mexico-based company said it would reopen sales for its 2022 commercial flights after having closed them years ago.

There will be three consumer offerings: i) a single seat; ii) a multi-seat couples / friends / family package; and iii) full-flight buy out, the company added.

Several years ago, the company said its price point would be roughly $200,000 per seat, before an accident caused the company to close sales.

Branson traveled 53.5 miles above the surface of the Earth, taking him and five crew mates to the edge of space where they experienced weightlessness

Scroll down for video

'Sales will initially open to the Company's significant list of early hand-raisers, prioritizing the Spacefarer Community, who, as promised, will be given first opportunity to reserve their place in space,' Virgin Galactic said in the statement.

'A follow-on priority list will be opened to customers interested in reserving future spaceflights.'

In the statement, Virgin Galactic CEO Michael Colglazier said the firm was 'leveraging the surge in consumer interest' after last month's successful flight.

'As we endeavor to bring the wonder of space to a broad global population, we are delighted to open the door to an entirely new industry and consumer experience,' Colglazier added.

In early July, Branson, along with five other members, traveled 53.5 miles above the surface of the Earth, going to the edge of space where they experienced weightlessness.

Sir Richard Branson floats in zero gravity on board Virgin Galactic's passenger rocket plane VSS Unity after reaching the edge of space above Spaceport America

Virgin Galactic has not yet responded to a request for comment from DailyMail.com.

During the quarter, Virgin Galactic had an adjusted EBIDTA loss of $56 million, generating $571,000 in revenue from scientific research experiments that were performed on the May test flight.

Pictured: The Virgin Galactic SpaceShipTwo space plane Unity flies at Spaceport America, near Truth and Consequences, New Mexico on July 11, 2021 before travel to the cosmos with Sir Richard Branson onboard with five other crew members

The Virgin Galactic SpaceShipTwo space plane Unity flies at Spaceport America before travel to the cosmos

In addition to reopening ticket sales, Virgin Galactic said its next spaceflight test, Unity 23, would happen in late September at Spaceport America in New Mexico, with members of the Italian Air Force.

After Unity 23, it will go through a four-month pause, with the Unity 24 test flight coming later this year.

If all goes well, Unity 25, scheduled for the third-quarter of 2022, will be its first commercial flight.

Astronaut Sir Richard Branson has inaugurated the dawn of the age of space tourism by becoming the first billionaire to make it into space after the 70-year-old Virgin Galactic founder took off on a flight to the edge of Earth's atmosphere in the VSS Unity plane

Virgin said it still has approximately 600 reservations for future flights, though most of those were sold between $200,000 and $250,000, according to CNBC.

In June, it received approval from the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) to give the firm the right to send paying customers into space.

Earlier this year, SpaceX founder Elon Musk purchased a ticket to fly on Virgin Galactic's VSS Unity ship, putting down a $10,000 deposit, the company confirmed in July.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA's Ingenuity helicopter has completed another safe flight on Mars, this time travelling 1,250ft in preparation for a series of reconnaissance missions for the Perseverance rover.

It will help the car-sized vehicle in its search for ancient microbial life on the Red Planet by scouting out locations in a rugged area of terrain.

Ingenuity flew for a little over two minutes before landing in a region scientists have dubbed South Séítah, a patch of ground on the floor of Mars' Jezero Crater which has sandy ripples that NASA scientists fear could be very challenging for the rover.

Scroll down for video

Diagram showing the different components of Ingenuity. The Ingenuity Mars Helicopter was built by JPL, which also manages the technology demonstration for NASA Headquarters

Photo of NASA 's Ingenuity helicopter taken during its tenth flight. NASA said it was the 'most complex' flight yet

INGENUITY FLIGHTS SO FAR Flight one: April 19, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 9.8ft, stationary hover and a landing Flight two: April 22, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, then shift westward for 14ft before returning and landing Flight three: April 25, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, shift northwards for 328ft at an airspeed of 2 m/s before returning to land Flight four: April 30, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 16ft, hover, shift southwards 873ft at 3.5m/s before returning to land Flight five: May 7, 2021 with a vertical takeoff up to 33ft, hover, shift southwards 423ft at 3.5 m/s before landing at that new location Flight six: May 22, 2021 with a vertical takeoff of 33ft, hover, shift southwest 492ft at 9mph, travel 49ft south, travel 164ft before returning to land Flight seven: June 8, 2021 with a vertical takeoff of 33ft, hover, shift 348ft at 9mph, land at Airfield D Flight eight: June 21, 2021 with a vertical takeoff, hover, shift southwest 520ft, land at Airfield E 438ft away from Perseverance Flight nine: July 5, 2021 with a record length of 2,050ft southwest over a prospective research location at 16ft per second. Flight ten: July 24, 2021 with a record height of 40 feet (12 metres) over Raised Ridges to Airfield G. Flight duration 165.4 seconds. Flight eleven: August 5, 2021 by flying 1,250ft for 130 seconds in preparation for a series of reconnaissance missions for the Perseverance rover. Advertisement

It took off for its 11th flight on the Red Planet at around 12:30pm local time (05:50 BST and 12:50 ET) on Thursday (August 5).

The helicopter was due to climb to an altitude of 39ft (12m) and reach speeds of 11 mph, but the mission team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in California are yet to confirm these details.

In a tweet, JPL said: '#MarsHelicopter has safely flown to a new location! Ingenuity flew for 130.9 seconds and traveled about 380 meters before landing at a spot that will set up a series of future reconnaissance flights to help @NASAPersevere in its search for ancient microbial life.'

Perseverance is currently heading south from its landing spot on the Jezero Crater, while Ingenuity is scouting locations to help it plot its way on the ground.

Ingenuity arrived on Mars attached to the belly of Perseverance, which touched down on Mars on February 18 after a nearly seven-month journey through space.

Perseverance made its first test drive on Mars on March 4, and on April 4, NASA confirmed that Ingenuity had been dropped to the surface of Mars from Perseverance's 'belly' in preparation for its historic flight.

NASA also said on April 5 that Ingenuity had survived its first night on the Martian surface – a major milestone because surface temperatures can plunge as low as -130°F (-90°C).

The helicopter, which is just 18-inches tall, made its first flight on April 19, 2021, making history as the first powered controlled flight on any planet other than Earth.

In a nod to this feat, Ingenuity carries a small amount of fabric that covered one of the wings of the Wright brothers' aircraft, known as the Flyer, during the first powered, controlled flight on Earth in 1903.

For the first flight, Ingenuity took off, climbed to about 10 feet (3 meters) above the ground, hovered in the air briefly, completed a turn and then landed.

After that, the helicopter successfully performed additional experimental flights of incrementally farther distance and greater altitude, culminating with the tenth flight on July 24.

The first five flights throughout April and May were part of a 'technical demonstration' to prove something could fly on Mars.

The subsequent flights formed part of an extended mission support role, helping Perseverance.

During its sixth flight on May 23, Ingenuity experienced a bit of a wobble due to some 'unexpected motion' in the final few feet.

This motion was from an 'image processing issue' but it 'muscled through', NASA JPL tweeted at the time.

The Jezero Crater (pictured) is an ancient river delta that seems a logical spot for somewhere that once harboured life
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The US Navy is developing a pilotless solar-powered plane that can fly for 90 days at a time to help keep a watchful eye on naval ships below or act as a communications relay platform.

The plane, dubbed 'Skydweller' and developed by Skydweller Aero, builds on the manned Solar Impulse 2 aircraft that flew around the world in 2015 and 2016, but had to stop every five days.

The upgraded version will eliminate the cockpit, allowing space for hardware that allows for autonomous abilities.

Skydweller Aero CEO Robert Miller told New Scientist: 'When we remove the cockpit, we are enabling true persistence and providing the opportunity to install up to about 400 kilograms of payload capacity.'

The pilotless craft will feature 236-foot long wings that are blanked in solar cells, but its makers may add hydrogen fuel cells for an additional boost.

'We are currently following our plan to test autonomous flight, then autonomous take-off, then autonomous landing and finally our first fully autonomous flight,' Miller added.

'Once all this has been proven, we will move into long-endurance testing with the goal of operating for 90-plus days.'

Scroll down for video

The US Navy is developing a pilotless solar-powered plane that can fly for 90 days at a time as it keeps a watchful eye on naval ships below or act as a communications relay platform

The wings will be covered with 2,900 square feet of photovoltaic cells, which provide 2 kilowatts of power, but the addition of hydrogen fuel cells make the craft more reliable, Aviation Today reports.

The autonomous plane will cruise at speeds of up to 100 knots and fly as high as 45,931 feet above the surface, and carry 800 pounds of payload.

'There are certainly differentiated missions that Skydweller can do that no other aircraft can do, but the core of it really is doing things that we do today better, smarter, cheaper, more effectively,' co-founder of Skydweller Aero John Parkes told Aviation Today.

'And that is communications — being a node in the sky whether for the military and first responder market or for the telecom world. And for the military specifically, doing intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) missions from an airborne perspective more effectively.'

Skydweller will also feature 236-foot long wings that are blanked in solar cells, but its makers may add hydrogen fuel cells for an additional boost

The upgraded version will eliminate the cockpit, allowing space for hardware that allows for autonomous abilities

The news of Skywalker's development follows an announcement from the US Air Force that it could soon replace Reaper, its unmanned aerial vehicle capable of remotely controlled or autonomous flight operations.

Although Skydweller does not included all of Reaper's capabilities, Parkes notes it could help reduce military costs.

'Being able to fly thousands of miles, persist over an area for 30-60 days and fly back is a differentiator,' said Parkes.

'It's a huge cost savings to the U.S. government when you look at the whole cost of doing a lot of the national security missions that we have.'

Skywalker does not need to takeoff or land as many times as the Reaper, which would eliminate the need for several crafts flying at ones.

The wings will be covered with 2,900 square feet of photovoltaic cells, which provide 2 kilowatts of power, but the addition of hydrogen fuel cells make the craft more reliable

A separate military drone maker announced an exciting concept that will escort piloted planes into the battlefield. General Atomics Aeronautical Systems (GA-ASI) revealed the first concept image for a missile-carrying air-to-air combat drone last month

'For us, if you're flying 90 days with one aircraft, that's two takeoffs and landings versus … hundreds,' Parkes said.

A separate military drone maker, General Atomics Aeronautical Systems (GA-ASI), announced in July an exciting concept that will escort piloted planes into the battlefield, similar to how Skywalker will assist naval planes.

GA-ASI, a firm that provides drones and radar solutions for the US military, revealed the first concept image for a missile-carrying air-to-air combat drone last month.

GA-ASI notes that when carried by a bomber, the combat drone can clear the way for the piloted plane to carry out other missions without being attacked by enemy aerial vehicles.

The new concept image shows a manned aircraft in the distance and a close look at the stealthy combat drone with a cockpit similar to a B-52 stealth bomber - but without the windows and a fraction of the size.

There is a prominent V-shaped tail and a weapons bay on the side of the rear fuselage with two doors, The Drive reports.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The International Space Station (ISS) averted a disaster on Thursday after a newly arrived Russian module suffered a concerning mishap.

In a worrying episode for NASA, the ISS was thrown out of control when jet thrusters of the 22-ton Nauka research module inadvertently fired a few hours after it docked.

Nauka, which is designed to serve as a research lab, storage unit and airlock, docked at the ISS on Thursday at 9:29am EDT (2:29pm BST).

But following the docking, the flight control team noticed the 'unplanned firing' of its thrusters about three hours later, NASA announced.

This caused the ISS to move out of attitude – its orientation in relation to its direction of travel – by 45 degrees, or one-eighth of a complete circle.

The station's position is key for getting power from its solar panels. If this was lost, the ISS would 'decay', meaning it would get closer and closer to Earth before it came crashing down.

Russian state-owned news agency RIA cited NASA specialists at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, as describing the struggle to regain control of the ISS as a 'tug of war' between the two modules.

The seven crew members aboard – two Russian cosmonauts, three NASA astronauts, a Japanese astronaut and a European space agency astronaut from France – were never in any immediate danger, according to NASA.

Scroll down for video

Nauka (left) is seen docked to the International Space Station (ISS) next to Soyuz MS-18 spacecraft on July 29, 2021

Pictured is the current configuration of the International Space Station (ISS). Three spaceships are docked at the space station including the SpaceX Crew Dragon and Russia’s Soyuz MS-18 crew ship and ISS Progress 78 resupply ship. The new Nauka Multipurpose Logistics Module (MLM) is now attached to the Zvezda service module’s Earth-facing port

THE NAUKA MODULE The Nauka module is designed to serve as a research lab, storage unit and airlock that will upgrade Russia's capabilities aboard the ISS. Nauka will be a new science facility, docking port and spacewalk airlock for future operations, along with providing additional crew quarters, a galley and a toilet. Nauka, which means 'science' in Russian' launched on July 21 atop a Russian Proton rocket. It docked with the ISS on July 29 - but for some reason, it mistakenly fired its thrusters and caused the ISS to move out of orientation. Advertisement

'The crew was never and is not in any danger, and flight controllers in Mission Control Houston are monitoring the status of the space station,' NASA said in a statement.

'Ground teams have regained attitude control and the motion of the space station is stable.'

What caused the malfunction of the thrusters on the Nauka module, which was delivered by the Russian space agency Roscosmos, has yet to be determined, NASA officials said.

The malfunction has forced NASA to postpone its planned launch of Boeing's new CST-100 Starliner capsule on a highly anticipated uncrewed test flight to ISS until at least August 3.

The Starliner, which will transport up to seven passengers to and from low-Earth orbit, had been set to blast off atop an Atlas V rocket on Friday (July 30) from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida.

NASA had reported Nauka's successful docking on Thursday before announcing the incident that followed.

The mishap began about three hours after it latched onto the ISS, as mission controllers in Moscow were performing some post-docking 'reconfiguration' procedures, according to NASA.

The module's jets inexplicably restarted, causing the entire station to pitch out of its normal flight position some 250 miles above the Earth, leading the mission's flight director to declare a 'spacecraft emergency', US space agency officials said.

An unexpected drift in the station's orientation was first detected by automated ground sensors, followed 15 minutes later by a 'loss of attitude control' that lasted a little over 45 minutes, according to Joel Montalbano, manager of NASA's space station program.

Flight teams on the ground managed to restore the space station's orientation by activating thrusters on another module of the orbiting platform, NASA officials said.

Following this morning's docking of the Nauka module to the @Space_Station, the module's thrusters started firing at 12:45pm ET inadvertently and unexpectedly, moving the station 45 degrees out of attitude. Recovery operations have regained attitude and the crew is in no danger: pic.twitter.com/jFlDZD7ZHp — NASA (@NASA) July 29, 2021

Nauka, which means 'science' in Russian', launched on July 21 atop a Russian Proton rocket

At the height of the incident, the station was pitching out of alignment at the rate of about a half a degree per second, Montalbano said during a NASA conference call with reporters.

The Nauka engines were ultimately switched off, the space station was stabilised and its orientation was restored to where it had begun, NASA said.

Communication with the crew was lost for several minutes twice during the disruption, but 'there was no immediate danger at any time to the crew, who 'really didn't feel any movement', Montalbano said.

Had the situation become dangerous enough to require evacuation, the crew could have escaped in a SpaceX crew capsule still parked at the outpost and designed to serve as a 'lifeboat' if needed, said Steve Stich at NASA's commercial crew program.

Boeing's CST-100 Starliner spacecraft sits atop a United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket, on Space Launch Complex 41 at the Cape Canaveral Space Force Station ready for the second un-piloted test flight to the International Space Station, Thursday, July 29, 2021. The launch was scheduled for Friday afternoon but has been delayed until August 3 at the earliest

Montalbano said there was no immediate sign of any damage to the space station. The flight correction maneuvers used up more propellant reserves than desired, 'but nothing I would worry about,' he said.

After its launch last week from Kazakhstan's Baikonur Cosmodrome, the module experienced a series of glitches that raised concern about whether the docking procedure would go smoothly.

Roscosmos attributed Thursday's post-docking issue to Nauka's engines having to work with residual fuel in the craft, TASS news agency reported.

'The process of transferring the Nauka module from flight mode to "docked with ISS" mode is underway.' Roscosmos was cited by TASS as saying.

'Work is being carried out on the remaining fuel in the module.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The combined lifestyle of just three typical Americans is enough to kill another human being, according to a new study.

Assuming that emissions continue to increase on their current high path, the study, found that there are 2.26×10-4, or 0.000226 premature deaths per metric ton of carbon dioxide emitted above and beyond 2020 rates.

Essentially, that means for every 4,434 metric tons of CO2 produced beyond current rates, one person is killed.

The average American churns out about 20 metric tons a year, so to hit that 4,434 threshold would take about 225 years—or three additional 75-year lifespans.

'Based on the decisions made by individuals, businesses or governments, this tells you how many lives will be lost, or saved,' R. Daniel Bressler, a researcher in sustainable development at Columbia University's Earth Institute, said in a statement.

A new study from Columbia University suggests the lifelong lifestyle of three typical Americans creates enough carbon emissions to kill someone.

Coining the phrase 'the mortality cost of carbon,' Bressler quantified 'the mortality impact of those decisions,' he said. 'It brings this question down to a more personal, understandable level.'

The research was published last month in the journal Nature Communications.

That's quite deadly compared to the global average of killing just .08 people per capita.

In the UK, it would take the current emissions of nearly 10 people (9.4 to be precise) to produce the same amount of 'excess mortality,' according to the statement, as compared to 25.8 Brazilians and 146.2 Nigerians.

Americans aren't alone with their deadly carbon footprint, though: According to Bressler's analysis (top): Saudi Arabians could kill 0.33 people per capita. It would take the lifetime CO2 emissions of 146.2 Nigerians, however, to do someone in

Americans aren't alone with their deadly carbon footprint, though: According to Bressler's analysis, Saudi Arabians could kill 0.33 people per capita, with Qatar, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and Australia hitting similar numbers.

Researchers have been decrying the long-term effects of carbon dioxide and greenhouse gasses, in both economic and health terms.

But those estimates tend to be on the macro level - how many millions of lives or acres of trees will be lost.

Economist William Nordhaus won a Nobel prize in 2018 for examining the 'social cost of carbon,' which looks at the financial burden of reducing emissions as compared to the cost climate change effects will inflict.

Bressler praises Nordhaus's research but says it misses the impact on mortality rates, which has seen an 'explosion of research' lately, he told The Guardian.

Factoring those mortality figures in, Bressler bumped up the cost of carbon more than 600 percent, from $37 per metric ton to $258.

Bressler admits his numbers are only based on direct temperature-related deaths, such as by heatstroke—ignoring fatalities from starvation, drowning, wars or infectious diseases. 'The number could be lower but it could also be a lot higher,' he told The Guardian.

Adding 1 million metric tons to the 2020 baseline emissions—equal to the annual output of an additional 216,000 passenger vehicles, 115,000 homes, or 35 commercial airliners—would kill 226 people.

Bressler based his formula on the assumption that, based on rising emission trends, by the year 2050 average temperatures will surpass 3.8 Fahrenheit above what they were before the Industrial Revolution, 'the largely agreed-upon limit after which the worst consequences of climate change will kick in.'

The study predicts that by 2100, temperatures would reach 7.4 F higher, resulting in some 83 million additional deaths.

Bressler admits his numbers aren't exact, and there's always the chance world governments could make a major U-turn in the coming years.

The study predicts that by 2100, temperatures will reach 7.4 F higher than pre-industrial rates, resulting in some 83 million additional deaths

But he only factored direct temperature-related deaths, such as by heatstroke—ignoring fatalities from starvation, drowning, wars, infectious diseases and numerous other indirect results of rising temperatures.

'I was surprised at how large the number of deaths are,' Bressler told The Guardian. There is some uncertainty over this—the number could be lower but it could also be a lot higher.'

In April 2021, the International Energy Agency predicted carbon dioxide emissions would swell by the second-highest increase in history, as manufacturing and shipping resume in the wake of the pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Climate experts trek more than 1,000 feet up the Presena glacier in northern Italy every summer to cover it with a giant tarp that prevents the snow beneath from melting.

The glacier has lost more than one third of its volume since 1993, but the tarp has saved 70 percent of its snow cover since the project began in 2008.

The tarp is made of geotextile tarpaulins that reflect sunlight, maintaining a temperature lower than the external one, and thus preserving as much snow as possible.

This part of the glacier is a popular skiing destination and as soon as the resort closes, a team heads up the steep mountain to unfurl 16-foot-wide and 229-foot-long strips across some 29 acres of ice – a task that takes one month to complete.

Scroll down for video

Climate experts climb up the more than 1,000-foot tall Presena glacier in northern Italy every summer to cover it with a giant tarp that prevents the snow beneath from melting

The Presena glacier is located on the boarder between Val di Sole and Valle Camonica, between Trentino and Lombardy.

Once the ski season is over and cable cars are berthed, conservationists race to try and stop it melting by using white tarps that block the sun's rays.

'This area is continuously shrinking, so we cover as much of it as possible,' Davide Panizza, 34, who heads the Carosello-Tonale company that does the work, told AFP.

They move methodically down the mountain under clear blue skies to pull the coverings taut, and sew them together to ensure warm drafts do not slip underneath. Bags of sand then act as anchors against the wind.

The tarp is made of geotextile tarpaulins that reflect sunlight, maintaining a temperature lower than the external one, and thus preserving as much snow as possible

This part of the glacier is a popular skiing destination and as soon as the resort closes, a team heads up the steep mountain to unfurl 16-foot-wide and 229-foot-long strips across some 29 acres of ice – a task that takes one month to complete

The Presena glacier is located on the boarder between Val di Sole and Valle Camonica, between Trentino and Lombardy

'There are glacier cover systems similar to ours on a few Austrian glaciers, but the surface covered by the tarpaulins is much smaller,' Panizza said.

The Austrian-made tarps cost up to $450 each and it takes the team six weeks to install them—and another six weeks to remove them before winter sets in again.

Franco Del Pero, leads the operation and says technological improvements mean contemporary tarps protect better than earlier versions.

'When we remove them in September and we see that they did their job, we feel proud,' he said.

The Austrian-made tarps cost up to $450 each and it takes the team six weeks to install them—and another six weeks to remove them before winter sets in again

Once the ski season is over and cable cars are berthed, conservationists race to try and stop it melting by using white tarps that block the sun's rays

Along with the treat of melting, Presena glacier has also been plagued by algae that turns its white snow pink. The species of algae, known as Ancylonema nordenskioeldii, absorbs sunlight and increases the risk of ice melting

Along with the treat of melting, Presena glacier has also been plagued by algae that turns its white snow pink.

The species of algae, known as Ancylonema nordenskioeldii, absorbs sunlight and increases the risk of ice melting.

But scientists say the harmless algae is making the snow darker and it is absorbing more sunlight as a result.

Therefore, the snow melts at a quicker than usual rate – a process that exacerbates the effects of warmer temperatures caused by greenhouse gases.

'The alga is not dangerous, it is a natural phenomenon that occurs during the spring and summer periods in the middle latitudes but also at the Poles,' Biagio Di Mauro of Italy's National Research Council told AFP.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Microbe communities found in the stomach of cows can break down plastic, potentially offering a sustainable way to help reduce litter, a study has found.

Specifically, the organisms come from the rumen — the first and largest of the four compartments that make up the bovine stomach.

Experts at Austria's University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences thought these bacteria may be useful as, in the cow diet, they break down natural plant polymers.

In fact, the team's experiments found that this diverse community of microbes can decompose plastic faster than single organisms tested in previous studies.

Microbe communities found in the stomach of cows (like those pictured) can break down plastic , potentially offering a sustainable way to help reduce litter, a study has found

Specifically, the organisms come from the rumen — the first and largest of the four compartments that make up the bovine stomach, depicted

'A huge microbial community lives in the rumen reticulum and is responsible for the digestion of food in the animals,' said paper author and biotechnology expert Doris Ribitsch of the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences in Vienna.

'So we suspected that some biological activities could also be used for polyester hydrolysis,' she added, referring to a type of reaction that decomposes plastic.

In their study, the team looked at three different kinds of polyesters — one of which was PET (polyethylene terephthalate), a synthetic polymer commonly used in the production of textiles and packaging.

The other two plastics were polybutylene adipate terephthalate (PBAT) — a biodegradable material used to make compostable plastic bags — and polyethylene furanoate (PEF), a bio-based material derived from renewable, plant-based sugars.

A slaughterhouse in Austria provided rumen liquid, which the researchers incubated with all three plastics — both in film and powder form — to examine how effective the microorganisms would be at breaking the materials down.

The team found that the microbes from the cows' rumens were capable of breaking down all three plastics — PET, PBAT, PEF — with the powdered versions, with their greater surface areas to attack, unsurprisingly breaking down faster than the films.

Moreover — compared to the results of similar studies conducted using single microorganisms — the team found that rumen liquid was more effective.

This suggests that it is the combination of enzymes used by the microbe community, rather than just one specific enzyme, that is key to effective plastic decomposition.

In their study, the team looked three different kinds of polyesters — one of which was PET (polyethylene terephthalate), a synthetic polymer commonly used in the production of textiles and packaging — including water bottles, as pictured

At present, the team have only conducted their work at a small scale in the lab.

However, Dr Ribitsch said, 'Due to the large amount of rumen that accumulates every day in slaughterhouses, upscaling would be easy to imagine.'

With their initial study complete, the researchers are looking forward to conducting further research in this field — as, Dr Ribitsch noted, microbial communities have been underexplored as a potential eco-friendly resource.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Experts have found a deep-water shark nursery filled with 'hundreds of the apex predators and innumerable amount of shark eggs near Tel Aviv, Israel that they believe could have important implications for understanding climate change.

The discovery, led by experts at the University of Haifa, the Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research and other institutions, was almost made by accident, as the researchers were looking at the Eastern Mediterranean Sea because of its vulnerability to climate change.

'This was happening under our noses for thousands of years, right next to Tel Aviv, one of the largest cities in Israel,' said Dr Yizhaq Makovsky, one of the leading researchers, in a statement.

'It was hiding in plain sight, which highlights how little we know about the deep sea — not just off the coast of Israel, but around the world. This is a global challenge.'

A deep-water shark nursery with 'hundreds' of sharks was found near Tel Aviv, Israel

The researchers also discovered deep sea brine pools and related habitat hotspots as part of their work.

The area had previously been thought of 'as an ocean desert,' according to Makovsky, with little in the way of marine life.

Israel is know for being a hotspot for sharks, according to the Jerusalem Post, including species such as dusky and sandbar sharks, both of which are endangered in the area.

It's possible the nursery could be the largest mating location for deep-sea sharks, experts believe.

The discovery was almost made by accident, as researchers were looking at the Eastern Mediterranean Sea because of its vulnerability to climate change

However, the size of the nursery surprised the researchers, not only for the discovery itself, but also what it means to the region as it pertains to rising sea temperatures.

'From a global marine research perspective, this discovery can have enormous implications,' Dr Makovsky added.

The research was done as part of the UN Sustainable Development Goals 'Life Below Water' initiative, which is designed to help save the ocean and biodiversity from the effects of climate change.

The Eastern Mediterranean 'can be regarded as an early-warning system' for climate change. It has experienced multiple climatic and anthropogenic changes at different time scales

It's possible the nursery could be the largest mating location for deep-sea sharks

This is due in part to the fact that the Eastern Mediterranean 'can be regarded as an early-warning system,' Makovsky explained.

'Therefore, we believe that our discovery of a previously unknown deep-sea hotspot of life could provide crucial information for the sustainability and resilience of the marine ecosystem not only in the Eastern Mediterranean, but also globally in other oceans.'

Makovsky continued: 'The deep sea is the Earth's climatic capacitor, mitigating short-term changes. Once the impact of surface synoptic changes migrates to the deep sea, the entire climate of the Earth changes. The Eastern Mediterranean Sea experienced multiple climatic and anthropogenic changes at different time scales.

'Investigating the geological and environmental records concealed in this hotspot will provide a high-resolution record of the impact of changes on the deep sea, which is essential for understanding local and global climatic changes.'

The new actions come in light of the United Nation's damning report that said global warming is already causing extreme weather and the world will see a temperature increase of 2.7F by 2040, compared to a previous forecast between 2030 and 2052.

It is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land,' the report warned.

The lengthy report added that it is virtually certain' heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions' and a rise in sea levels approaching 6 feet by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out.'

In July, a number of blacktip reef sharks were spotted off New York's coastline that are not native area, with officials noting they likely moved north because of climate change.

In February, researchers in California found that great whites were moving north off the California coast, from Santa Barbara all the way to Bodega Bay, to seek cooler waters as a result of climate change.

Though climate change is impacting the migrations and hunting patterns of the apex predators, it's also impacting how they swim.

In March 2020, Australian researchers found that sharks became 'right handed,' swimming to the right, after swimming in tanks heated to simulate temperature changes that are expected by the end of the century.

Rising sea temperatures may also negatively impact young sharks by shortening their freeze response times they implement to keep from being eaten by predators such as large fish and other sharks, a recent study found.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Scientists have determined forests in temperate zones like the United States are a key tool in combatting climate change because of their ability to draw cooling clouds.

Environmental engineers at Princeton University analyzed satellite records of cloud cover at latitudes of between 30 and 45 degrees—a region encompassing much of the US and Eurasia—from 2001 to 2010.

Comparing conditions in areas where forests had been planted or replanted with regions without tree cover, they found forests in midlatitudes attracted more clouds, helping to reflect sunlight back into space and keeping the area cooler.

The clouds formed are the right kind, IFLScience reports: Thick, long-hanging strati that form earlier in the day, when the sun is higher, thereby enhancing their cooling effects.

'If one considers that clouds tend to form more frequently over forested areas, then planting trees over large areas is advantageous and should be done for climate purposes,' the study's senior author, Amilcare Porporato, an environmental engineer at Princeton's High Meadows Environmental Institute, said in a statement.

The research was published this month in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Forests in midlatitude regions like the United States and Eurasia have a net beneficial impact on combatting global warming, according to a new report from Princeton University, thanks to their ability to attract clouds that can reflect sunlight back into space

The reflectiveness of the Earth's surface, known as the 'albedo,' is a key factor in both global and regional climate.

'Forests absorb large amounts of solar radiation as a result of having a low albedo,' the researchers said in the release.

Trees absorb carbon dioxide, the leading greenhouse gas, but their leaves are darker than grasslands and desert and could trap excess heat.

In tropic zones, any warming caused by forest cover is far outweighed by the carbon the trees store but climate experts were unsure that principle held once you moved into more temperate climes, where you don't have year-round vegetation.

Black dots on this map represent forested areas, while green dots represent grasslands and other short vegetation. Areas are shaded from cloudiest (white) to least cloudy (brown)

'In the tropics, low albedo is offset by the higher uptake of carbon dioxide by the dense, year-round vegetation,' Porporato said.

'But in temperate climates, the concern is that the sun's trapped heat could counteract any cooling effect forests would provide by removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.'

Because of the albedo question, 'nobody has known whether planting trees at midlatitudes is good or bad,' Porporato added.

Since clouds tend to form more frequently over forested areas, 'planting trees over large areas is advantageous and should be done for climate purposes,' says Amilcare Porporato, an environmental engineer at Princeton's High Meadows Environmental Institute

'We show that if one considers that clouds tend to form more frequently over forested areas, then planting trees over large areas is advantageous and should be done for climate purposes.'

Tree-planting is not always the solution to climate change, though: In northern climates, it can have a net warming effect.

Some critics have said planting trees is an ineffective strategy because the land needed to achieve global 'net zero' carbon targets by 2050 would be five times the size of India.

Earlier this month, Oxfam said at least 3 billion acres of new forest land would be needed to offset emissions, and reaching that goal was 'mathematically impossible.'

In a report, Oxfam warned that offsetting global carbon emissions worldwide by planting trees was 'mathematically impossible,' as it would require an area five times the size of India

More than 120 countries, including the EU, Japan and South Korea, have vowed to be 'net zero' by the middle of the 21st century.

THE AMAZON RAINFOREST: FROM CARBON SINK TO EMITTER The largest forest in the world, the Amazon rainforest, has actually shifted from being a carbon absorber to a carbon emitter because of extensive logging and raging wildfires. A July report in the journal Nature found the Amazon was actually 'fueling' global warming. Logging in Brazil has tilted the Amazon from a carbon 'sink' to a carbon emitter Scientists at the National Institute for Space Research in Sao Jose dos Campos reported southeastern Amazonia — about 20 percent of the entire rainforest — has switched from being a buffer to a substantial source of CO2. Without all the deforestation, the Amazon could soak up carbon emitted by human activity, forestalling the worst impacts of climate change, said lead author Luciana Gatti. But millions of trees have been lost to fire and logging and are releasing CO2 as they die. Historically the Amazon has slowed the pace of climate change by storing up to 200 gigatons of carbon, equivalent to five years worth of human emissions. It's green leaves convert carbon through photosynthesis into carbohydrates that end up in the trees' trunks and branches, acting as a 'carbon sink.' But 'factors such as deforestation and climate change are thought to have stimulated a decrease in the capacity,' Gatti said in a statement. 'They have altered the local balance of carbon gases, which is indicative of the health of an ecosystem.' Advertisement

The pledge involves offsetting unavoidable emissions by removing greenhouse gases from the atmosphere with new technologies and nature-based strategies.

Oxfam calculated that the tree-planting goals of four of the world's largest oil and gas corporations – Shell, Eni, Total and BP – would require an area twice the size of the UK to meet 'net-zero' targets.

Shell alone would need an area the size of Honduras by 2030, the anti-poverty nonprofit stated.

In 'Tightening the Net,' Oxfam International warned that if countries and companies over-rely on tree-planting to meet 'net zero' targets, global food prices could soar 80 percent over the next three decades.

Governments and corporations are 'hiding behind unreliable, unproven and unrealistic 'carbon removal' schemes in order to claim their 2050 climate change plans will be 'net zero,' the agency said in a release.

'We will be hoodwinked by 'net-zero' targets if all they amount to are smokescreens for dirty business-as-usual,' Nafkote Dabi, Oxfam climate change director said in a release.

'Net zero should be based on 'real zero' targets that require drastic and genuine cuts in emissions, phasing out fossil fuels and investing in clean energy and supply chains.

'Instead, too many 'net zero' commitments provide a fig leaf for climate inaction. They are a dangerous gamble with our planet's future.'

'Nature and land-based carbon removal schemes are an important part of the mix of efforts needed to stop global emissions,' Dabi added,

'But they must be pursued in a much more cautious way. Under current plans, there is simply not enough land in the world to realize them all.

'They could instead spark even more hunger, land grabs and human rights abuses, while polluters use them as an alibi to keep polluting.'

She called relying on planting trees rather than legitimately focusing shifting away from fossil fuel-dependent economies 'a dangerous folly.'

Eni told Oxfam that nature-based solutions were 'crucial' to achieve carbon neutrality goals in the long-term, while Total said it operated on the principle that 'natural carbon sinks must be connected to an agricultural or forestry value chain that is local and sustainable.'

Shell maintains its 2050 goal did not rely on extensive reforestation, while BP also said it was not relying on offsets to meet 2030 emission reduction targets.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Faecal transplants from young mice into older mice helped to prevent cognitive decline, researchers found, and hope it could inspire new treatments in humans.

Microorganisms that live on and in the human body have an impact on health and vary with age. Friendly bacteria can have beneficial effects on the immune system.

Researchers took microorganisms found in faecal matter in younger mice and placed it into older mice, then tracked changes in the brain over time.

This transplant technique counteracted specific ageing-associated changes in the older mice, according to researchers from University College Cork in Ireland.

The team say the findings suggest future treatments that change gut bacteria balance may help cure ageing-related cognitive decline in humans in the future.

When it comes to rejuvenating the bacteria balance in humans, researchers say a dietary alternative to a faecal transplant may present a more palatable solution.

The team say the findings suggest that such transplants may offer the potential for a new type of treatment of ageing-related cognitive decline in humans in the future

MICROBIOME: DOES IT CONTROL EVERYTHING? Researchers now estimate that a typical human body is made up of about 30 trillion human cells and 39 trillion bacteria. These are key in harvesting energy from our food, regulating our immune function, and keeping the lining of our gut healthy. Interest in, and knowledge about, the microbiota has recently exploded as we now recognise just how essential they are to our health. A healthy, balanced microbiome helps us break down foods, protects us from infection, trains our immune system and manufactures vitamins, such as K and B12. It also sends signals to our brain that can affect mood, anxiety and appetite. Imbalances in the gut are increasingly being linked to a range of conditions. Last year, scientists at California Institute of Technology found the first ever link between the gut and Parkinson's symptoms. The composition of our gut microbiota is partly determined by our genes but can also be influenced by lifestyle factors such as our diet, alcohol intake and exercise, as well as medications. Advertisement

As our bodies age, the so-called friendly bacteria can be gradually replaced with bacteria that drive chronic inflammation, metabolic dysfunction and disease.

Microorganisms in the gut shape local immunity, but can also affect brain ageing and increase the risk of neurodegenerative diseases, the Irish researchers said.

John Cryan, Marcus Boehme and colleagues transplanted faecal microbes from the gut of either young mice, aged 3-4 months, or older mice aged 19-20 months into other older mice aged 19-20 months.

'It's a potential game changer. We've now established the microbiome can be harnessed to reverse age-related brain deterioration,' said Prof Cryan.

'We also see evidence of improved learning ability and cognitive function.'

A staggering 100 trillion microorganisms live in the human gut - both good and bad and the immune system is affected by the balance between the two types.

The Irish team showed introducing specific species of gut microbe to older lab rodents from younger donors, helped them think and remember.

Ageing-associated changes in the immune system were reversed, leaving the older mice better at learning the way round mazes - and not forgetting how they did it.

They were also less prone to anxiety - another common symptom of dementia.

Scans later showed their brains had been rejuvenated - containing metabolites and patterns of gene regulation resembling those of adolescents.

Prof Cryan said: 'It should be said we are not advocating faecal transplants for people who want to rejuvenate their brain.

'Instead, these studies point towards a future where there will be a focus on microbiota-targeted dietary or bacterial-based interventions.

'They will promote optimum gut health and immunity in order to keep the brain young and healthy. Such strategies will be a more palatable elixir indeed.'

The study suggests such therapies could combat cognitive decline and adds to evidence probiotics sold in supermarkets as diet supplements boost concentration, decision-making and understanding.

Prof Cryan said: 'Microorganisms in the gut shape local immunity, but can also affect brain ageing and increase the risk of neurodegenerative diseases.'

Globally, the number of people with dementia is set to triple to around 150 million by 2050 because of ageing populations around the world.

This transplant technique counteracted specific ageing-associated changes in the older mice, according to researchers from University College Cork in Ireland

When it comes to rejuvenating the bacteria balance in humans, researchers say a dietary alternative to a Faecal transplant may present a more palatable solution

The microbes 'turned back the clock' in the old mice - and open up microbial-based interventions in humans, said Prof Cryan adding that first much work is needed to translate the findings for clinical use in humans.

But he added: 'There is a growing appreciation of the importance of the microbes in the gut on all aspects of physiology and medicine.'

Alzheimer's and other forms of dementia affect 920,000 people in the UK - a figure set to rise to two million by 2050. There is no cure.

Previous research has found a daily dose of probiotics over just 12 weeks can produce significant improvement in elderly patients.

Researchers took microorganisms found in faecal matter in younger mice and placed it into older mice, then tracked changes in the brain over time

Future research is needed to explore how specific bacteria or their metabolites within the microbiome may be responsible for these effects.

Professor Paul Ross, director of APC Microbiome Ireland at UCC, said the research further demonstrates the importance of the gut microbiome in many aspects of health.

He added it applies 'particularly across across the brain/gut axis where brain functioning can be positively influenced.'

'The study opens up possibilities in the future to modulate gut microbiota as a therapeutic target to influence brain health,' Professor Ross said.

The findings have been published in the journal Nature Aging.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pikach-EWW! The real-life 'counterparts' of the popular Pokémon have a disgusting way to survive winters without hibernating — eating yak faeces.

Experts with the Chinese Academy of Sciences studied pikas, tiny mammals which live in the meadows of the Qinghai–Tibetan plateau at altitudes of some 16,400 feet.

They found that, to get through the winters, when temperatures fall down to -22°F (-30°C), plateau pikas (Ochotona curzoniae) adopt a number of strategies.

Alongside sometimes eating yak excrement, which provides a ready and easily digestible food source, they also slow down their metabolism to save energy.

The finding also helps to explain why pika populations are larger in areas where yak graze, despite how the animals are believed to usually be in competition for food.

Despite the similarity appearance, Pokémon's Pikachu was actually styled after squirrels, while 'pika' was derived from a Japanese word for a sparkling sound.

Scroll down for video

Pikach-EWW! The real-life counterparts of the popular Pokémon have a disgusting way to survive winters without hibernating — eating yak faeces — a study found. Pictured: a pika caught after snaking on a lump of excrement on the Qinghai–Tibetan plateau

The finding helps to explain why pika populations are larger in areas where yak also graze — despite the fact that the animals are normally in competition for food. Pictured: a yak

Researchers led from the Chinese Academy of Sciences found that, to get through the winters of the of the high-altitude Qinghai–Tibetan plateau, when temperatures fall down to -22°F (-30°C), plateau pikas (Ochotona curzoniae) adopt a number of survival strategies

The study was undertaken by biologist John Speakman of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and his colleagues.

'Lots of animals including rabbits and pikas eat their own faeces,' Professor Speakman told Live Science, explaining that this 'coprophagy' can help animals absorb nutrients that they couldn't initially digest from the food.

'But eating the faeces of other species is relatively rare,' he added.

In their study, Professor Speakman and colleagues spent 13 year studying the tiny mammals on the high-altitude meadows of the Qinghai–Tibetan plateau.

Alongside filming the plateau pikas, the team also implanted temperature-logging sensors into the animals to monitor them over the cold winters, during which they manage to expend around 30 per cent less energy than usual.

The team found that the creatures responded to the harsh conditions by lowering their body temperatures and cutting down on physical activities such as foraging.

Instead, in locales where such was available, they turned to the excrement of domestic yak (Bos grunniens) as a readily available source of food that didn't require so much energy-intensive searching to locate.

Having already passed through the yak's gastrointestinal system, the researchers explained, the faecal matter would be eat for the pikas to digest — and likely still retains both water and nutrients needed to sustain the mammals.

Not only did the team capture this unappealing behaviour on film, but their analysis also revealed signatures of yak DNA in the stomach contents of some of the pika that they analysed.

Alongside sometimes eating yak excrement — which provides a ready and easily digestible food source — pikas (pictured) also suppress their body temperature to save energy

'Lots of animals including rabbits and pikas eat their own faeces,' Professor Speakman told Live Science, adding: 'But eating the faeces of other species is relatively rare.' Pictured: a pika (left) eats yak excrement, a habit not shared by Pokémon's Pikachu (right) Despite the similarity in appearance, Pikachu was actually styled after squirrels — while 'pika' was derived from a Japanese word for a sparkling sound.

'We are currently studying what other benefits might accrue [from eating yak faeces],' Professor Speakman added.

'There are obvious potential costs as well, like exposure to gut parasites — so that's probably why it isn't a very common behaviour.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

In their study, biologist John Speakman of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and colleagues spent 13 year studying the tiny mammals on the high-altitude meadows of the Qinghai–Tibetan plateau. Pictured: Professor Speakman in 2008, holding a plateau pika, Ochotona curzoniae

Experts with the Chinese Academy of Sciences studied pikas, tiny mammals which live in the meadows of the Qinghai–Tibetan plateau (pictured) at altitudes of some 16,400 feet
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emissions

Carbon dioxide

Carbon dioxide (CO2) is one of the biggest contributors to global warming. After the gas is released into the atmosphere it stays there, making it difficult for heat to escape - and warming up the planet in the process.

It is primarily released from burning fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas, as well as cement production.

The average monthly concentration of CO2 in the Earth's atmosphere, as of April 2019, is 413 parts per million (ppm). Before the Industrial Revolution, the concentration was just 280 ppm.

CO2 concentration has fluctuated over the last 800,000 years between 180 to 280ppm, but has been vastly accelerated by pollution caused by humans.

Nitrogen dioxide

The gas nitrogen dioxide (NO2) comes from burning fossil fuels, car exhaust emissions and the use of nitrogen-based fertilisers used in agriculture.

Although there is far less NO2 in the atmosphere than CO2, it is between 200 and 300 times more effective at trapping heat.

Sulfur dioxide

Sulfur dioxide (SO2) also primarily comes from fossil fuel burning, but can also be released from car exhausts.

SO2 can react with water, oxygen and other chemicals in the atmosphere to cause acid rain.

Carbon monoxide

Carbon monoxide (CO) is an indirect greenhouse gas as it reacts with hydroxyl radicals, removing them. Hydroxyl radicals reduce the lifetime of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.

Particulates

What is particulate matter?

Particulate matter refers to tiny parts of solids or liquid materials in the air.

Some are visible, such as dust, whereas others cannot be seen by the naked eye.

Materials such as metals, microplastics, soil and chemicals can be in particulate matter.

Particulate matter (or PM) is described in micrometres. The two main ones mentioned in reports and studies are PM10 (less than 10 micrometres) and PM2.5 (less than 2.5 micrometres).

Air pollution comes from burning fossil fuels, cars, cement making and agriculture

Scientists measure the rate of particulates in the air by cubic metre.

Particulate matter is sent into the air by a number of processes including burning fossil fuels, driving cars and steel making.

Why are particulates dangerous?

Particulates are dangerous because those less than 10 micrometres in diameter can get deep into your lungs, or even pass into your bloodstream. Particulates are found in higher concentrations in urban areas, particularly along main roads.

Health impact

What sort of health problems can pollution cause?

According to the World Health Organization, a third of deaths from stroke, lung cancer and heart disease can be linked to air pollution.

Some of the effects of air pollution on the body are not understood, but pollution may increase inflammation which narrows the arteries leading to heart attacks or strokes.

As well as this, almost one in 10 lung cancer cases in the UK are caused by air pollution.

Particulates find their way into the lungs and get lodged there, causing inflammation and damage. As well as this, some chemicals in particulates that make their way into the body can cause cancer.

Deaths from pollution

Around seven million people die prematurely because of air pollution every year. Pollution can cause a number of issues including asthma attacks, strokes, various cancers and cardiovascular problems.

Asthma triggers

Air pollution can cause problems for asthma sufferers for a number of reasons. Pollutants in traffic fumes can irritate the airways, and particulates can get into your lungs and throat and make these areas inflamed.

Problems in pregnancy

Women exposed to air pollution before getting pregnant are nearly 20 per cent more likely to have babies with birth defects, research suggested in January 2018.

Living within 3.1 miles (5km) of a highly-polluted area one month before conceiving makes women more likely to give birth to babies with defects such as cleft palates or lips, a study by University of Cincinnati found.

For every 0.01mg/m3 increase in fine air particles, birth defects rise by 19 per cent, the research adds.

Previous research suggests this causes birth defects as a result of women suffering inflammation and 'internal stress'.

What is being done to tackle air pollution?

Paris agreement on climate change

The Paris Agreement, which was first signed in 2015, is an international agreement to control and limit climate change.

It hopes to hold the increase in the global average temperature to below 2°C (3.6ºF) 'and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C (2.7°F)'.

Carbon neutral by 2050

The UK government has announced plans to make the country carbon neutral by 2050.

They plan to do this by planting more trees and by installing 'carbon capture' technology at the source of the pollution.

Some critics are worried that this first option will be used by the government to export its carbon offsetting to other countries.

International carbon credits let nations continue emitting carbon while paying for trees to be planted elsewhere, balancing out their emissions.

No new petrol or diesel vehicles by 2040

In 2017, the UK government announced the sale of new petrol and diesel cars would be banned by 2040.

However, MPs on the climate change committee have urged the government to bring the ban forward to 2030, as by then they will have an equivalent range and price.

The Paris Agreement, which was first signed in 2015, is an international agreement to control and limit climate change. Pictured: air pollution over Paris in 2019.

Norway's electric car subsidies

The speedy electrification of Norway's automotive fleet is attributed mainly to generous state subsidies. Electric cars are almost entirely exempt from the heavy taxes imposed on petrol and diesel cars, which makes them competitively priced.

A VW Golf with a standard combustion engine costs nearly 334,000 kroner (34,500 euros, $38,600), while its electric cousin the e-Golf costs 326,000 kroner thanks to a lower tax quotient.

Criticisms of inaction on climate change

The Committee on Climate Change (CCC) has said there is a 'shocking' lack of Government preparation for the risks to the country from climate change.

The committee assessed 33 areas where the risks of climate change had to be addressed – from flood resilience of properties to impacts on farmland and supply chains – and found no real progress in any of them.

The UK is not prepared for 2°C of warming, the level at which countries have pledged to curb temperature rises, let alone a 4°C rise, which is possible if greenhouse gases are not cut globally, the committee said.

It added that cities need more green spaces to stop the urban 'heat island' effect, and to prevent floods by soaking up heavy rainfall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tree DNA was used to convict a timber thief who chopped down precious maple woods in Washington state in 2018 which resulted in a wildfire that cost $4.2 million to contain.

Justin Andrew Wilke, 39, was operating an illegal logging businesses out of Olympic National Forest, but initially told official he had sold wood taken from private property.

However, at trial, Richard Cronn, Phd., a research geneticist for the USDA Forest Service, testified that the wood Wilke sold was a genetic match to the remains of three poached maple trees investigators found in the scorched forest.

Following a six-day trial in Tacoma, Wilkes was convicted on July 9 of conspiracy, theft of public property, depredation of public property, trafficking in unlawfully harvested timber and attempting to traffic in unlawfully harvested timber.

The fire started in August 2018, which Wilke and a group are being accused of starting.

The group allegedly spotted a wasp's nest at a base of a tree they had cut down.

The group sprayed the nest with insecticide and gasoline and then lit it on fire, but failed to extinguish the fire, and it developed into a wildfire later named the 'Maple Fire.'

Tree DNA was used to convict a timber thief who chopped down precious maple woods in Washington state in 2018, which resulted in a wildfire that cost $4.2 million to contain

Acting U.S. Attorney Tessa M. Gorman said in a statement: 'When people steal trees from our public lands, they are stealing a beautiful and irreplaceable resource from all of us and from future generations.

'That theft, coupled with the sheer destruction of the forest fire that resulted from this activity, warrants federal criminal prosecution. I commend the various branches of the U.S. Forest Service who worked diligently to investigate and hold this defendant accountable.'

Wilke and others conducted an illegal logging operation in the Elk Lake area of the Olympic National Forest, near Hood Canal, between April and August 2018, according to records filed in the case. He poached maple trees prized as wood for musical instruments and brought them to lumber mills.

In July 2018, a man who had just been released from prison, Shawn Williams, 49, joined the conspiracy and testified against his co-conspirator Wilke.

Justin Andrew Wilke, 39, was operating an illegal logging businesses out of Olympic National Forest, but initially told official he had sold wood take from private property. Pictured is a shot of the Maple Fire in 2018

The red highlights the land scorched by the Maple Fire, which was more than 3,000 acres

Williams assisted Wilke in removing maple trees from the national forest and transporting them to a mill in Tumwater, Washington.

'The type of maple harvested by the defendants is highly prized and used to produce musical instruments,' according to the U.S. Attorney's Office Western District of Washington.

Williams pleaded guilty in 2019 and was sentenced in 2020 to 30 months in prison.

The Maple Fire consumed more than 3,300 acres between August and November 2018.

Some witnesses testified at trial that Wilke was standing next to the nest when it was lit on fire, and therefore appeared to have set the fire.

However, because the fire was set at night, they were not able to see his exact actions.

The jury did not convict Wilke of the two federal counts related to the forest fire: setting timber afire and using fire in furtherance of a felony.

Gregory Murphy, Wilke's attorney, said in a statement to The Washington Post that Wilke 'did not dispute that he, along with other uncharged coconspirators, unlawfully profited from unlawfully logged maple in 2018.'

However, at trial, Richard Cronn, Phd., a Research Geneticist for the USDA Forest Service, testified that the wood Wilke sold was a genetic match to the remains of three poached maple trees investigators found in the scorched forest (pictured)

Following a six-day trial in Tacoma, Wilke was convicted on July 9 of conspiracy, theft of public property, depredation of public property, trafficking in unlawfully harvested timber, and attempting to traffic in unlawfully harvested timber. Pictured are first responders heading toward the fire

'In fact, Mr. Wilke repeatedly offered to plead guilty to the six counts of which he was ultimately convicted,' Murphy said. 'But Mr. Wilke has always maintained that he did not cause a forest fire.'

Wilke is facing up to 10 years in prison for his crimes.

Prosecutors highlighted the danger of Wilke and Williams actions in a statement: 'Forest fires present a dire and growing threat in this region.

'They destroy our forests, poison our air, and endanger responders, local residents, recreationalists, and wildlife.

'When this fire occurred in early August 2018, the Puget Sound region was (as it is today) already experiencing significant smoke from existing wildfires, and the high risk of fire was evident to everyone in Western Washington.

'Despite this atmosphere, Williams participated in taking the extreme risk of setting fire to a portion of a tree—deep in the forest, in mid-summer. The consequences of that decision—thousands of acres burned, millions of dollars in containment costs, and the release of huge amounts of smoke—were easily foreseeable.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists in Jerusalem have discovered a once opulent banquet hall that may have welcomed VIPs on their way to visit the nearby Temple Mount 2,000 years ago.

It had two chambers separated by a hallway decorated with a 'magnificent' fountain and Corinthian capitals, as well as guest rooms where members of the elite could dine on wooden reclining sofas, experts believe.

They said it may also have acted as a city hall before later being divided into three chambers to add a pool or ritual bath as future rulers put their own stamp on the grandiose structure.

Scroll down for video

Grand: Archaeologists in Jerusalem have discovered a once opulent banquet hall (pictured) that may have welcomed VIPs on their way to visit the nearby Temple Mount 2,000 years ago

It had two chambers separated by a hallway decorated with a fountain and Corinthian capitals, as well as guest rooms where VIPs could dine on wooden reclining sofas, experts believe

Why is Temple Mount one of the world's most contested religious sites? Temple Mount is known as one of the world's most contested religious sites, and is a regular scene of flare-ups between Israelis and Palestinians. The site, considered exceptionally holy to both Jews and Muslims, sits in the shadow of the stunning Mount of Olives in Jerusalem. The Temple Mount - known in Hebrew as Har Habayit and Haram al-Sharif or Noble Sanctuary in Islam - has been the site of religious tension for hundreds of years. The plot sits on elevated plaza above the Western Wall in Jerusalem that was the site of both of Judaism's ancient temples. The area is also home to the Al-Aqsa Mosque and considered the third holiest in Islam, after Mecca and Medina. It is also home to the gold-topped Dome of the Rock, one of the most recognised symbols of Jerusalem. Muslims believe it was the site of the Prophet Muhammad's ascent to heaven in the 7th century. Jewish connection to the site stems from the belief that it contains the 'Foundation Stone' where God created earth according to ancient scripture. It is considered by Jews the place where God's presence exists. It is believed to be the site of many important events detailed in the Bible, including the Binding of Isaac, Jacob's dream, and the prayer of Isaac and Rebekah. Advertisement

Today the hall lies beneath Jerusalem's Muslim Quarter and is accessed by the Western Wall Tunnel, an excavation that runs along the western flank of Temple Mount, one of the world's most contested religious sites.

Experts think the building was mostly likely run by the city's Jewish leadership at the time, and may have welcomed Pagan guests.

Shlomit Weksler-Bdolach, who directed the excavation for the Israel Antiquities Authority, said the building dates back to approximately 20-30 AD.

She said: 'This is without doubt one of the most magnificent public buildings from the Second Temple period that has ever been uncovered outside the Temple Mount walls in Jerusalem.

'The building, which apparently stood along a street leading up to the Temple Mount, was used for public functions.

'It may even have been the city council building, where important dignitaries were received before entering the Temple compound and the Temple Mount.'

One of the building's two chambers was uncovered in 1867, but only recently was the second found, along with the hallway.

Dr Weksler-Bdolach said that as future Jerusalem rulers sought to make their mark the building was later divided into three chambers.

This led to some 'very, very impressive ritual baths' below the ground of the plaza, she said.

The excavation revealed that the hall, which is now being opened to the public, was no longer in use by the 7th Century.

'Visitors to the site can now envisage the opulence of the place: the two side chambers served as ornate reception rooms and between them was a magnificent fountain with water gushing out,' Dr Weksler-Bdolach said.

'We believe that the guest rooms, which were also used for dining, contained wooden reclining sofas that have not been preserved.'

On these sofas, guests would have reclined as they feasted, following the custom of the Romans and the Greeks before them.

The banquet hall was also decorated with sculpted cornice-bearing pilasters, flat supporting pillars, and topped with Corinthian capitals.

Mordechai Soli Eliav, chairman of the Western Wall Heritage Foundation, said: 'These chambers are part of a new walk through the Western Wall Tunnels.

Experts say it may also have acted as a city hall before later being divided into three chambers to add a pool or ritual bath as future rulers put their own mark on the grandiose structure

Refurbishment: The building was later divided into three chambers, archaeologists said, with a pool or ritual bath being installed in one

Location: The hall lies beneath Jerusalem's Muslim Quarter and is accessed by the Western Wall Tunnel, an excavation that runs along the western flank of Temple Mount (pictured)

'Here visitors will view fascinating finds and walk for the first time along the entire route among Second Temple-period remains that illustrate the complexity of Jewish life in Jerusalem.'

The Temple Mount is a holy site for three major world religions: Christianity, Islam and Judaism.

It is the former site of the First Temple, also known as Solomon's Temple, where the Ark of the Covenant was reputedly kept before the Babylonians razed the building.

A modest Second Temple was built on the site and later refurbished into a grander design by Herod The Great, but this too was destroyed – this time by the Romans.

The banquet hall was also decorated with sculpted cornice-bearing pilasters, flat supporting pillars, and topped with Corinthian capitals

Granting access: Now the banquet hall has been excavated it is being opened to the public

The Temple Mount (pictured) is a holy site for three major world religions: Christianity, Islam and Judaism

The Second Temple is the setting for the Cleansing of the Temple, a biblical narrative where Jesus expels merchants and money changers from the holy site.

And in Islam, Temple Mount is said to be the place from which Muhammad ascended into heaven to receive instruction from God.

Today, the site is home to the Dome of the Rock – an Islamic shrine.

Jewish tradition holds that Temple Mount is the place where Abraham attempted to sacrifice his son, Isaac.

Orthodox Jews believe that they will eventually build a Third Temple at the site, ushering in the next coming of the Messiah.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Asteroid Bennu, which is about a third of a mile wide, has a slightly greater chance of hitting Earth than previously thought, NASA has revealed.

The US space agency has increased the odds of the space rock colliding with our planet from a 1-in-2,700 chance to 1-in-1,750.

The statement, shared by NASA on Wednesday, stems from data collected by the OSIRIS-Rex spacecraft that is brining samples of the asteroid back to Earth.

Along with rocks and dust, the craft captured precision data to better predict the near-Earth object's orbit around the sun, which shows a 1-in-1,750 chance of a future collision with the planet over the next 300 years.

It also has a 1-in-2,700 chance of hitting Earth on the afternoon of September 24, 2184, according to the NASA study.

Even if the asteroid were to collide with our planet, it is nowhere near the size of the dino-killing, six-mile across space rock that hit the Yucatan peninsula 66 million years ago, as Bennu is less than a third of a mile wide.

Nonetheless, if Bennu were to impact Earth, it would be similar to an explosion of more than 1.1 billion tons of TNT.

Kelly Fast, program manager for the Near-Earth Object Observations Program at NASA Headquarters in Washington, said in a statement: 'NASA's Planetary Defense mission is to find and monitor asteroids and comets that can come near Earth and may pose a hazard to our planet.

Scroll down for videos

Asteroid Bennu, which is about a third of a mile wide, has a 1-in-2,700 chance of hitting Earth on the afternoon of September 24, 2184 (pictured). The statement was share by NASA on Wednesday and stems from data collected by the OSIRIS-Rex spacecraft that is brining samples of the asteroid back to Earth

'We carry out this endeavor through continuing astronomical surveys that collect data to discover previously unknown objects and refine our orbital models for them.

'The OSIRIS-REx mission has provided an extraordinary opportunity to refine and test these models, helping us better predict where Bennu will be when it makes its close approach to Earth more than a century from now.'

NASA released its Bennu study, titled 'Ephemeris and hazard assessment for near-Earth asteroid (101955) Bennu based on OSIRIS-REx data,' on Wednesday, which was published in the journal Icarus.

Although there is a slight chance Bennu will smash into Earth over the next three centuries, NASA notes there is more than a 99.9 percent probability it will not.

Along with rocks and dust, the craft captured precision data to better predict the near-Earth object's orbit around the Sun, which shows a 1-in-1,750 chance of a future collision over the next 300 years

Before fear sets in nearly 120 years from now, NASA found that the asteroid will make a close approach to Earth in 2135.

This will help scientists better understand Bennu's exact trajectory during that encounter and help them predict how Earth's gravity will alter the asteroid's path around the sun.

'Although the chances of it hitting Earth are very low, Bennu remains one of the two most hazardous known asteroids in our solar system, along with another asteroid called 1950 DA,' NASA shared in the statement.

The precision measurements captured by OSIRIS-REx will help scientists determine how the asteroid's orbit will evolve over time and whether it will pass through a 'gravitational keyhole' during its 2135 close approach - according to AFP this will be half the distance of the Earth to the Moon.

'These keyholes are areas in space that would set Bennu on a path toward a future impact with Earth if the asteroid were to pass through them at certain times, due to the effect of Earth's gravitational pull,' NASA explained.

Although there is a slight chance Bennu will smash into Earth over the next three centuries, NASA notes there is more than a 99.9 percent probability it will not

The precision measurements captured by OSIRIS-REx will help scientists determine how the asteroid's orbit will evolve over time and whether it will pass through a 'gravitational keyhole' during its 2135 close approach

To calculate exactly where the asteroid will be during its 2135 close approach – and whether it might pass through a gravitational keyhole – study lead Davide Farnocchia, of the Center for Near-Earth Object Studies (CNEOS), and his team evaluated various types of small forces that may affect the asteroid as it orbits the sun.

The team has to look at all possibilities and incidents that could happen, as even the smallest force can significantly deflect Bennu's orbital path over time, causing it to pass through or completely miss a keyhole.

Such forces include the sun's heat: one side of the asteroid heats up during the day as it travels around the sun, but then cools as it enters night.

As it cools, the surface releases infrared energy, which generates a small amount of thrust on the asteroid – a phenomenon known as the Yarkovsky effect.

Over short timeframes, this thrust is minuscule, but over long periods, the effect on the asteroid's position builds up and can play a significant role in changing an asteroid's path.

Steve Chesley, senior research scientist at JPL and study co-investigator, said in a statement: 'The Yarkovsky effect will act on all asteroids of all sizes, and while it has been measured for a small fraction of the asteroid population from afar, OSIRIS-REx gave us the first opportunity to measure it in detail as Bennu traveled around the Sun.

'The effect on Bennu is equivalent to the weight of three grapes constantly acting on the asteroid – tiny, yes, but significant when determining Bennu's future impact chances over the decades and centuries to come.'

The team considered many other perturbing forces as well, including the gravity of the sun, the planets, their moons, and more than 300 other asteroids, the drag caused by interplanetary dust, the pressure of the solar wind, and Bennu's particle-ejection events.

Although a 0.057 percent impact probability through the year 2300 and an impact probability of 0.037 percent on Sept. 24, 2182, are low, this study highlights the crucial role that OSIRIS-REx operations played in precisely characterizing Bennu's orbit

The force OSIRIS-REx exerted when performing its Touch-And-Go (TAG) sample collection event October 20, 2020 also factors in as a disturbance that could throw the asteroid off orbit.

Although a 0.057 percent impact probability through the year 2300 and an impact probability of 0.037 percent on Sept. 24, 2182, are low, this study highlights the crucial role that OSIRIS-REx operations played in precisely characterizing Bennu's orbit, according to NASA.

Dante Lauretta, OSIRIS-REx principal investigator and professor at the University of Arizona, said in a statement: 'The orbital data from this mission helped us better appreciate Bennu's impact chances over the next couple of centuries and our overall understanding of potentially hazardous asteroids – an incredible result.

'The spacecraft is now returning home, carrying a precious sample from this fascinating ancient object that will help us better understand not only the history of the solar system but also the role of sunlight in altering Bennu's orbit since we will measure the asteroid's thermal properties at unprecedented scales in laboratories on Earth.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@WhatsApp is finally allowing its users to move their entire chat history when they change between an Android and an iPhone.

It means people will be able to take voice notes, photos and conversations with them if they switch operating systems, which was not possible until now and had been a major source of frustration for many consumers.

The Facebook-owned messaging service said its upgrade, which will allow users to switch from Android to iOS and from iOS to Android, had been 'one of our most requested features from users for years'.

It will begin the roll out on Android initially, starting with Samsung's new Galaxy foldables, which have been unveiled today.

Scroll down for video

Upgrades: WhatsApp is finally allowing its users to move their entire chat history when they change between an Android and an iPhone (pictured)

WHAT IS END-TO-END ENCRYPTION? End-to-end encryption ensures only the two participants of a chat can read messages, and no one in between – not even the company that owns the service. End-to-end encryption is intended to prevent data being read or secretly modified when it is in transit between the two parties. The cryptographic keys needed to access the service are automatically provided only to the two people in each conversation. In decrypted form, messages are accessible by a third party – which makes them interceptable by governments for law enforcement reasons. Facebook-owned WhatsApp is already encrypted, and now Mark Zuckerberg is looking to do the same with Facebook Messenger and Instagram Direct. Advertisement

To start, users will be able to take their WhatsApp history from iOS to an Android device, and will subsequently be able to do the same on iOS devices.

'Your WhatsApp messages belong to you. That's why they are stored on your phone by default, and not accessible in the cloud like many other messaging services,' said Sandeep Paruchuri, product manager at WhatsApp.

'We're excited for the first time to make it easy for people to securely transfer their WhatsApp history from one operating system to another.

'This has been one of our most requested features from users for years and we worked together with operating systems and device manufacturers to solve it.'

Users around the world can start to use the feature to take their WhatsApp chats to a Samsung device that runs Android 10 or higher in the coming weeks.

The announcement was made as Samsung launched one of its most expensive smartphones yet – the £1,700 Galaxy Z Fold3 – which folds vertically down the middle of the screen.

The new phone is one of two new additions to the Galaxy Z series – Samsung's line of foldable phones.

The firm calls Galaxy Z Fold3 'a true multitasking powerhouse' with a main screen measuring 7.6 inches when unfolded and an exterior cover screen measuring 6.2 inches.

It's also the first ever foldable device from Samsung to come with an S Pen stylus – commonly found with the company's Note range.

The Korean tech giant, which claims 'the future is foldable', has also launched the £1,000 Z Flip3, which flips open like a retro 90s phone thanks to a horizontal hinge through the middle of the screen.

Both devices are 5G compatible and have IPX8 water resistance. They're available for pre-order today (August 11) and go on sale August 27.

Samsung had already released the original Galaxy Z Fold in 2019 and its follow-up the Galaxy Z Fold2, as well as the original Galaxy Z Flip, last year.

Samsung calls the Galaxy Z Fold3 (pictured) 'a true multitasking powerhouse' with a 7.6-inch Infinity Flex Display and IPX8 Water Resistance

Galaxy Z Fold3 has two screens - one smaller one on the outside that customers can use when it's folded, and the larger interior screen

Samsung has also launched the £1,000 Z Flip3 (pictured), which flips open like a retro 90s phone thanks to a horizontal hinge through the middle of the screen

But these two new additions are the most durable phones in the Galaxy Z series so far, the company claims.

The Galaxy Z Fold3 will start at £1,599 – down from £1,799 for last year’s device – while the Z Flip3 starts at £949, down from the £1,229 price tag of the previous version.

Last week WhatsApp also launched a new Snapchat-like feature called View Once, which causes your photos and videos to 'self-destruct' once they've been opened.

It differs from the recently-launched 'Disappearing Messages' feature, which causes messages to disappear within seven days of being opened.

The smartphone app hopes View Once will make it easier and safer for users to send sensitive information.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Researchers at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign have discovered that black holes emit flickers of light - akin to a 'burp'- when they're consuming gas and stars around them and this change in brightness is directly correlated to their size.

Supermassive black holes (SMBHs), which are millions to billions times more massive than the sun, usually reside at the center of galaxies, including one at the center of the Milky Way, known as Sagittarius A*.

When dormant, SMBHs often don't give off much light. However, when they are active, usually at the dawn of the universe consuming all known matter, the radiation they give off occasionally outshines the galaxies they reside in, with the flickering light ranging from hours to decades of observations.

Supermassive black holes emit flickers of light when consuming matter, with the change in brightness directly correlated to size. When SMBHs are active, the radiation they give off occasionally outshines the galaxies they reside in, with the flickering light ranging from hours to decades

SUPERMASSIVE BLACK HOLES ARE AT THE HEART OF GALAXIES Supermassive black holes are objects found at the heart of most galaxies. They have a mass millions to billions of times the mass of the Sun and allow nothing to escape, not even light. In the Milky Way the supermassive black hole is known as Sagittarius A*. There is also a class of ultramassive black holes, with a mass of at least 10 billion times the mass of the son. Even larger ones, with 100 billion times the mass of the sun have been dubbed stupendously large black holes. Advertisement

'There have been many studies that explored possible relations of the observed flickering and the mass of the SMBHs, but the results have been inconclusive and sometimes controversial,' said the study's lead author, Colin Burke, in a statement.

A supermassive black hole swallows a large amount of matter. As that matter begins to move at high speed due to the black hole's gravity it emits intense energy, which can push the surrounding matter outward. This is how the galactic wind is created.

It's still unclear why the flickering happens due to 'physical processes that are not yet understood,' however.

The researchers looked at a number of characteristics, including timescale, to allow them to see how the pattern changes and see if it correlates with the SMBH's mass.

They also looked at the results of accreting white dwarfs, remnants of stars similar to the sun and found that there is a timescale-mass correlation holds, despite the fact white dwarfs are significantly smaller than black holes.

Smaller SMBHs have a shorter timescale, while conversely, larger SMBHs have a longer timescale.

'These results suggest that the processes driving the flickering during accretion are universal, whether the central object is a supermassive black hole or a much more lightweight white dwarf,' the study's co-author, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Yue Shen added.

'The firm establishment of a connection between the observed light flicker and fundamental properties of the accretor will certainly help us better understand accretion processes,' study co-author Yan-Fei Jiang added.

It's unclear why the flickering happens, as it's due to 'physical processes that are not yet understood.' Smaller SMBHs have a shorter timescale, while larger SMBHs have a longer timescale

Not only could these flickers of light help determine the size of SMBHs and white dwarfs, but they may also help researchers uncover intermediate-mass black holes (IMBHs), which are between 100 and 100,000 times the mass of the sun, of which only one has been found.

'Now that there is a correlation between the flickering pattern and the mass of the central accreting object, we can use it to predict what the flickering signal from an IMBH might look like,' Burke added.

The study was published Thursday in the journal Science.

Black holes and their existence have continued to fascinate researchers in recent memory.

The first image of a black hole's event horizon - the ring of light around the perimeter- was unveiled in April 2019, after scientists spent years probing Sagittarius A*.

In September 2020, scientists said the M87* black hole appeared to be wobbling while it rotated, the result of turbulence.

In June, the earliest known supermassive black hole 'storm' with a wind speed approaching 1.1 million mph was discovered 13.1 billion light-years from Earth.

Last month, Stephen Hawking's theory that black holes' event horizons will never shrink was proven right by a group of researchers at MIT.

Separately, Einstein's theory of general relativity was proven after scientists spotted light coming from behind a black hole for the first time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sometimes you feel like a nut, sometimes you crack them open using only instinct.

Scientists at Germany's University of Tübingen have learned that orangutans living in zoos can use tools to crack nuts, becoming one of just a few species of primates with the capability of doing so.

Additionally, some of the orangutans did not observe the behavior from others, a fact that surprised the researchers.

Four orangutans at Leipzig Zoo in Germany were given nuts and hammers, as were eight orangutans at Zurich Zoo.

Scientists have learned orangutans living in zoos can use tools to crack nuts. Some of the orangutans did not observe the behavior from others, surprising researchers

Four orangutans at Leipzig Zoo and eight at Zurich Zoo in Germany were given nuts and hammers

Of the 12 orangutans tested, four (one in Leipzig and three in Zurich) used the wooden hammers to spontaneously crack the nuts, despite having no experience at all.

'The orangutans can even develop this complex behavior purely through individual learning,' said the study's lead author, Elisa Bandini, in a translated statement.

One orangutan tried to use an anvil (a tree root or stone) as a hammer, but when the anvil was fixed to the ground, the orangutan used the wooden hammer to get the nuts cracked.

The other three orangutans, all older, used their hands or teeth to help crack the nuts.

'For those three larger animals, biting the nuts got them what they wanted,' said study co-author, Claudio Tennie, in the statement.

'After chimpanzees, the orangutans are the great apes with the second largest repertoire of known tool use. So far, however, wild animals have not been observed cracking nuts,' Tennie added in the statement.

Just a few species of mammals have been known to crack nuts in the wild - chimpanzees (which can also use tools without observing others), capuchins and macaques - long considered one of the complex behaviors of tool usage.

Of the 12, four used the wooden hammers to spontaneously crack the nuts, despite having no experience at all

Some researchers thought that this behavior required the ability to be learned, but that however, is not the case, Baldini explained.

'Up to now, science had assumed the opposite assumption and had even expected that the skill would become extinct in great apes if it could not be passed on culturally.'

The study was published earlier this week in the American Journal of Primatology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Several bouquets of offering flowers have been discovered 59 feet below temple of the god Quetzalcóatl – a pyramid that still stands in the Mexican ruined city of Teotihuacan.

Quetzalcóatl, or 'Plumed Serpent' was an important god during ancient Mesoamerica, a historical region that included central Mexico through Belize, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and northern Costa Rica.

This deity was said to have given maize to humanity and responsible for the creation of mankind, which may be why offering flowers were uncovered under the god's temple.

Sergio Gómez, an archaeologist at Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History, said the stems are in good condition and still tied with the original cotton-made cords.

Scroll down for video

Several bouquets of offering flowers have been discovered 59 feet below temple of the god Quetzalcóatl – a pyramid that still stands in the Mexican ruined city of Teotihuacan

'In total there are four bouquets of flowers in very good condition, they are still tied with ropes, probably cotton,' Gómez told Mexican news outlet La Jornada.

'This is a very important find because it speaks of the rituals that were carried out in this place.'

Gómez says it is too early to determine what kind they are – but he hopes to solve that mystery soon.

'Although we do not know the exact date of when they were deposited, because we just took them out this week, they must be very old and correspond to the first phases of Teotihuacan, between 1,800 and 2,000 years ago,' Gómez explained.

The stems are in good condition and still tied with the original cotton-made cords

Teotihuacan, with its huge pyramids of the sun and moon, is made up of a labyrinth of palaces, temples, homes, workshops, markets and avenues. The city is thought to have been built in 100BC and existed until the 8th century

'We have found complete objects that were placed in this shot; the ceramics are also from the Zacuali and Miccaotli phases, from the beginning of our era, between years zero and 200 after Christ.'

Gómez has been working at in the ruined city for nearly 12 years, sifting through ancient soil, rocks and pyramids looking for clues about those who once called the area home.

Some 30 miles (50km) north of Mexico City, Teotihuacan, with its huge pyramids of the sun and moon, is made up of a labyrinth of palaces, temples, homes, workshops, markets and avenues.

The city is thought to have been built in 100BC and existed until the 8th century.

Archaeologists consider it one of the most influential in pre-Hispanic North America, with a population of 200,000 at its peak.

Pictured is the tunnel running below and through the pyramid where archaeologists found the offering flowers

Teotihuaca means 'the place where men become gods'. The mysterious city of Teotihuacan, some 30 miles (50km) north of Mexico City, thrived between the first and eighth centuries, after which its civilization vanished (shown on map). The city was totally abandoned in 700 AD and very little is know about the civilisation

However, only 5 percent of Teotihuacan has been excavated despite more than 100 years of exploration.

During excavations, Gómez as recovered more than 100,000 artifacts within the ancient city and specifically under the three pyramids that are still standing.

However, the offering flowers are the first intact botanical materials every to be found at the site.

'It is very relevant because it will give us indications of the flora that was used for ritual purposes,' Gómez said.

In 2011, archaeologist uncovered other offerings at the base of the pyramid, including animal remains, three human figurines and a haunting, green mask that was used in rituals 2,000 years ago

The mask was carved from a single jade stone and is the only one of its kind to be discovered in thee ancient city

'In this same context, while sifting the earth, several kilos of charcoal were found as a result of a ritual ceremony that included the burning of seeds and fruits.'

In 2011, archaeologist uncovered other offerings at the base of the pyramid, including animal remains, three human figurines and a haunting, green mask that was used in rituals 2,000 years ago.

Perez Cortez, an investigator with the Zacatecas INAH Center, said in a statement when the mask was discovered: 'We know [the offerings were] deposited as part of a dedication ceremony.'

The mask was carved from a single jade stone and is the only one of its kind to be discovered in thee ancient city.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Around 6 per cent of homes– roughly 1.5 million – do not have internet access

Concerns over older and vulnerable households which are not online, do not use a mobile phone or live in a rural area with poor connectivity being left behind

The death knell has been sounded for the traditional landline telephone.

From 2025, all households and businesses will need the internet to make calls under a major digital shake-up.

It means millions of customers will be pushed online for the first time or forced to rely on a mobile phone instead.

Those without internet may need an engineer to visit their home to get them set up and those with older phones could need to buy a new handset.

Industry insiders compared the move to the switch to digital TV in 2012, when broadcasters stopped transmitting traditional analogue signals to household rooftop or indoor aerials.

But while that change was led by the Government, the switch to 'digital' calls is being driven by the telecoms industry.

The major digital shake-up means millions of customers will be pushed online for the first time or forced to rely on a mobile phone instead [Stock image]

The upgrade will also impact other services that rely on the existing telephone network such as alarm systems, phones in lifts, payment terminals and red telephone boxes. Telecoms giants are aiming for the switchover to be complete in 2025.

But experts have raised concerns that millions of older and vulnerable households which are not online, do not use a mobile phone or live in a rural area with poor connectivity are at risk of being left behind.

Q&A Will I need a fast connection? Internet speeds of just one megabit per second (Mbps) should be enough for a good digital phone service. And every UK household has the right to demand a download speed of at least 10 Mbps. Will my bills rise? Customers will have to pay for the internet to use their home phone. But experts have said providers are likely to offer cheap, basic deals similar to landline-only contracts. It is not known if customers with older phones will need to buy a new handset or if they will get one for free. What if the internet goes down? If the internet crashes or there is a power cut, digital phone lines will stop working. Those who are vulnerable or do not have a mobile phone should be offered a back-up such as a battery pack, emergency phone line or mobile phone so they can still call 999 in an emergency. What do I need to do? Nothing yet. Those on landline-only deals or without the internet will hear from their providers later on. Advertisement

Around 6 per cent of households – roughly 1.5 million homes – do not have access to the internet, according to watchdog Ofcom.

Many may only use the internet on their mobile phone via wireless services, while around half a million households do not own a mobile.

Caroline Abrahams, director of Age UK, said: 'Given that about half of older people over the age of 75 are not online, this could be a particular problem for our oldest citizens.

'Given the threat of fraud, telecom providers also need to take steps to prevent anyone who is in particularly vulnerable circumstances from becoming victims of digital scams.'

Amid fears a power cut or internet outage could leave households stranded, Ofcom has stressed that telecoms providers have an obligation to ensure all households have access to the emergency services.

This means firms may need to provide customers with a free mobile phone or battery packs.

Around two million customers are believed to have already been switched to an internet-based phone service. BT, which memorably used Maureen Lipman as 'Beattie' to promote landline services in the 1980s, said half a million customers now have its Digital Voice service.

It is not known when providers will write to landline-only customers to inform them of the switchover.

Openreach, which runs the majority of the nation's wire and cable infrastructure, has been working with businesses for months to ensure they are ready.

And the firm is aiming to install ultra-fast full fibre broadband in 25 million households by the end of 2026, which should provide a more reliable service.

Virgin Media, which owns its own cables, is also working to switch its home phone service to its fibre broadband network by 2025.

Martyn James, of dispute service Resolver, criticised the 'failure to publicise' the switchover decision, adding: 'The telecoms businesses risk causing considerable distress to those many customers who find the online world hard to navigate.

'It's vitally important landline customers do not end up paying more and that cheap or subsidised broadband services are available for people forced online.' An Openreach spokesman said: 'Protecting vulnerable customers is an absolute priority for us. We are working with communications providers to identify vulnerable customers early on.'

Ofcom said it is working to ensure vulnerable customers get all the support they need.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mars' largest moon, Phobos, may be the key to answering one of science's greatest questions – was there life on the Red Planet?

Scientists from the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) suggest asteroids that hit Mars billions of years ago may have sent ancient microbial life to its moon that are now 'dead remains' in its soil.

Dr. Ryuki Hydo, who is leading the research, told DailyMail.com in an email: 'Phobos is very unique in terms of its location to the host planet, Mars -- Phobos orbits very close to Mars (~3 times Mars radius).

'As a comparison, the Earth's moon orbits at ~60 times Earth's radius. So, we thought that if Mars has ever had life on it, it could be easily transferred to Phobos without a big impact on Mars that would destroy biosignatures within the ejecta (by impact melting/vaporization).'

The research refers to the dead remains as 'SHIGAI' (Sterilized and Harshly Irradiated Genes, and Ancient Imprints), which includes sterilized microorganisms and potential DNA fragments.

Hydo and his team are set to launch the Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) mission in 2024, which will collect samples from the Phobos surface and return them to Earth five years later.

Scroll down for video

Mars' largest moon, Phobos, may be the key to answering one of science's greatest questions – was there life on the Red Planet?

Dr James O'Donoghue, a planetary space scientists at JAXA, told DailyMail.com: 'Phobos is one of the best places to look for the remains of ancient life in the solar system, probably second only to Mars. I don't know if it will be found, but I've got my fingers crossed!'

Mars has two moons, Demios being the other, which are the smallest in the solar system.

Phobos orbits just 3,700 miles from the Martian surface – no known moons orbit closer – which is why it could be harboring ancient signs of life from its host planet.

Even if Martian lifeforms were transported to Phobos, Hydo said they died shortly after reaching the small moon or may have been destroyed during the impact-shock.

Scientists are set to launch the Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) mission in 2024, which will collect samples from the Phobos (pictured) surface and return them to Earth five years later

When MMX launches in 2024, it 'will first orbit around Phobos, while we will study the surface in detail before selecting the landing site'

Hydo wrote in an article published in Science Magazine that Phobos' environment is highly inhospitable, as it does not have air or water, and its 'surface is constantly bathed in solar and galactic cosmic radiation.'

When MMX launches in 2024, it 'will first orbit around Phobos, while we will study the surface in detail before selecting the landing site,' explained Hyodo.

'Then, we will decide which region on Phobos would be the best to maximize the scientific outcomes.'

When the team lands the craft on Phobos' surface, it will use a driller/core system to extract samples that will then be brought back to Earth in 2029 for analysis.

'Even if microorganisms were present on the surface of Mars, sterilization via the collision or radiation will have occurred. The probability of a living microorganism in the Martian moon samples returned to Earth by the MMX project remains less than one million to one,' Hydo told DailyMail.com.

Scientists from the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) suggest asteroids that hit Mars billions of years ago may have sent ancient microbial life to its moon and are now 'dead remains' in the soil

'Here, being 'dead' is very important because there is an international rule, 'planetary protection', defined by COSPAR. This international regulation says that we cannot bring back any living life-from from outside the Earth because it may be dangerous to Earth life-forms.'

NASA's Perseverance is currently on Mars searching the Jezero Crater for such ancient signs of life.

Perseverance, nicknamed Perky, landed on Mars on February 18, following a 239-million-mile journey, it spent the first few months helping the Ingenuity helicopter.

It has now begun its primary mission on the Red Planet, to look for traces of ancient life signs that could suggest microbial life evolved on Mars billions of years ago.

As part of this is it hoping to collect samples to be studied in much more advanced laboratories back on Earth.

Perseverance is carrying seven instruments that analyze samples from the surface, including an advanced panoramic camera, a ground-penetrating radar and an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer for analysis of chemical elements.

Selected samples will be collected by drilling down to nearly three inches and then sealed in special sample tubes and stored on the rover.

When the rover reaches a suitable location, the tubes will dropped on the surface and collected by a future retrieval mission, which is currently being developed.

Currently, NASA and ESA plan to launch two more spacecraft that would leave Earth in 2026 and reach Mars in 2028.

The first will deploy a small ESA Fetch rover, being built in the UK, which will make its way to Perseverance, pick up the filled sampling tubes and transfer them to a ‘Mars ascent vehicle’ – a small rocket.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Short men and obese women earn up to $1,000 (£700) less per year than their taller, skinnier counterparts, according to a new study into body shape and salary.

This is evidence of a long suspected 'beauty premium' that suggests physical attractiveness demands a higher value in the labour market, according to lead author Suyong Song from the University of Iowa.

Researchers examined data from 2,383 volunteers, including whole body scans and information on their family income and gender.

They found that in men earning over $70,000 (£50,000) per year, a centimetre increase in height was worth $1,000 (£700) extra in income per year.

For women earning the same amount, every single point decrease in BMI was worth an extra $1,000 (£700) per year in their pay cheque, the researchers discovered.

The authors say this shows the importance in accurately measuring body shapes when it comes to creating public policies on mitigating discrimination and bias.

Short men and obese women earn up to $1,000 (£700) less per year than their taller, skinnier counterparts, according to a new study into body shape and salary

The study found that in men earning over $70,000 (£50,000) per year, a centimetre increase in height was worth $1,000 (£700) extra in income per year (stock image)

WHAT IS THE BEAUTY PREMIUM IN EMPLOYMENT? Researchers claim a 'beauty premium' exists within the labour market. This is where employers value attractiveness in employees when deciding salary and in hiring. A study by the University of Iowa revealed that taller men and skinnier women earned up to £700 more per year than short men and fatter women. Other studies have found that women who wear makeup are seen as more trustworthy than women who don't. Although a 2018 study by the University of Massachusetts found that people perceived as 'very unattractive' earn more than better looking peers. This was likely due to ugly people being less open to new experiences and more likely to commit to their job, the team behind the research said. A study in 2006 by Wesleyan University found that employers thought beautiful people were more productive even when only interviewed over the phone. This suggests that the confidence that can come with being beautiful allows people to present themselves better even when not visible. Advertisement

'I have been curious of whether or not there is physical attractiveness premium in labor market outcomes,' Song told PsyPost, about the idea behind the study.

One of the problems previous studies have had is that they rely on self reported body measurements, or errors in how the body is measured.

'Most previous studies often defined physical appearance from subjective opinions based on surveys,' Song explained.

He said a key challenge was also defining body shapes from these body measurements, as simple self reported responses were too simple.

To overcome this problem the team turned to data gathered by the Civilian American and European Surface Anthropometry Resource (CAESAR) project that was conducted by the US Air Force from 1998 to 2000.

As well as detailed demographic information, body measurements made with a tape measure and calliper body measurements, it included 3D whole-body scans.

These scans allowed the researchers to feed the data on 2,383 individuals into a machine learning algorithm to identify physical features and find patterns.

'The findings showed that there is a statistically significant relationship between physical appearance and family income and that these associations differ across genders,' Song told PsyPost.

'In particular, the male's stature has a positive impact on family income, whereas the female's obesity has a negative impact on family income.'

The data uncovered through the machine learning study revealed specific trends.

'One centimetre increase in stature is associated with approximately $998 increase in family income for a male who earns $70,000 of the median family income,' the team reported in the paper published in PLOS One.

For women 'one unit decrease in obesity is associated with approximately $934 increase in the family income for a female who earns $70,000 of family income.'

'The results show that the physical attractiveness premium continues to exist, and the relationship between body shapes and family income is heterogeneous across genders,' Song went on to explain.

'Our findings also highlight importance of correctly measuring body shapes to provide adequate public policies for improving healthcare and mitigating discrimination and bias in the labor market.'

They used machine learning to examine data from 2,383 volunteers, including whole body scans and information on their family income and gender

The team has suggested that awareness that this form of discrimination exists should be promoted in the workplace and tackled through training.

They also say that mechanisms to minimise the bias through hiring and promotion processes should be encouraged, including blind interviews where the hiring manager doesn't see the candidate during the interview process.

There are limitations, as the data set only includes family income rather than individual income - so other factors could play into the income disparity.

This is evidence of a long suspected 'beauty premium' that suggests physical attractiveness demands a higher value in the labour market, according to lead author Suyong Song from the University of Iowa

'This opens up additional channels through which physical appearance could affect family income,' Song explained.

'In this study, we identified the combined association between body shapes and family income through the labor market and marriage market.

'Thus, further investigations with a new survey on individual income would be an interesting direction for the future research.'

The findings have been published in the journal PLOS One.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SpaceX CEO Elon Musk tweeted an image of the Raptor Engine system part of the Super Heavy booster that will eventually power its massive Starship vehicle into orbit - and it looks like something out of Star Wars.

The photograph highlights a maze of connecting fuel lines that one Twitter user suggests looks like Sarlacc – an alien beast buried in the Great Pit of Carkoon, with only a mouth full of teeth visible.

'The inspiration I assume,' the Twitter user shared in the caption of the Sarlacc photo, which Musk then replied, 'I mean of course.'

Sarlacc's lair was the site of entertainment for Jabba the Hutt, who forces prisoners into the creature's gaping tentacled mouth to watch them being shredded to pieces.

Although the Raptor engine's inner workings look like something from the hit sci-fi film, it highlights the intricate details going into creating each of the 29 rockets that will sit below the booster.

'Completing feed system for 29 Raptor rocket engines on Super Heavy Booster,' Musk wrote in the caption, adding that the image showed 'just the primary fuel lines.'

The image also highlights how enormous the engine is, as another Twitter user pointed out that there were 23 SpaceX employees working inside the maze of pipes.

Scroll down for video

SpaceX Super Heavy booster, which will eventually carry the massive Starship into orbit, is nearing completion and Elon Musk shared an image on Twitter of the Raptor Engine's fuel system that looks like something out of Star Wars

SpaceX is working to construct a 160-foot-tall Starship prototype, known as Serial Number 20 (SN20), which the firm aims to strap to the Super Heavy booster and launch into orbit as early as next month.

Starship requires the booster stage to reach orbit and combined, the two reach a whopping 394 feet tall, much larger than the Statue of Liberty with its full plinth, which reaches 305 feet.

Without the plinth, Lady Liberty is closer to 151 feet, similar in size to the upper stage of Starlink, which stands at 160 feet.

According to a filing with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the prototype will launch from Texas and make a 'soft ocean landing' off the coast of Hawaii after spending 90 minutes in orbit.

The photograph highlights a maze of connecting fuel lines that one Twitter user suggests looks like Sarlacc – an alien beast buried in the Great Pit of Carkoon, with only a mouth full of teeth visible

'The inspiration I assume,' the Twitter user shared in the caption of the Sarlacc photo, which Musk then replied, 'I mean of course.' Sarlacc's lair was the site of entertainment for Jabba the Hutt, who forces prisoners into the creature's gaping tentacled mouth to watch them being shredded to piece

Once the booster gets Starship into orbit, it will come back to Earth, where it will land in the Gulf of Mexico about 20 miles from shore.

Although the massive Starship is still sitting in pieces on the launch pad at SpaceX's Boca Chica, Texas facility, the firm is moving along with testing.

The most recent progress saw the team fire off Booster 3, the first prototype Super Heavy to roll to the launch site, on July 19.

A total of three-engine Static Fire tests were conducted, which paves the way for Booster 4, which is currently being stacked in the High Bay.

The booster fired up all three engines for the expected duration, confirmed by Musk before he noted that 'depending on progress with Booster 4, we might try a 9 engine firing on Booster 3.'

The most recent progress saw the team fire off Booster 3, the first prototype Super Heavy to roll to the launch site, on July 19. A total of three-engine Static Fire tests were conducted, which paves the way for Booster 4, which is currently being stacked in the High Bay

SpaceX is working to construct a 160-foot-tall Starship prototype, known as Serial Number 20 (SN20), which the firm aims to strap to the Super Heavy booster and launch the rocket into orbit as early as next month, brining Musk one step closer to colonizing

A year ago, Elon Musk announced to SpaceX employees that Starship progress was a top priority, with progress accelerating 'dramatically and immediately.'

That resulted in a rapid increase in Starship prototypes being built, often with a new prototype ready before the previous one had even been tested.

The test flights have ranged from static firing the engines, to launching up to six miles into the air and attempting to land back down on the launch pad.

The first time SpaceX achieved a landing without blowing up was on May 5, when the SN15 rocket flew six miles up then returned safely to the landing pad.

SpaceX is working with the FCC, US Air Force, NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration for the flight to arrange the safest time to launch.

One of SpaceX's key goals is to ensure that the Starship rockets are reusable, and future tests will see both stages return to the launch pad, rather than the ocean.

Musk has calculated that to reach his goal of putting one million humans on Mars by 2025, his Starship rockets would need to conduct around three flights a day and a total of 1,000 flights a year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A new study notes that Earth has lost enough ice every year since 1979 to fill Lake Superior because of climate change.

The research notes that the planet has lost approximately 33,000 square miles of ice every year from 1979 until 2016.

The collective area of ice, which is known as the cryosphere and holds almost three-quarters of the planet's fresh water, is a good indicator that the surface area of Earth's ice is shrinking from warming temperatures.

'The cryosphere is one of the most sensitive climate indicators and the first one to demonstrate a changing world,' Xiaoqing Peng, a geographer at Lanzhou University in China said in a statement.

Earth has lost enough ice every year since 1979 to fill Lake Superior because of climate change

The planet has lost approximately 33,000 square miles of ice every year from 1979 until 2016

The collective area of ice on the planet, known as the cryosphere, holds almost three-quarters of the planet's fresh water. It is a good indicator that the the surface area is shrinking from warming temperatures

In addition, the researchers found that the first day of freezing takes place on average 3.6 days later than in 1979 and it thaws roughly 5.7 days earlier

'Its change in size represents a major global change, rather than a regional or local issue.'

In early January, NASA said that 2020 was the warmest on record, tied with 2016.

The global average temperature was 1.84 degrees Fahrenheit (1.02 degrees Celsius) warmer than the mean between 1951 and 1980.

Prior to this study, holistic changes in the global cryosphere had not been measured.

The researchers used measurements made by satellites from the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) and looked at snow depths the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts and compared that to 28,000 local weather stations across the planet.

Most of the shrinkage occurred in the Northern Hemisphere, losing about 39,300 square miles, or roughly the size of Kansas, each year.

In the Southern Hemisphere, the cryosphere rose about 5,400 square miles per year, largely due to the sea ice in the Ross Sea being aided by wind and ocean currents and cold meltwater from Antarctic ice sheets.

In addition, the researchers found that the first day of freezing takes place on average 3.6 days later than in 1979 and it thaws roughly 5.7 days earlier.

'This kind of analysis is a nice idea for a global index or indicator of climate change,' said Shawn Marshall, a glaciologist at the University of Calgary, who was not involved in the study.

Marshall said he thinks the data could be used to examine when ice and snow cover give Earth its peak brightness and see how the land reflects the heat, known as the albedo effect, and what role it playings in climate change.

The authors say that the global dataset can now be used to further probe the impact of climate change on the cryosphere, and how these changes impact ecosystems, carbon exchange and the timing of plant and animal life cycles.

The findings have been published in the scientific journal Earth's Future.

In June, a separate study suggested that weakened ice sheets and rising sea temperatures could cause a 'climate domino effect,' impacting nearly 40 percent of the world's population.

In May, researchers found that the Greenland ice sheet, the second largest on the planet, is close to reaching the tipping point of no return with 'accelerated melting.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The gray wolf population in Wisconsin fell by nearly a third after they were removed from the Endangered Species Act days before the 2020 US presidential election - with illegal hunting partly to blame for the drop.

Researchers discovered that 218 wolves were killed by licensed hunters and approximately 100 additional wolves died in a number of different ways, the majority of which may be from 'cryptic poaching,' which hides illegal killings.

It's now estimated that Wisconsin is home to anywhere between 695 and 751 wolves, down from 1,034 last year.

The gray wolf population in Wisconsin fell by nearly a third after they were removed from the Endangered Species Act days before the 2020 US presidential election, partly because of illegal killings, according to a new study

218 wolves were killed by licensed hunters and approximately 100 additional wolves died in a number of different ways, the majority of which may be from 'cryptic poaching,' which hides illegal killings.

It's now estimated that Wisconsin is home to anywhere between 695 and 751 wolves, down from 1,034 last year

The removal of federal protection went into effect in January 2021

The findings are the first look at the wolf population in the state after the February public hunt ended in just a few days once the quota of 119 wolves was surpassed.

The quota of 119 wolves was set to help maintain the state's population. The researchers noted that the state's Ojibwe Tribes were granted an additional quota of 81 wolves, but they did not conduct a hunt.

'Although the DNR is aiming for a stable population, we estimate the population actually dropped significantly,' said the study's lead author, University of Wisconsin-Madison environmental studies scientist Adrian Treves, in a statement.

'During these periods, we see an effect on poaching, both reported and cryptic. Those wolves disappear and you never find them again,' study co-author Francisco J. Santiago-Ávila​, added.

'Additional deaths are caused simply by the policy signal, and the wolf hunt adds to that.'

The researchers estimate the wolf population could recover in one or two years if there was no hunting, but Wisconsin law requires a wolf hunt between November and February before federal protections kick in.

Days before the 2020 U.S. presidential election, the Trump administration removed the gray wolves from the Endangered Species Act, calling the gray wolf's recovery 'a milestone of success.'

The findings of the new study can help the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for the next gray wolf hunt later this year, as well as provide guidance for other states following the removal of federal protection.

The removal of federal protection went into effect in January 2021.

Previous studies have shown that when federal regulations are relaxed, 'would-be poachers are inclined to kill more wolves because the relaxed policies signal that predators are less valued,' the statement added.

'These methods and models are freely available to these agencies,' added study co-author Karann Putrevu.

'They should take advantage of the best available science to meet their stated goals.'

The study was published in the July 5 edition of PeerJ.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A handheld railgun, which uses electricity rather than gunpowder to propel ammunition, is being sold in the US for the first time.

L.A.-based Arcflash Labs is accepting preorders for the GR-1 Anvil, available online for $3,375.

That includes the 20-pound rifle, a battery pack and a hard carrying case, though ammo and a charger are sold separately.

The GR-1 Anvil is an 8-stage semi-automatic high-voltage Gauss Rifle, billed as the world's first handheld coilgun.

The coils in a coilgun attract a ferromagnetic projectile down the barrel, accelerating it to ultra-high speeds: According to its specs, the Anvil is capable of accelerating a projectile up to 200-plus feet per second.

Using an advanced capacitor charging system, it can fire up to 20 rounds per minute at full power, or up to 100 rounds per minute at half power.

'It is the most powerful coilgun ever sold to the public,' according to the Arcflash Labs website, 'and also (very likely) the most powerful handheld coilgun ever built.'

There's about a six-month wait for orders, according to the site but buyers must also sign a full liability waiver prior to shipment.

Scroll down for video

The GR-1 Anvil from Arcflash Labs is an 8-stage semi-automatic high-voltage Gauss Rifle, billed as the world's first handheld coilgun. The weapon uses electricity, rather than gunpowder, to accelerate a projectile down the barrel

The Anvil generates muzzle energy – the energy of the projectile as it leaves the barrel – of around 85 joules, according to New Scientist, comparable to high-end air rifles 'or about half the power of a .22 caliber rifle.'

That non-lethality is a selling point, according to Arcflash co-founder David Wirth, who started the company with Jason Murray, a fellow aerospace engineer and former Air Force officer.

'The scalable effects of a Gauss rifle would allow law enforcement to fire rubber bullets at a speed proportional to their distance to target, so they're less likely to injure someone if they're close and more likely to reach the intended target if they're far away,' Wirth told New Scientist.

Animal control experts could also use a coilgun to more efficiently and safely fire tranquilizer darts.

The $3,375 price tag includes the rifle, a battery pack and a hard carrying case. Ferromagnetic ammo and a charger are sold separately

While any steel rod with a diameter of under a half-inch could be used as ammo, Arcflash recommends its three standard projectiles— 32 mm, 42 mm, and 52 mm—and maintains it's not responsible for 'for damage to the unit or personal injury' caused by firing non-standard ammo.

Is the ANVIL the semi-automatic or Uzi of the future? Not just yet, say experts.

The Anvil's muzzle energy is comparable to high-end air rifles, or about half the power of a .22 caliber rifle. The impact is equivalent to that of a .22 short bullet, used in Olympic events and to hunt small game like rabbits

'If your prior exposure to Gauss rifles comes from laying waste to your video enemies in the Fallout series… you may be slightly underwhelmed by the power of the real thing,' reported Field & Stream.

'Nevertheless, early firearms weren't that deadly either, and look where we are now.'

The hunting enthusiast site compares the impact from an Anvil projectile to a .22 short bullet, used in Olympic events and to hunt small game like rabbits.

'It is far more powerful than Arcflash Labs' earlier gun,' Field & Stream adds, 'which had about the same punch as a Daisy Red Ryder [BB gun].'

A haldheld Gauss rifle like the Anvil could be used by law enforcement to fire rubber bullets less likely to cause significant injury while still reaching targets that are further away

While the Anvil is handheld, militaries around the world have been interested in larger-scale railguns that could fire massive projectiles faster than the speed of sound to devastating effect.

Railguns have the capability of accelerating a projectile to Mach 6, equivalent to 5,400 miles an hour.

China expects to unveil a super-sized electromagnetic railgun on naval ships as soon as 2025.

Pictured: One of two electromagnetic railgun prototypes on display aboard joint high speed vessel USS Millinocket at Naval Base San Diego on July 8, 2014. For now, the Navy is suspending its railgun program

In July, the U.S. Navy announced it was pulling the plug on an electromagnetic railgun program it had spent more than 15 years and $500 million developing and even considered mounting on a warship.

But the mammoth weapon's limited range (about 110 miles) and frequent need for repairs made it impractical.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk volunteered SpaceX to develop NASA's Artemis moon mission spacesuits following news on Tuesday that the gear will take two years longer than expected, pushing the mission past its 2024 schedule.

An audit from the agency's Office of Inspector General found NASA is on track to spend more than $1 billion developing the suits by the time the first two are ready, which would won't happen until 'April 2025 at the earliest,' according to a report.

Musk caught wind of the delay via a tweet posted by CNBC space reporter Michael Sheetz, in which the billionaire commented: 'SpaceX could do if need be.'

In the tweet thread, Sheetz also noted there are 27 different companies supplying components for the Artemis suits and Musk commented that the issue may bee that there are 'too many cooks in the kitchen.'

Sandra Johnson, public affairs officer for spacesuits at NASA, told DailyMail.com in an email: 'Artemis includes a collaborative effort between NASA, its international partners, and industry partners to return humans to the Moon.

'NASA is currently accepting industry feedback to a draft Request for Proposals (RFP) for the agency’s strategy for purchasing commercial spacesuits, hardware, and services for use on Artemis missions and the International Space Station. NASA plans to release the formal RFP in early Fall.

'The opportunity will be open to all of industry.'

Scroll down for video

An audit from the agency's Office of Inspector General found NASA is on track to spend more than $1 billion on developing the suits by the time its first two are ready, which would won't happen until 'April 2025 at the earliest. Musk caught wind of the delay via a tweet posted by CNBC space reporter Michael Sheetz, in which the billionaire commented: 'SpaceX could do if need be'

'NASA's current schedule is to produce the first two flight-ready xEMUs [Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit] by November 2024, but the Agency faces significant challenges in meeting this goal,' reads the report titled 'NASA's Development of Next-Generation Spacesuits.'

'This schedule includes approximately a 20-month delay in delivery for the planned design, verification, and testing suit, two qualification suits, an ISS Demo suit, and two lunar flight suits.

These delays—attributable to funding shortfalls, COVID-19 impacts, and technical challenges—have left no schedule margin for delivery of the two flight-ready xEMUs.'

NASA has already spent $420 million on space suit development since 2007, before the advent of its Artemis program, and it plans to 'invest approximately $625.2 million more' through 2025, according to the report.

The American space agency is looking to develop two types of spacesuits: : intravehicular suits, which are worn inside a spacecraft, and extravehicular suits, which are worn for exploring outside of a spacecraft

In 2017, NASA decided to design, test and produce xEMU suits in-house, which resulted in six suits being built with parts from 27 different contractors and vendors. And another reason for the delay is that NASA is allowing these different contractors and vendors to propose their own ideas for the look of the moon mission suit

The US space agency is looking to develop two types of spacesuits: intravehicular suits, which are worn inside a spacecraft, and extravehicular suits, which are worn for exploring outside of a spacecraft.

In 2017, NASA decided to design, test and produce xEMU suits in-house, which resulted in six suits being built with parts from 27 different contractors and vendors.

Another reason for the delay is that NASA is allowing these different contractors and vendors to propose their own ideas for the look of the moon mission suit.

Although SpaceX's focus is developing rockets, the 50-year-old Musk has dabbled in making suits: the SpaceX CEO personally worked on the white suits used in the Dragon Crew missions.

Musk said it took him and costume designer Jose Fernandez three years to design the Dragon Crew spacesuits that made their debut in May 2020, with NASA astronauts Robert Behnken and Douglas Hurley, who launch May 30 to the International Space Station (ISS).

The suits were made in Hawthorne, California, in the same facility where SpaceX keep its rockets.

However, the Artemis suits will be more complex than those that travel to the ISS.

Although SpaceX's focus is developing rockets, Musk has dabbled in making suits: the CEO personally worked on the white suits used in the Dragon Crew missions (pictured)

NASA unveiled the two new suits in 2019, xEMU and the Orion Crew Survival suit, which will eventually be worn by the first woman and next man on the moon.

The xEMU model provides mobility and flexibility for when exploring the lunar surface, while the Orion Crew Survival Suit is to be worn while taking off or landing.

Astronauts will be able to walk, not bunny hop like their predecessors, in the new suits, which will also give them the ability to bend down and pick things up over their head.

The 'Orion Crew Survival Suit' is much lighter than xEMU and was made to be work when astronauts are taking off and landing on the moon.

When in use, this suit depressurizes in order to protect the wearer from accidental depressurization.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Several species of weasel, including one considered the world's smallest carnivore, are in decline across the southern US, according to a new study.

Researchers at North Carolina State University say the cause of this population drop isn't clear—whether diseases, predators, climate change or the use of pesticides and rodenticides are to blame, or some combination of those factors.

'We're trying to put weasels on the radar,' said study co-author Roland Kays, head of the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences' Biodiversity Lab.

While weasels are sometimes viewed as a pest, they're an important part of the ecosystem, Kays said, preying on mice and other small rodents.

The least weasel (Mustela nivalis,) Long-tailed weasel (M. frenata), and the stoat (M. erminea) 'are distributed across most of North America, yet several recent studies have reported difficulty detecting [them] within their historical range,' the researchers wrote in the journal PLOS ONE.

Several states have revised the status of weasels to that of 'species of conservation concern,' the researchers wrote.

Scroll down for video

A new report indicates the populations of weasels, including the Least weasel (pictured) are in decline

The common weasel, also known as the 'least weasel,' kills and eats rabbits, along with the occasional fish, frog, bird and birds' eggs.

As recently as 2008, the least weasel was listed On the International Union for Conservation of Nature's red list as 'least concern' among threatened species.

But now, Kays says, 'We see them very rarely on our camera traps in North Carolina.'

'Small carnivores are of increasing conservation concern globally, including those formerly thought to be widespread and abundant.'

A chart of weasel populations based on trapping/harvesting. The data is impacted by the decline in interest in weasel fur

A map indicating where weasel populations are better (blue), worse (pink) or comparable to historical averages (green)

To get a better handle on the situation his team analyzed four different data sets: Trapping data, information from museums, citizen reports uploaded to iNaturalist and the National Trail Camera Survey.

From the National Trail Camera Survey, 'none of the southern cameras picked up any weasels.' Kays said. 'Only cameras located north of 40 degrees latitude detected weasels.'

And information garnered from trapped showed a 'dramatic, many-orders-of-magnitude decline,' he added.

Kays said the results in North Carolina are indicative of the south, with weasels declining in lowlands but still existing in relatively healthy numbers in the mountains.

'There were lots of records in the past of weasels in the piedmont and in the mountains,' he said. 'We still found recent records of them in the mountains,' but less so in the piedmont, a a type of gentle slope leading from the base of a mountain to flat, broad land.

A long-tailed weasel captured on camera by the North Carolina Weasel Survey in 2019. Researchers say in recent years, none of the Southern cameras picked up any weasels, 'only cameras located north of 40 degrees latitude'

The long-tailed weasel was abundant in the lowlands according to old records but conspicuously absent in the current data, a point Kays called 'particularly concerning.'

More research needs to be done to determine the cause of the weasel's disappearance, but Kays, a professor of forestry and environmental resources at NC State, noted that a USDA study found climate change had a negative impact on wildlife in the Southwest.

'Just the fact that they're disappearing from the piedmont and not the mountains, suggests it might be a climate issue,' Kays said.

Researchers are unclear if its predators, rodenticides, climate change , disease or 'a combination of different factors' impacting the weasel's numbers

Pesticides and rodenticides tend to accumulate in predators, he added—so if mice, rats and other vermin are carrying toxins, the weasels will absorb it.

Weasels were once trapped for their fur, though the market for them is fairly small today.

'There could be a combination of different factors,' Kays said. 'We don't track these small predators very well. We need to start keeping track, and we need to start doing better surveys of weasels.'

Many cultures have imbued the weasel with mythological symbolism, including the ancient and Macedonians and Greeks, who believed the creature could kill the basilik. The Inuit of Alaska believed the creature was wise, while the Ojibwe believed the least weasel could kill the monstrous wendigo by running inside its anus.

At just five to ten inches, the least weasel is the smallest members of the genus Mustela, which also includes polecats, ferrets and mink.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A minke whale carcass that washed on the shores of a private Plymouth, Massachusetts beach last month will now head to a landfill, wildlife officials said on Thursday.

'The level of decomposition of this carcass would likely result in the whale breaking apart as it’s being pulled off the beach, spreading the problem rather than solving it,' the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisheries Northeast/Mid-Atlantic office wrote in an August 5 Facebook post.

'For this particular case, due to the condition and smell of the carcass, we have been coordinating with [Homeowners Association] on how to bring it to the Bourne landfill.

'As of Monday, the HOA was working on arranging the heavy equipment required to remove it.'

A minke whale carcass that washed on the shores of a Plymouth, Massachusetts beach last month will head to a landfill

NOAA said the whale was initially spotted bobbing up and down on July 17, approximately 1.4 miles off Manomet Point in Plymouth, Massachusetts

NOAA said the whale was initially spotted bobbing up and down on July 17, approximately 1.4 miles off Manomet Point.

The following day, the 21-foot male minke washed up on shore at the private beach and it has lain there since as there was a 'lack of a disposal plan at the time.'

According to NBC Boston, a Plymouth resident said the smell was so bad it was 'like death in a dumpster.'

Another local told the news outlet that it was more than just an aesthetic problem and that it was 'interfering with our ability to enjoy our homes.'

The International Fund for Animal Welfare externally examined the carcass and determined it was likely killed by a ship's propeller, NBC Boston reported.

Minke whales have experienced an unusual mortality event for the past four years, but the cause is unknown

NOAA explained in the post that documenting this whale helps the better understand the Unusual Mortality Event for minke whales that has gone on for the past four years.

In a separate post on its website, NOAA said the whales have been stranded up and down the Atlantic Ocean, from Maine to South Carolina since January 2017.

The cause is unknown, but full or partial necropsy examinations were performed on 60 percent of the whales.

Preliminary findings on several whales show evidence of human interaction or infectious disease, NOAA added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA said on Friday it is looking for a few good men and women to help it progress in its plan to go to send humans to Mars by 2037.

The US space agency is seeking ‘highly motivated individuals’ to participate in year-long Mars surface simulation, where they will live a 1,700-square-foot module 3D-printed by ICON, called Mars Dune Alpha.

The program consists of three simulations, with the first starting in 2022, and each will see four crew members spend the 365 days completely isolated in the mock habitats of the Red Planet.

‘The habitat will simulate the challenges of a mission on Mars, including resource limitations, equipment failure, communication delays, and other environmental stressors,’ NASA shared in the announcement.

‘Crew tasks may include simulated spacewalks, scientific research, use of virtual reality and robotic controls, and exchanging communications. The results will provide important scientific data to validate systems and develop solutions.’

Scroll down for video

NASA is seeking ‘highly motivated individuals’ to participate in year-long Mars surface simulations, where they will live a 1,700-square-foot module 3D-printed by ICON, called Mars Dune Alpha

Applications open today and run through September 12, 2021.

Those interested in participating must be within the ages of 30 to 55, possess a master’s degree in a STEM field and have at least two years of related professional experience.

Individuals will have to pass the NASA long-duration flight astronaut simulation and are required to have a COVID-19 vaccination, reads the application website.

But they won't end up going to the actual Red Planet when a mission, with that honor initially reserved for highly-trained astronauts

The habitats will be constructed at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and will include workstations, medical facilities and a place to grow food.

The habitats will be constructed at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and will include workstations, medical facilities and a place to grow food.

Each mission will include four crew members who will have their own sleeping quarters located on one end of the habitat and on the other side of the habitat is dedicated to workstations, medical stations and food-growing stations

The missions aim to provide valuable insights and information to assess NASA’s space food system, as well as physical and behavioral health and performance outcomes for future space missions.

NASA will also use research from the Mars Dune Alpha simulations to inform risk and resource trades to support crew health and performance for future missions to Mars when astronauts would live and work on the Red planet for long periods of time.

Grace Douglas, lead scientist for NASA’s Advanced Food Technology research effort at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston, said in a statement: ‘This is a rare and unique opportunity.

The missions aim to provide valuable insights and information to assess NASA’s space food system, as well as physical and behavioral health and performance outcomes for future space missions. Pictured are the workstations

NASA will also use research from the Mars Dune Alpha simulations to inform risk and resource trades to support crew health and performance for future missions to Mars when astronauts would live and work on the Red planet for long periods of time

'The analog is critical for testing solutions to meet the complex needs of living on the Martian surface.

‘Those selected will have a historic role in preparing humanity for the next giant leap in space.’

Each mission will include four crew members who will have their own sleeping quarters located on one end of the habitat and on the other side of the habitat is dedicated to workstations, medical stations and food-growing stations.

A shared living space will be constructed in the center.

The habitat will include a mix of fixed and movable furniture, and customizable lighting, temperate and sound control.

Each mission will include four crew members who will have their own sleeping quarters located on one end of the habitat and on the other side of the habitat is dedicated to workstations, medical stations and food-growing stations (pictured)

Jason Ballard, co-founder and CEO, ICON, said in a statement: ‘This is the highest-fidelity simulated habitat ever constructed by humans.

‘Mars Dune Alpha is intended to serve a very specific purpose--to prepare humans to live on another planet.

‘We wanted to develop the most faithful analog possible to aid in humanity's dream to expand into the stars.

‘3D printing the habitat has further illustrated to us that construction-scale 3D printing is an essential part of humanity's toolkit on Earth and to go to the Moon and Mars to stay.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Researchers have found evidence that a flood which happened more than 12,000 years ago and drained an ancient lake at the speed of more than 800 Olympic swimming pools per second may have pushed the Earth back into an ice age.

A team of experts - led by the researchers at the University of Alberta - found evidence that Glacial Lake Agassiz started to spill out to the northwest in a channel known as the Clearwater-Athabasca Spillway.

This spillage may have caused the Younger Dryas cooling event, some 13,000 years ago.

The ancient lake, which no longer exists, covered an area of 580,000 square miles in modern-day southern Manitoba, central Saskatchewan all the way up to the Alberta border.

Researchers, including Sophie Norris (pictured), have found evidence that a 12,000 year-old flood that drained a lake at speeds of more than 800 Olympic swimming pools per second may have pushed Earth back into an ice age

The ancient lake, which no longer exists which covered an area of 580,000 square miles in modern-day southern Manitoba, central Saskatchewan all the way up to the Alberta border

The researchers - using sedimentary evidence, more than 100 valley cross sections and a model of the bedrock's erodibility and size of the lake- estimated that at the height of the spillage, 2 million cubic meters of water were discharged every second

'One suggestion is the drainage of meltwater from glacial Lake Agassiz, a large ice-dammed lake in central North America, into the surrounding oceans may have affected ocean circulation, contributing to this climatic event,' researchers wrote in the study.

It's likely that the 'catastrophic meltwater to drain to the Arctic Ocean' occurred over a 6–9 month period during the Younger Dryas, but they are not yet clear if this happened during the beginning of the event.

'We know that a large discharge has gone through the area but the rate of the discharge or the magnitude was pretty much unknown,' the study's lead author, Sophie Norris, said in a statement.

Over the span of roughly nine months, approximately 5,000 cubic miles (21,000 cubic kilometers) were drained from the lake, roughly the equivalent of all the Great Lakes combined

Using sedimentary evidence, more than 100 valley cross sections, and a model comprised of gradual dam failure with the bedrock's erodibility and the size of the lake, the researchers estimated that 2 million cubic meters of water were discharged every second at the height of the spillage, making it one of the largest floods known to occur on Earth.

For comparison purposes, this is roughly 10 times what the Amazon River spills every second.

Over the span of roughly nine months, approximately 5,000 cubic miles (21,000 cubic kilometers) were drained from the lake, roughly the equivalent of all the Great Lakes combined.

The ancient lake was formed after the Laurentide Ice Shield started to melt around 16,000 years ago, creating a dam that prevented meltwaters from entering the Hudson Bay

The ancient lake was formed after the Laurentide Ice Shield started to melt around 16,000 years ago, creating a dam that prevented meltwaters from entering the Hudson Bay.

'What I find deeply satisfying is that modern hydraulic modeling, when applied to the evidence preserved in the landscape, shows how a phenomenal flood propagated 12,000 years ago,' said University of Southampton researcher and study co-author Paul Carling.

'When all the uncertainties are considered, the outcome remains pretty solid.'

Although scientists are not sure what caused the Earth to slip back into an ice age, the lake flooding theory is certainly plausible, study co-author Froese added.

WHAT IS THE YOUNGER DRYAS IMPACT HYPOTHESIS? The Younger Dryas impact hypothesis proposes that fragments of a disintegrating comet struck the Earth around 12,800 years ago. These fragments bombarded North and South America, Europe and western Asia. This generated a thin layer of detritus covering around 19.3 million square miles (50 million square kilometers). This layer contained concentrations of platinum, meltglass and nano-diamonds from the impactors. Experts argue that this episode saw large-scale biomass burning, an impact-induced winter, longer-time climatic shifts and the extinction of late Pleistocene megafauna. Advertisement

'We don't know for sure that the flood caused the Earth to slip back into the ice age, but certainly if you put that much water into the Arctic Ocean, the models show you get cooling of the northern hemisphere climate.'

The researchers will next try to find out whether the flood happened at the start of the Younger Dryas climate event, which may have been the root cause of it, or if it was just a part of other events.

It's also possible the floods resulted in the region's expansive oil sands, a region of loose sand, water and clay that also has a form of petroleum.

'The oil sands region is essentially within the channel that this flood formed,' Norris explained. 'There would have been a huge amount of Quaternary material on top of that, as there is in the surrounding area, but it has been exposed in Fort McMurray by this huge event.'

The study was published last month in Geophysical Research Letters.

There are several theories about what caused the Younger Dryas cooling event that lasted about 1,500 years.

In June, a separate group of researchers said that a cosmic impact, likely an asteroid, hit Earth and likely triggered the Younger Dryas climate shift.

This shift was potentially the most 'devastating impact since the extinction of the dinosaurs' and resulted in a mini Ice Age that lasted more than 1,000 years.

Several other studies over the years have supported the theory of an ancient asteroid strike.

Others, however believe the Younger Dryas cooling event was caused by other methods. In 2020, another study suggested it was caused by ancient volcanic eruptions and not meteor impacts.

Some have even suggested that an hour-long hailstorm from space plunged the planet into the mini-ice age.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tourists have been warned to avoid the Grand Canyon due to a searing localized heatwave which will see the famed attraction become a 115f cauldron.

The base of the canyon, 4,000 feet below, is set to hit the roasting temperature today, which has sparked an excessive heat warning for just the Grand Canyon itself.

That extreme heat in the lower elevations is the result of a compression of air as it descends into the canyon, according the National Weather Service.

During what is known as 'adiabatic heating', air becomes more compressed as it descends into the canyon and releases energy the further down it goes, thus increasing temperatures.

The Grand Canyon is one of the most visited parks in the US with some 5.9 million people stopping to see this natural wonder of the world each year, but meteorologists are urging the public to stay away Friday due to extreme temperatures plaguing the canyon

Officials are discouraging any physical activity within the canyon between 10am and 4pm GMT, when 'temperatures are expected to rise to dangerous levels,' according to National Weather Service in Flagstaff, Arizona.

'Day hikers on Bright Angel Trail should descend no further than 1.5 miles,' wrote the Weather Service. 'Hikers should attempt to be out of the canyon and at Indian Garden or Bright Angel Campground between these hours.'

Although the warning may sound extreme, such announcements are not uncommon in the canyon – the last one was on June 2 when temperatures went up to 111f and a number of warnings were issued last year.

While the canyon will be hit with extreme heat, just outside of the area will be between 80 and 90 degrees, which is normal this time of year.

The base of the canyon, 4,000 feet below, is set to heat up to 115 degrees Fahrenheit today, which has sparked an excessive heat warning for just the Grand Canyon itself

The extreme heat in the lower elevations is the result of a compression of air as it descends into the canyon

During adiabatic heating, temperatures of around 89 degrees Fahrenheit at an elevation of 8,200 feet can shoot up to 112 degrees Fahrenheit at an elevation of 2,500 feet as the air becomes more and more compressed at lower levels of the canyon.

According to The Washington Post, this is also why you see snow covered mountain tops in the middle of summer.

Heat warnings for the Grand Canyon are issued throughout the year, but in June 2020, officials warned hikers their boots could literally melt apart and their feet will suffer blisters because of extreme heat conditions at the national park.

Heat warnings for the Grand Canyon are issued throughout the year, but in June 2020, officials warned hikers their boots could literally melt apart and their feet will suffer blisters because of extreme heat conditions at the national park

'Grand Canyon is an unforgiving environment,' says the park service in another social media post from last year.

'The heat inside the canyon can cause shoes to come apart, and heavy hiking boots can trap sweat and lead to painful blisters,' park service officials explained.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Financial worries are already well-known as one of the main sources of conflict in a romantic relationship.

But now a new study reveals that people who base their self worth on how much they earn clash with their partner more often.

The team of researchers, based in Michigan and Texas, recruited hundreds of people in a marriage or in a committed relationship.

They found a link between conflict, such as arguments, and 'financially contingent self-worth' (FCSW) – the feeling that personal worth depends on the ability to achieve financial success.

Amazingly, this link was found regardless of how much money they were earning or their level of economic stress.

Although the experts couldn't explain the link, it's likely that someone who's paying more attention to their finances is neglecting the various needs of their partner, causing conflict.

Scroll down for video

People in relationships who base their self worth on how much they earn clash with their partner more often, researchers in Michigan and Texas found (file photo)

The study was led by Deborah E. Ward, an assistant professor of psychology at Saginaw Valley State University in Michigan.

FINANCIALLY CONTINGENT SELF-WORTH Financially contingent self-worth (FCSW) is conditional source of self-esteem. People with high FCSW will have feelings of personal worth and value that depend on one's ability to achieve financial success. Those with low FCSW likely use other aspects about their personality to feel worthy. Advertisement

'It's not the case that liking, valuing, or wanting to have money and/or financial success is a bad thing,' Professor Ward told PsyPost.

'It's when a person views financial success as a core component of what makes them a good or worthwhile person that can open them up to vulnerabilities.'

The researchers initially recruited 434 participants, who were in a committed relationship, either married or otherwise long-term. They were assessed for their levels of FCSW and how often they had had disagreements with their partner.

Participants who reported higher levels of FCSW reported more frequent financial conflicts with their partners, the experts found.

Interestingly, these conflicts in turn were linked with lower levels of relationship satisfaction, and this link remained statistically significant even after controlling for income, economic pressures and materialism.

Seventy-four of the 434 participants also completed a six-week diary study, which required them to complete a relationship questionnaire each week.

During weeks when participants reported higher feelings of FCSW, they also had more financial disagreements with their partner and reported feeling less supported by their partner, the diary logs showed.

In a follow-up experiment, researchers recruited another 337 people who had their FCSW levels craftily manipulated.

These participants were either assigned to one of two conditions – they had to read a news article proclaiming the benefits of financial success or another article about how financial success doesn't affect quality of life.

Unsurprisingly, those in the first condition reported higher FCSW compared to those who read the other article.

They also displayed more hostile responses to hypothetical financial scenarios involving their partner, and reported lower relationship satisfaction and perceived support from their partner.

This shows that merely planting a seed in someone's mind that financial success is important makes them reevaluate how supportive their partner is.

People with high FCSW will have feelings of personal worth and value that depend on one's ability to achieve financial success (stock image)

Professor Ward pointed out that the study is correlational, so her team could not definitively say that having FCSW causes people to have more financial conflicts with their partners.

'For example, it could instead be that having more financial conflicts leads people to believe that having more money would improve their relationship problems, which could increase their tendency to base self-worth on money,' she told PsyPost.

'What we can say is that we see a consistent association between having financially contingent self-worth and perceiving greater financial-related conflicts in one’s relationship.'

The study has been published in Journal of Social and Personal Relationships.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If advanced extraterrestrial civilizations exist, they could be using stars to secretly communicate with each other in a way that would appear like random blinking lights to others listening in, a new study suggests.

The notion comes from Imperial College London quantum physicist Terry Rudolph, who theorizes 'paranoid' aliens are harnessing the power of entangled photons from various stars to send these hidden messages.

Entangled photons, or quantum entanglement, occur when linked particles of light affect each other no matter how far apart, according to NASA.

This type of communication 'can be rendered in principle indiscernible to those of us excluded from the conversation,' which, according to the pre-print paper published in arXiv, is why we have yet to find life beyond our own planet.

Scroll down for video

If advanced extraterrestrial civilizations exist in space, they could be using stars to secretly communicate with each other in a way that would appear like random blinking lights to others listening in, a new study suggests

The idea of quantum entanglement is not new, having been dismissed by the none other than Albert Einstein as 'spooky action at a distance.'

However, in recent decades, scientists have been investigating this idea and found it is possible - even from Earth to a satellite in space.

Entanglement can occur when a laser beam is shot through a crystal, according to Live Science, resulting in individual photons to split and form pairs of entangled photons that can be separated by large distances.

The separated photons, for example, are Photon A and Photon B.

The notion comes from Imperial College London quantum physicist Terry Rudolph (pictured), who theorizes 'paranoid' aliens are harnessing the power of entangled photons from various stars to send these hidden messages

Photon A takes on an up-spin state and Entangled Photon B, though now far away, takes up a state relative to that of Photon A – a down-spin state.

The transfer of state between Photon A and Photon B takes place at a speed of at least 10,000 times the speed of light, which is 186,282 miles per second, regardless of distance.

'Photons can propagate billions of light-years and retain significant quantum coherence,' Rudolph wrote in the study.

'One consequence is therefore that a sufficiently advanced civilization can perform quantum non-demolition measurements of photon number on suitable modes of light being emitted from stars, in such a way that useful large-scale entanglement is distributed by the subsequent free-space propagation of that light through the universe.'

To make these transmitted messages invisible to anyone other than the receiver, Rudolph states these aliens could 'hide their photonic entanglement dispersion by using the thermal light already being emitted by the different stars they visit.'

This would necessitate knowing the number of photons in the modes they have chosen to use, which would also require performing a quantum non-demolition measurement of the photon number.

'Because the thermal light they are measuring is diagonal in the number basis even this process can be rendered in principle indiscernible to those of us excluded from the conversation,' Rudolf wrote in the study.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ambitious plans to stop the completely stop the increase in marine plastic pollution by the year 2050 have been laid out by researchers with the United Nations.

The report, penned by the UN's International Resource Panel, stresses the need for systemic changes to the entire plastics economy to protect the world's oceans.

Condemning the piecemeal efforts made to date to tackle plastic pollution, the team has called for a reduction in the overall amount of plastic that we produce.

They are also calling for other measures, including a global co-ordination of plastic-related policies and increased support for innovations in the recycling sector.

According to the authors of the report, their recommendations are likely the most demanding ever proposed to tackle the plastic problem.

Experts recently estimated that 11 million tons of plastic are discharged into the oceans each year — with devastating effects for marine ecosystems and beyond.

Analysis suggests that the mitigation efforts currently put in place by governments and industry only have the potential to reduce this figure by 7 per cent come 2040.

Ambitious plans to stop the completely stop the increase in marine plastic pollution by the year 2050 have been laid out by researchers with the United Nations (stock image)

In a recent report , experts from The Pew Charitable Trusts and SYSTEMIQ calculated the annual discharge of plastic waste into the ocean was in the order of some 11 million tons — with the potential to increase significantly (as pictured) if measures are taken to address the issue

Analysis suggests that the mitigation efforts currently put in place by governments and industry only have the potential to reduce this figure by 7 per cent come 2040 — but that the measures outlined in the UN report could see a total halt to plastic pollution by 2050

THE SCALE OF THE PLASTICS PROBLEM In a recent report, experts from The Pew Charitable Trusts and SYSTEMIQ calculated the annual discharge of plastic waste into the ocean was in the order of some 11 million tons. According to the UN report, the latest projections indicate that current commitments to tackle marine plastic waste will only lower this figure by a meagre 7 per cent come 2040. Given this, they concluded, concerted action is needed urgently on a systemic scale to end plastic pollution. Advertisement

The UN report — which was commissioned by the G20 intergovernmental forum — was released today during the 'Forum on the Multi-stakeholder Platform on Marine Litter and Microplastics', which was hosted virtually by the Japanese government.

'It's time to stop isolated changes, where you have country after country doing random things that on the face of it are good but actually don't make any difference at all,' said report author and marine policy expert Steve Fletcher.

'Intentions are good but don't recognize that changing one part of the system in isolation doesn't magically change everything else,' the University of Portsmouth researcher added.

'A country might put in place recyclable plastics,' he explained.

'But if there is no collection process, no recycling system in place and no market for the plastic to be used again and its cheaper to use virgin plastic then that recycled plastic is a total waste of time.'

'It's a type of "green washing" that looks good on the surface but has no meaningful impact,' Professor Fletcher concluded.

Alongside reducing the production of plastic, the report had a number of recommendations to help stop marine waste by the mid-century — starting with a globally-agreed set of policy targets for implementation on the national level.

'Actions that are known to reduce marine plastic litter should be encouraged, shared and scaled up immediately, the authors wrote in their report.

'These include moving from linear to circular plastic production and consumption by designing out waste, incentivising reuse, and exploiting market-based instruments.'

In addition, the team said, it will be essential to support innovation into new processes and approaches to recycle plastics beyond those which are presently available to us.

Other recommendations included performing independent studies are needed to evaluate the effectiveness of ongoing plastics policies in different contexts and the regulation of the international trade in plastic waste.

The movement of waste plastics into countries with insufficient waste management infrastructure, the researchers explained, can result in the leakage of plastics into the natural environment.

'Actions that are known to reduce marine plastic litter should be encouraged, shared and scaled up immediately, the authors wrote in their report. 'These include moving from linear to circular plastic production and consumption by designing out waste, incentivising reuse, and exploiting market-based instruments.' Pictured: plastic waste littering a beach in France

The authors also noted that the COVID-19 pandemic — on-going during the period over which the report was composed — has led to significant impacts on the world's plastic economy

The authors also noted that the COVID-19 pandemic — on-going during the period over which the report was composed — has led to significant impacts on the world's plastic economy.

Specifically, the public health crisis has seen a huge increase in the production and disposal of single-use plastic products like personal protective equipment, couple with record low oil prices that threaten to undercut plastic recycling efforts.

At the same time, stay-at-home efforts have impeded the ability of the world's estimated 11 million waste pickers to remove plastic from the environment.

However, the experts said, COVID recovery stimulation packages have the potential to help tackle waste by promoting jobs in the recycling and green tech markets.

The full findings of the report were published on the UN's International Resource Panel website.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists have unearthed the remains of a woman that lived 14,000 years ago, the first signs of a modern burial at the historically important Cova Gran de Santa Linya site in Spain, where evidence of the last Neanderthals and the first modern humans has previously been unearthed.

Dubbed 'Linya, the La Noguera woman,' experts found two of the woman's femurs, one still attached to a pelvis, an arm and leg bone and bones from her hands and feet.

The woman's skull, vertebrate and ribs were also discovered, though these were poorly preserved.

The archaeologists used carbon-14 dating of the sediment to determine the woman's age.

Experts found the remains of a woman that lived 14,000 years ago at the Cova Gran de Santa Linya site in Spain. Two femurs, an arm bone, leg bone and bones from hands and feet of 'Linya, the La Noguera woman' were unearthed. A skull, vertebrate and ribs were also discovered

'We recovered bone remains which definitely belonged to a human skeleton, and still partly connected, two meters below the ground of a side area of the excavation,' said Centro Nacional de Investigación sobre la Evolución Humana (CENIEH) researcher Alfonso Benito Calvo in a statement.

'A location that didn't presage the appearance of this kind of remains.'

The bones were located were several large blocks had fallen from the roof of the cave.

Linya's bones were found in the supine position, or lying horizontally, with her skull and torso facing up.

Cova Gran de Santa Linya is 'key' to studying human presence in the northeastern Iberian Peninsula

Cova Gran de Santa Linya covers more than 2,500 square miles and it's one of the 'transition' sites that have shown evidence of the last Neanderthals, some 45,000 years ago and the first modern humans, ranging between 37,000 and 30,000 years ago

According to experts, the Cova Gran de Santa Linya site is considered 'key' to the study of human presence in the northeastern Iberian Peninsula.

It covers more than 2,500 square miles and is one of the so-called 'transition' sites that have shown evidence of the last Neanderthals, some 45,000 years ago, and the first modern humans, ranging between 37,000 and 30,000 years ago.

Archaeologists have also previously uncovered evidence of the Last Glacial Maximum, which took place between 20,000 and 15,000 years ago.

Evidence of the first farmers, which originated between 7,000 and 4,000 years ago, has also been discovered at the site.

It is one of the 'transition' sites that have shown evidence of the last Neanderthals and the first modern humans Evidence of the Last Glacial Maximum and the first farmers have also been discovered at the site

First discovered in 2002, archaeologists have uncovered artifacts ranging between 45,000 and 4,000 years ago at Cova Gran de Santa Linya, but no human remains until 2020's excavation campaign.

Experts from CENIEH note that there are innumerable buried vestiges at the site, thanks to the sediment at Cova Gran.

This will allow them to accurately recreate the populations who lived in the area over the last 50,000 years, from ancient Neanderthals to the first Homo sapiens.

Further analysis of the soil may eventually reveal if Linya's body was covered with animal skins or plants, Calvo further explained.

'Prehistoric remains of modern humans in the Iberian Peninsula are very scarce.

'The study of Linya will let us learn more about what the hunter-gatherers of the northeast of the Peninsula were like, and how they lived.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bumblebees use paths and lanes created by humans to navigate their surroundings, a new study has revealed.

Researchers led from the Queen Mary University of London transplanted bee hives to a landscape — a rice farm — where the only features were a grid of raised paths.

Radar tracking of the insects showed that the bees initially relied on the paths to help them find their way around — at least until they became more confident.

According to the team, better understanding how bumblebees navigate could aid in efforts to conserve the important insects, whose population numbers are in decline.

Various bee species are being threatened by a combination of pesticide use, loss of their natural habitat, poor nutrition, climate change and diseases.

The study is part of a wider project exploring whether bees can be used as models to help design tiny flying robots and similarly help them to navigate around.

Bumblebees use paths and lanes created by humans to navigate their surroundings, a new study has revealed. Pictured: a bumblebee in flight

The research was conducted by animal behaviour expert Joanna Brebner of the Queen Mary University of London and colleagues.

'We think that these paths and roads are essentially being used as visual crutches by the bees,' Ms Brebner told the Times.

'They make life easier, which means that they’ll follow them if they’re not sure. But they can ignore them — they don’t have to follow them,' she explained.

In their study, the team equipped 83 bees from eight hives with special, lightweight metallic transponders that allowed their flights to be tracked using harmonic radar.

Each transponder weighed in at just a few milligrams, which is well with the maximum load of nectar and pollen worker bees are known to be able to carry.

Hives were transported to a rice farm in Spain, just south of Seville. The farm was comprised of a grid of unflooded paddies, each 1378x656 feet (420x200m) in area, separated by a combination of raised pathways and pairs of single-lane roads.

Besides these paths, the farm was essentially flat, with no other above-ground features that the bees would ordinarily use to help them navigate.

For each session of radar tracking, two hives were used at once, and were set out near to four feeding stations containing an unscented sucrose solution for the bees.

Three feeders were placed along the paths and lanes bordering the individual paddies, while a fourth was placed in the centre of one of the fields.

Hives were transported to a rice farm (pictured) in Spain, just south of Seville. The farm was comprised of a grid of unflooded paddies, each 1378x656 feet (420x200m) in area, separated by a combination of raised pathways and pairs of single-lane roads

For each session of radar tracking, two hives were used at once, and were set out near to four feeding stations containing an unscented sucrose solution for the bees. Three feeders were placed along the paths and lanes bordering the individual paddies, while a fourth was placed in the centre of one of the fields. Pictured: a map of the experimental layout

The team found that as the bees first began to explore their new surroundings, they consistently followed the roads and paths — doing so even when taking a more direct route to their destination would have been quicker.

'Bee exploration flights, search behaviour and foraging routes were shaped by linear features, with bees frequently flying along and parallel to pathways and roads,' the researchers wrote in their paper.

Reliance on the human-made features was only temporary, however — with the bees beginning to use more direct shortcuts to the feeders as they became accustomed to their new environment.

When the researchers tried removing the feeding stations, they found that the bees would use the roads to hunt for the missing feeders, for example by looking along the paths if the feeder in question had previously been on a path.

In contrast, if the missing feeder had been located in the middle of a field, the bees would use the paths as boundaries within which to search.

The team found that as the bees first began to explore their new surroundings, they consistently followed the roads and paths (top left, top right, and bottom left) — doing so even when taking a more direct route would have been quicker. Reliance on the human-made features was only temporary, however — with the bees beginning to use more direct shortcuts to the feeders as they became accustomed to their new environment (bottom right)

Understanding how bees navigate could help farmers plant crops that rely on bees for pollination in ways that ultimately improve yields, avoid the so-called 'edge effects' which often benefit those plants growing on the edges of fields.

'Potentially what you could do about that is design the field in a different way, or set the hives in different locations,' Ms Brebner told the Times.

Alongside this, conservationists could work to encourage bees not to nest in places where following roads and pathways might lead them into problems.

The findings, Ms Brebner added, 'gives you scope to sort of predict what bees might do, and then to use this to your advantage.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Animal Behaviour.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA has hit back at Russian claims a US astronaut drilled a hole in the International Space Station in 2018 to force an early return to Earth due to a psychological crisis.

According to a report in TASS, the Russian state news agency, Roscosmos insiders claim there were multiple holes drilled by someone unfamiliar with the module design and without proper support to ensure accurate drilling in low gravity.

They claim NASA astronaut Serena Auñón-Chancellor made the hole after a blood clot developed in her jugular vein that she had to treat herself, leading to an 'acute psychological crisis'.

NASA doesn't comment on medical matters but disputed the claim, describing the astronaut as extremely well respected and as making many invaluable contributions.

August 2018 saw astronauts rush to fix a hole which had appeared in the outer wall of the Soyuz capsule on the orbiting laboratory. Its origins were, and still are, a mystery, despite rife speculation and accusations from all sides.

It is thought the latest report may be Roscosmos deflecting accusations from NASA over the arrival of the Russian Science module sending the ISS in a spin in July.

August 2018 saw astronauts rush to fix a hole (pictured) which had appeared in the outer wall of the Soyuz capsule on the orbiting laboratory. Its origins were, and still are, a mystery despite rife speculation.

They claim Aunon-Chancellor made the hole after a blood clot developed in her jugular vein that she had to treat herself, leading to an 'acute psychological crisis'

THE $100 BILLION ISS SITS 250 MILES ABOVE THE EARTH The International Space Station (ISS) is a $100 billion (£80 billion) science and engineering laboratory that orbits 250 miles (400 km) above Earth. It has been permanently staffed by rotating crews of astronauts and cosmonauts since November 2000. Research conducted aboard the ISS often requires one or more of the unusual conditions present in low Earth orbit, such as low-gravity or oxygen. ISS studies have investigated human research, space medicine, life sciences, physical sciences, astronomy and meteorology. The US space agency, Nasa, spends about $3 billion (£2.4 billion) a year on the space station program, a level of funding that is endorsed by the Trump administration and Congress. A U.S. House of Representatives committee that oversees Nasa has begun looking at whether to extend the program beyond 2024. Alternatively the money could be used to speed up planned human space initiatives to the moon and Mars. Advertisement

In response to the most recent allegations, said to come from Roscosmos, Bill Nelson, head of NASA posted on Twitter: 'I fully support Serena.'

The Russian space agency conducted an investigation into the hole in 2019 and compiled a dossier on the incident, but reports claim it will not disclose its findings.

The leak, a circular hole in the hull of the Russian Soyuz capsule as it joined the ISS, was the subject of headlines and speculation for months.

Claims of the cause have included a botched repair job by an engineer on Earth who drilled through the side of the spacecraft, issues in manufacturing and sabotage.

The hole in the Russian Soyuz spacecraft attached to the station was spotted on August 30, 2018, three months after it first docked, after crew spotted a decrease in air pressure, causing astronauts to rush to find the cause.

Just days prior to their return to Earth, the cosmonauts endured a gruelling spacewalk that lasted almost eight hours to investigate the hole, using knives and shears to carve into the side of the space station itself.

The crew discovered a 2-millimetre (0.08 inches) hole which caused the leak and plugged it with epoxy and gauze.

NASA claimed the astronauts on board were never in danger of suffocation due to the 'lifeboat' spacecraft attached to the station to provide a return to Earth.

Later, images and further investigation revealed the hole had been made from the inside, ruling out space debris as the cause.

Sergey Prokopyev and two other astronauts, Serena Aunon-Chancellor of NASA and Alexander Gerst of the European Space Agency, were on board when it as detected.

The allegation against Aunon-Chancellor was made in an article published by TASS claiming to 'debunk' 12 things America claims about the Russian space agency.

They report it would not have been possible for the damage to happen on Earth as the ship would never pass vacuum chamber tests, essential to be flight ready.

'If there were any holes in it, then the pressure in this ship would immediately drop and it would not pass the appropriate tests. Thus, Roscosmos immediately ruled out the version of damage to Soyuz-MS-09 on Earth,' TASS reported.

It then goes on to discuss the mental health of Aunon-Chancellor, suggesting she took drastic action to 'speed up her return to Earth'.

A tiny hole, only 2mm wide (pictured), was found to be responsible for the loss of valuable cabin pressure which was first detected on August 30, 2018

Mr Prokopyev and Mr Kononenko had to use a pair of telescoping booms to reach the Soyuz and said it took nearly four hours for them to cross the approximately 100 feet to get to the capsule (pictured)

It lists the reasons behind the defamatory claim, suggesting the video camera at the junction of the Russian and American segments 'mysteriously' stopped working at the time and that the US astronauts refused to pass a polygraph.

Roscosmos insiders told TASS that the Russian astronauts took a polygraph and added the agency wasn't allowed to examine the tools and drills on the ISS for presence of the remains of metal shavings.

It went on to add that of the eight holes only one went all the way through, the rest appeared to just scuff the walls.

It is thought the latest report may be Roscosmos deflecting accusations from NASA over the arrival of the Russian Science module sending the ISS in a spin in July

It said that it 'speaks of drilling precisely in zero gravity conditions without the necessary support,' adding one hole was in the transverse rib of the ship's hull, obviously drilled by someone who hadn't been trained on the Soyuz spacecraft.

The statement sent out by NASA in response to the claims was relatively void of detail and didn't specifically exonorate Aunon-Chancellor, writing: 'To protect their privacy, the agency will not discuss medical information regarding crew members.'

Since then agency officials have tweeted their support for the astronaut.

Kathy Lueders from NASA and responsible for the human spaceflight program said Serana was an 'extremely well-respected crew member who has made invaluable contributions. I did not find this accusation credible.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Though NASA's Perseverance rover is on the Mars surface looking for signs of ancient life, the US space agency believes that robots looking in caves may help the US space agency find life outside this planet.

As such, it is working with a number of contractors, including Boston Dynamics, on a project known as BRAILLE (Biologic and Resource Analog Investigations in Low Light Environments), exploring Mars-like caves on Earth in hopes that one day they will be used for future missions.

Fully autonomous robots, like Boston Dynamics' Spot, could help explore these caves, which are believed to be hundreds of feet long and make communicating with Earth difficult, if not impossible.

Scroll down for video

NASA is training robots like Boston Dynamics' Spot (pictured) to help traverse caves on Earth for future missions to Mars

It is part of NASA's BRAILLE (Biologic and Resource Analog Investigations in Low Light Environments) project

Fully autonomous robots could help explore Martian caves, believed to be hundreds of feet long. NASA has incorporated its autonomy and artificial intelligence system, NeBula, into Spot

On Earth, NASA has incorporated its autonomy and artificial intelligence system, NeBula, into Spot, to help it explore the moon, Mars and other places in the solar system.

'Future potential human exploration missions can benefit from robots in many different ways,' Ali Agha, the project's research lead, told CBS News. 'Particularly, robots can be sent in precursor missions to provide more information about the destination before humans land on those destinations.

'In addition, robots can accompany astronauts during the missions to help with scouting certain terrains or with logistics and many tasks that can make astronauts' missions safer and more efficient.'

In July, NASA's InSight lander detailed the inner structure of Mars, showing off its core, mantle and crust, utilizing data from 'marsquakes.'

Caves were found on Mars in 2007, with scientists speculating they could be home to life

Utilizing NeBula, NASA researchers are able to address 'various elements of the mission, including sensing, environment, motion, system health, communication, among others' for the robot's brain, according to NASA's website.

For its body, the robot needs to have temperature management, be shielded from radiation and be capable of conserving power and energy.

'SPOT is one of the most capable robots that we have and it is amazing to see how it successfully reacts to high-level decisions and commands coming from the robot brain and how it can maintain stability over rough and extreme terrains,' Agha said.

'In addition to our capable traditional wheeled rovers, the ability to 'walk' is a huge asset when dealing with uneven terrains with no roads and no flat surfaces.'

Caves were first found on Mars in 2007, with scientists speculating then that they could be home to extraterrestrial life.

Since then, researchers have studied underground lava tubes on the Red Planet (as well as the moon), including a 'lava tube' on the side of Pavonis Mons, one of Mars's largest volcanoes that could be one day be used for human settlement.

The robot needs to be able carry enough payload so its eyes, ears and brain can help it navigate the Martian or lunar terrain; have the requisite amount of science instruments; and be capable of traversing a celestial body with a 'reasonable' level of stability, speed and endurance.

Spot is one of the few robots NASA is working with that is capable of handling all three requirements, Agha explained.

'Boston Dynamics Spot robot is one of the few robots that satisfy these constraints simultaneously,' Agha added. 'So integrating our robot brain, NeBula, on Spot has been pushing the boundaries of what was possible in exploring unknown Mars-like environments.'

On its website, NASA JPL highlights Spot's 'smarts,' noting it could be used to find microbial life under the surface of Mars, or icy celestial bodies, such as Europa, Enceladus and Titan.

It's possible that next-generation robots could access areas of Mars that would not be capable with traditional rovers, such as the Perseverance or its predecessor, the Curisoty, Agha added.

'The next-generation robot bodies and mechanical locomotion capabilities would enable new types of missions over terrains that were otherwise inaccessible by traditional rovers,' Agha said.

'Also, due to the increased speed and traversal capabilities, future missions can target destinations that are traditionally considered to be too far from landable regions on Mars.'

In April, a study published by researchers at Brown University suggested that life could be thriving under the dusty landscape of Mars.

The researchers looked at the chemical composition of rocks from Mars that have made their way to Earth and determined that if they touched water, could support microbial communities similar to those on Earth.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After sitting forgotten in a cabinet for nearly 50 years, a 'remarkable' collection of Tudor, Stuart and Commonwealth coins is set to sell for £500,000 at auction.

Amid the stunning set is a Henry VIII coin valued at £60,000, which was struck in tribute to the Tudor king's first wife, Catherine of Aragon, in around 1526–29.

Other highlights include an Elizabeth I 'Ship Ryal' Rose Noble coin from the year of the Spanish Armada — one of only three known to still exist — valued at £60,000.

Meanwhile, a coin from the reign of Edward VI, the so-called 'Boy King' and son of Henry VIII who took the throne at the age of nine, has been valued at £6,000.

The coins were amassed by the noted numismatist Horace Hird in the period from the early 1920s to his death in 1973. They are now being sold by his relatives.

Mr Hird's collection will go under the hammer at the London-based auction house of Spink & Son on September 28 this year.

The sale contains 'arguably the most impressive collection of Tudor coins to come on to the market for 70 years', and has come as a surprise to numismatists.

Mr Hird had widely been thought to have sold or gifted away the entirety of his collection by the 1960s. However, it appears he retained the 52 coins now on sale.

After sitting forgotten in a cabinet for nearly 50 years, a 'remarkable' collection of Tudor , Stuart and Commonwealth coins is set to sell for £500,000 at auction. Pictured: a Henry VIII coin, valued at £60,000, produced in honour of Catherine of Aragon

Amid the stunning set is a coin from the reign of a young Henry VIII (left, depicted here at the time of his first marriage) — valued at £60,000 — which was struck in tribute to the Tudor king's initial wife, Catherine of Aragon (right), in around 1526–29

One coin from the collection being auctioned was minted during the reign of Edward VI, the so-called 'Boy King' who took the throne at the age of nine —and has been valued at £6,000.

Pictured: a painting of the 'Boy King' Edward VI of England at age 13, three years into his reign

Included within Mr Hird collection's is also a James I Spur Ryal coin (dated to 1611–1612) which has been valued at £60,000.

A Charles I Pattern Unite minted in 1630 and originally worth 20 shillings is expected to sell for at least £25,000, while a Henry VII Sovereign coin from 1504–1509 could be sold for some £30,000.

A Double Crown from 1651, which has an usual spelling mistake, with 'Commonwealth' written with three 'M's, has also has been estimated at £10,000.

'We had a call from a descendant of Horace Hird earlier this year to look at the coins,' said Spink & Son auctioneer and coin specialist Gregory Edmund.

'They had been untouched since the 1960s and were still wrapped up with their paperwork.

'His once-in-a-lifetime collection includes a complete series of "Double Rose Nobles" or "Sovereigns" as issued for the Dutch Revolt.'

These coins were minted to pay for the English forces that occupied Holland during the Anglo-Dutch Revolt of 1585–1587.

Included within Mr Hird collection's is also a James I Spur Ryal coin (pictured) dated to 1611–1612 which has been valued at £60,000

The coins were amassed by the noted numismatist Horace Hird in the period from the early 1920s to his death in 1973. They are now being sold by his relatives. Pictured: Mr Hird's collection includes coins from the reigns of James I (left) and Charles I (right)

A Charles I Pattern Unite minted in 1630 and originally worth 20 shillings (pictured) is expected to sell for at least £25,000 when it goes to auction late next month

A Double Crown from 1651, which has an usual spelling mistake, with 'Commonwealth' written with three 'M's (as pictured), has been estimated at £10,000

'There is also an extremely rare example of the Rose Noble or 'Ryal', depicting Elizabeth I in a ship, as issued for the year of the Spanish Armada,' Mr Edmund said.

The coin depicts the Virgin Queen on board a war galleon, holding an orb and sceptre. Despite being championed by Elizabeth I's 'favourite' statesman, Robert Dudley, the Earl of Leicester, the coin proved commercially unsuccessful.

It was beset by local imitations and a poor supply from the Royal Mint, resulting in only 6,000 being produced, or which just three examples are known to remain.

'Words fail to express the significance of this coin to the story of the English nation,' the auctioneer continued.

'Whilst three portraits exist of Elizabeth I in the aftermath of the Armada — at Greenwich, Woburn Abbey and the National Portrait Gallery — these paintings have been subject to restoration and alteration over subsequent centuries.

'This coin remains an unchanged and true contemporary record of one of the most seismic chapters in this island's story.'

'There is also an extremely rare example of the Rose Noble or 'Ryal', depicting Elizabeth I in a ship, as issued for the year of the Spanish Armada,' said Spink & Son auctioneer and coin specialist Gregory Edmund. The coin (pictured) depicts the Virgin Queen on board a war galleon, holding an orb and sceptre

'Whilst three portraits exist of Elizabeth I in the aftermath of the Armada — at Greenwich, Woburn Abbey and the National Portrait Gallery — these paintings have been subject to restoration and alteration over subsequent centuries,' said Mr Edmund. In contrast, he explained, the Rose Noble from Mr Hird's collection 'remains an unchanged and true contemporary record of one of the most seismic chapters in this island's story.'

'Once in a lifetime is often overused in discussion prior to auction, but in this case it is simply an understatement,' Mr Edmund said of the lots being sold. Pictured: an Elizabeth I Pattern Groat in gold, dated to 1601, which has been valued at £15,000

'Once in a lifetime is often overused in discussion prior to auction, but in this case it is simply an understatement,' Mr Edmund continued.

'Such a complete assemblage of this series, as Horace has diligently formed, has to my knowledge not been achieved at public auction since 1950.

'It is as great a testament as any to the calibre of Hird's contribution to the long and illustrious history of British numismatics.'

Pictured: this Henry VII Sovereign coin from 1504–1509 could be sold for some £30,000

Pictured: Henry VIII, as painted by Hans Holbein the Younger around the year 1537
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This year's Gulf of Mexico's dead zone – an area of low oxygen that can kill fish and marine life – is larger-than-the average, scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced Tuesday.

Data shows the dead zone has been 5,380 square miles for the past five years, but recent measurements show it is now 6,334 square miles - an area slightly larger than Connecticut.

The dead zone covers a massive area of the Gulf bottom waters that contains fewer than two parts per million of oxygen, a condition called hypoxia, which suffocates bottom-living organisms.

NOAA is blaming the larger-than-normal dead zone on high freshwater runoff from the Mississippi River, which measured above normal for three weeks prior to the agency conducting the test.

'Each year, excess nutrients from cities, farms and other sources in upland watersheds drain into the Gulf and stimulate algal growth during the spring and summer,' NOAA explained in its report. 'The algae eventually die, sink and decompose.'

'Throughout this process, oxygen-consuming bacteria decay the algae,' the report continued.

'The resulting low oxygen levels near the bottom are insufficient to support most marine life, rendering the habitat unusable and forcing species to move to other areas to survive.'

Data shows the dead zone has been 5,380 square miles for the past five years, but recent measurements show it is now 6,334 square miles - an area slightly larger than Connecticut

Nutrient runoff from the Mississippi River has a large role in determining the size of the dead zone.

This nutrient pollution, mainly from agriculture and developed land runoff in the Mississippi River watershed, is affecting coastal resources and habitats in the Gulf by stimulating algal growth.

Eventually, the algae decomposes, which uses up the oxygen needed to support life in the Gulf.

This loss of oxygen in the water can cause the loss of fish habitat or force them to move to other areas to survive.

NOAA started

It also leads decreased reproductive capabilities in fish species and a reduced average size of caught shrimp.

Nancy Rabalais, a Louisiana State University researcher who has led the dead zone studies for years, said in a statement: 'The distribution of the low dissolved oxygen was unusual this summer.

'The area from the Mississippi River to the Atchafalaya River, which is usually larger than the area to the west of the Atchafalaya, was smaller.

'The area to the west of the Atchafalaya River was much larger.

'The low oxygen conditions were very close to shore, with many observations showing an almost complete lack of oxygen.'

NOAA is blaming the larger-than-normal dead zone on high freshwater runoff from the Mississippi River, which measured above normal for three weeks prior to the agency conducting the test

NOAA forecasted in June that the hypoxic zone would be 4,880 square miles, but freshwater runoff was higher than expected and it is now 2.8 times times larger than the 2035 target set by the Hypoxia Task Force.

However, the largest measurement to-date is 8,776 square miles in 2017.

EPA Assistant Administrator for Water Radhika Fox said in a statement: 'This year, we have seen again and again the profound effect that climate change has on our communities — from historic drought in the west to flooding events. Climate is directly linked to water, including the flow of nutrient pollution into the Gulf of Mexico.

'As we work to address the Gulf of Mexico hypoxic zone, we must consider climate change and we must strengthen our collaboration and partnerships to make needed progress.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brass knuckles, old letters and a portrait of Adolf Hitler are among the trove of WWII Nazi artifacts found hiding behind a wall of a home in Hagen, Germany.

The 'Nazi time capsule' was discovered during renovations following a severe flood that hit the region in July, which killed 190 people and cost billions of dollars in damages.

Sebastian Yurtseven was conducting renovations at his aunt's home that suffered damages when he pulled a rotted piece of plasterboard away and came across a newspaper dated 1945.

'I got goosebumps,' Sebastian Yurtseven told local media. 'I didn't think it would turn into such a huge discovery.'

One-by-one, Yurtseven pulled out a revolver, gas masks, National Socialist German Worker's Party eagles and hundreds of letters and documents from the National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV) – among other items.

NSV, which was started in 1938, was structed on the Nazi Party model and provided childcare, healthcare and medical services to those who followed Hitler's values and ideologies.

The group also operated its own kindergartens and several relief organizations, and organized its Kinderland Dispatch in 1940 - a camp for Nazi youth.

Researchers say there is evidence of all these aspects in the Hagen find.

Scroll down for video

Brass knuckles, old letters and a portrait of Adolf Hitler are among the trove of WWII Nazi artifacts found hiding behind a wall of a home in Hagen, Germany

NSV was funded through assets and money taken from Jews, and researchers believe the home was once one of its headquarters.

The artifacts are said to have been quickly tossed inside the foot-wide wall cavity in April 1945, when Nazi members heard American forces were marching into Hagan.

Archive manager Ralf Blank of the FAZ told the Frankfurter Allgemeine: 'That must have happened very hectically.

'Such hasty disposal operations are known from countless diary campaigns, but to actually be able to secure such a find once, that alone is a very exciting thing.'

Sebastian Yurtseven was conducting renovations at his aunt's home that suffered damages when he pulled a rotted piece of plasterboard away and came across a newspaper dated 1945

One-by-one, Yurtseven pulled out a revolver, brass knuckles, NSDAP part eagles and hundreds of letters and documents from the National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV) – among other items

The discovery is being hailed as 'a time capsule from the Nazi era' and experts hope it will reveal the inner workings of the NSV, as most of the documents were destroyed or loss following the arrival of allied forces.

'We hope, for example, to come across files on the distribution of so-called Jewish furniture,' said Blank.

Along with the documents, experts found dozens of WWII gas masks for men, women and children stashed inside the wall, along with several air canisters.

Staff excavating the home have collected 12 boxes of artifacts that have been taken to another facility for further examination.

The discovery is being hailed as 'a time capsule from the Nazi era' and experts hope it will reveal the inner workings of the NSV, as most of the documents were destroyed or loss following the arrival of allied forces. Pictured is the Nazi Eagle pin

Along with documents, experts found dozens of WWII gas masks for men, women and children stashed inside the wall, along with several air canisters

Yurtseven and his aunt were amazed at the discovery and said they had no idea of the Nazi legacy behind the wall of their family house that was purchased in the 1960s.

A separate WWII era discovery was made last month, when a construction crew working in Lublin, Poland discovered a bunker built by Nazi Germany.

The wooden structure included a staircase that led to three underground corridors surrounded by concrete walls and ceilings - all of which were encased in wooden beams.

A separate WWII era discovery was made last month, when a construction crew working in Lublin, Poland discovered a bunker built by Nazi Germany. The wooden structure included a staircase that led to three underground corridors surrounded by concrete walls and ceilings

The bunker may have been the site of an intense battle between the Germans, during their occupation of the country, and the Soviet Red Army in 1944, experts believe.

Dariusz Kopciowski, the Lublin Conservator of Monument, told TheFirstNews: 'We don't yet know what else could be there. At the moment we have to check if there are not some unexploded bombs.'

'In the discovered bunker, we found ammunition which could suggest that battles were fought inside.'

.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A fishermen off the coast of Massachusetts had the catch of a lifetime when he reeled in a blue lobster over the weekend.

Captain Joe and Sons lobsterman Toby Burnham caught the cerulean crustacean on July 16 near the shores of Gloucester, Massachusetts, a coastal city on Cape Ann.

He took it in to be photographed and eventually released it into the sea, the company said on its Facebook page.

Commenters on the Facebook page applauded the fish market company for releasing the catch back into the wild, noting how rare it is.

A rare blue lobster was captured on July 16 near the shores of Gloucester, Massachusetts

The lobster was taken in the fishermen who got it photographed and then eventually released the lobster back into the sea

Captain Joe and Sons lobsterman Toby Burnham (pictured) caught the cerulean crustacean on July 16

'Great that is was thrown back in the ocean!' one person wrote. 'This blue lobster is not [meant] for people to eat.'

'Beautiful blue color! another person wrote. 'Not for consumption!'

It's believed that blue lobsters get their color from a genetic defect, according to the University of Main Lobster Institute.

The lobster creates a certain protein, known as crustacyanin, from the aforementioned defect that results in the color.

The odds of catching one are routinely cited as one-in-two-million, but experts agree this is just a guess as no one really knows how many blue lobsters exist in the wild.

In an interview with Boston.com, Captain Joe's owner, Joey Ciaramitaro, said he has seen a blue lobster roughly every two or three years.

'A lot of lobster people say they catch blue lobsters, and they're really kind of brownish-green – like a normal colored lobster with a little hint of blue around an edge or something,' Ciaramitaro told the news outlet.

'But about every two or three years, one of our lobstermen brings in a legit blue lobster, and this was one of these lobsters he brought it in.'

'I think it's kind of like feeling that it's a special lobster and it shouldn't be in captivity,' Ciaramitaro added. 'It should go back to the ocean.'

Captain Joe and Sons has not yet responded to a request for comment from DailyMail.com.

In April, a fishermen caught a blue lobster off the Cornish coast of Penzance, before releasing it back into the wild, DailyMail.com reported.

In February 2021, a yellow lobster, a one-in-30 million find, was caught off the coast of Maine.

The lobster, nicknamed Banana, was eventually donated to the University of New England's Marine Science Center in Biddeford.

In July 2020, a blue lobster that was delivered to a Red Lobster restaurant in Ohio gained a new lease on life after an employee noticed the rarity and refused to cook the lobster, which was later transported to a nearby zoo.

Several other rare lobsters have been caught in recent memory, including a female calico lobster that was caught in Silver Springs, Maryland in January 2019.

An 'albino' lobster was captured off the Yorkshire coast in December 2019, before it was eventually donated to the National Trust.

A translucent lobster, described as a 100 million-to-1 catch, was found off the coast of Maine in August 2018.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists have discovered a 19th century road while looking for unmarked graves from the Fredericksburg National Cemetery near the Battle of Fredericksburg, one of the bloodiest during the Civil War, in Virginia.

The discovery, made by the Northeast Archeological Resources Program, is in addition to a brick-lined culvert, that was also unearthed at Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields National Military Park in northern Virginia.

The road is believed to have led to the spot where a monument for the Civil War cemetery was 'proposed during the early design of the cemetery,' officials said, according to the Charlotte Observer.

However, the monument was never put up and the road was eventually 'buried.'

Archaeologists have discovered a 19th century road while looking for unmarked graves from a cemetery near the Battle of Fredericksburg in Virginia

The road is believed to have led to the spot where the monument for the Civil War cemetery (pictured) was 'proposed during the early design of the cemetery.' However, the monument was never put up and the road was eventually 'buried'

The discovery was made using radar and magnetometer surveys while the researchers were looking for unmarked graves, though none were found, the agency said in a Facebook post announcing the find.

The culvert was found when the research equipment indicated 'an unknown feature' buried nearby.

The excavation at Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields National Military Park in northern Virginia started in late June.

To date, no graves of unmarked soldiers have been found, the officials added.

This map created by the US Geological Survey in 1934 shows Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County Battlefields Memorial National Military Park

This map of the Battle of Fredericksburg shows the majority of the Union Army situated across the Rappahannock river, as they awaited the construction of a pontoon bridge. After they crossed, they were met with heavy opposition from Confederate soldiers who were in the hills to the west and south of the area

In October of 1862, General Robert E. Lee reorganized his Army of Virginia into two corps. After being promoted to lieutenant general, Jackson took command of the second corps, leading them to a decisive victory at the Battle of Fredericksburg.

At the battle, Union Army crossed over the Rappahannock River on a pontoon bridge. After they crossed, they were met with heavy opposition from Confederate soldiers who were in the hills to the west and south of the area.

The Fredericksburg National Cemetery was created in July 1865 by Congress in an effort 'to honor the Federal soldiers who died on the battlefields or from disease in camp,' according to the National Park Service.

More than 15,000 US soldiers are laid to rest there, most of which died in the Civil War, though there are about 100 20th century soldiers and a couple spouses.

Although Fredericksburg National Cemetery has not taken in a burial since the 1940s, officials are looking for one more burial spot.

According to the NPS, the new grave will house the remains of Union soldiers that were found in 2015 'near the Rowe–Goolrick House, which served as a hospital during the Battle of Fredericksburg,' the park said in a June 30 Facebook post.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just one vaping session can cause stress that leads to severe lung damage and puts a person at risk for heart or neurological diseases, a new study finds.

Researchers from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) compared oxidative stress in the lungs of routine cigarette smokers, vapers and people with no history of long term use of tobacco or nicotine devices.

Oxidative stress describes the harmful effects that free radicals (unstable molecules) have on the body.

Vaping for only 30 minutes caused oxidative stress levels two to four times higher than baseline levels in those with no history of previously smoking.

While vapes have been seen as a 'safer' alternative to tobacco and cigarette use by some, data in recent years have found there are many negative effects of using the devices.

Researchers found that non-smokers would have two to four times the amount of cells test positive for oxidative stress after vaping for only 30-minutes. Little overall change was found for those with smoking histories, though

For the study, published in JAMA Pediatrics, the UCLA researchers gathered 32 participants from the study aged 21 to 33.

They were split into three groups based on their history with cigarette or nicotine use.

Among the volunteers, there were nine regular cigarette users, 12 e-cigarette or vap, users and 11 participants who were non-smokers.

The team collected a type of immune cell called CD45 from all participants both before and after a 30-minute vaping session.

While those with little smoking history still had lower oxidative stress levels than the regular smokers, their CD45 immune cells were testing positive for oxidative stress at a two to four-fold increased rate.

'We were surprised by the gravity of the effect that one vaping session can have on healthy young people,' said Dr Holly Middlekauff a professor of cardiology and physiology at UCLA.

'This brief vaping session was not dissimilar to what they may experience at a party, yet the effects were dramatic.'

Even a person that does not regularly use nicotine products can still be opening themselves to certain dangerous conditions, researchers found.

'Over time, this imbalance can play a significant role in causing certain illnesses, including cardiovascular, pulmonary and neurological diseases, as well as cancer,' said Middlehauff.

Oxidative stress is an imbalance between free radical cells and antioxidants.

Free radicals are harmful oxygen cells that can cause tissue damage, and antioxidants are responsible for combatting their harmful cells.

The tissue damage can leave a person more vulnerable to diseases like heart disease, cancer, Alzheimer's and diabetes, among many other potential conditions.

Oxidative stress caused by using vapes or smoking can put someone at an increased risk of developing cancer, Alzheimer's and other conditions

Smoking is a common cause of oxidative stress, and the damage it can cause to the lungs is responsible for the well-known link between lung cancer and smoking.

E-cigarettes, and the brand JUUL which has become almost synonymous with the devices, have become widely used by teens and young adults.

JUUL first rose to prominence in 2015 as an easy, trendy and discrete way for people to smoke nicotine.

Their use among school-aged children can be attributed to their flavors, and the devices resemblance to a USB stick, allowing kids to easily carry them at school without getting caught.

Devices like JUULs are largely blamed for a recent increase in nicotine use by teens and young adults.

In 2020, nearly 40 percent of high schoolers who regularly smoke nicotine did so using an e-cigarette, according to a report by Tobacco Free Kids.

There has also been a legislative effort across the country to ban devices like vapes, e-cigarrettes and even menthol cigarettes that are blamed for the recent uptick in teen nicotine and tobacco use.

Researchers have found a link between teens using devices like vapes and e-cigarettes and the eventual use of cigarettes and tobacco

Last year, sale of all electronic cigarettes was banned in San Francisco and Chicago banned the sale of flavored nicotine.

The entire state of New York became the first to do so when they banned the sale of flavored tobacco products last year.

A bill in Florida that would have done the same passed through the state legislature in 2020, but was vetoed by Governor Ron DeSantis.

Menthol cigarettes, which have a mint-type flavor, have recently been targeted by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and are being pulled off of shelves.

The FDA claims the cigarettes are more likely to hurt minority and younger Americans, though some disagree with the potential ban.

Menthol cigarettes are already banned in Massachusetts, and also in the United Kingdom, Brazil and other countries.

A previous study finds that these types of bans could have a reverse effect though, and cause an increase in teenage tobacco use.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Popular fish including herrings, pilchards and sardines are shrinking and may face extinction, as climate change causes sea temperatures to rise, a study has warned.

Experts from Chile's Center for Advanced Studies in Arid Zones and the University of Reading explored how past temperature fluctuations have impacted fish evolution.

They found that warming waters in the past led to a reduction in the size of fish, as a result of the need to adapt their metabolism to the increasing temperature.

This in turn reduces how far the fish can travel, limiting their ability to relocate to more suitable environments as conditions change around them.

This impact of climate change may also be bolstered by other human activities, the team cautioned, with overfishing known to also lead to fish shrinking.

This is due to fishing creating a selective pressure for smaller fish, which are less attractive targets for the industry and more likely to be let go and breed.

The study comes shortly after the UN published a worrying report, warning that the Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected.

Scroll down for video

Popular fish including herrings, pilchards and sardines (pictured) are shrinking and may face extinction, as climate change causes sea temperatures to rise, a study has warned

UN warns Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C by 2040 The study comes shortly after the UN published a worrying report, warning that the Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected. Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040. The world's largest ever report into climate change also said it was 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'. Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850. 'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.' Advertisement

'Warming waters are a double whammy for fish, as they not only cause them to evolve to a smaller size, but also reduce their ability to move to more suitable environments,' said paper author Chris Venditti of the University of Reading.

'Our research supports the theory that fish will get smaller as oceans warm under climate change, but reveals the worrying news that they will also not be able to evolve to cope as efficiently as first thought.

'With sea temperatures rising faster than ever, fish will very quickly get left behind in evolutionary terms and struggle to survive.

'This has serious implications for all fish and our food security, as many of the species we eat could become increasingly scarce or even non-existent in the decades to come.'

In their study, the team explored the 150-million-year history of the 'Clupeiformes' — the diverse group of fish that includes commercial species like anchovies, Atlantic and Pacific herring and Japanese and South American pilchards.

Their analysis revealed that, historically, smaller clupeiform fish have typically arisen in warmer waters, while also moving shorter distances and lower speeds and having lower rates of formation of new species.

The findings were not unexpected. It has long been thought that fish will get smaller as the world warms, because they will have to increase their metabolism and will need more oxygen to sustain their bodily functions.

As larger fish have greater energy reserves to call upon in comparison with smaller fish, a reduction in size will reduce the distances over which fish can travel, and limit their ability to seek out more suitable environments as the climate changes.

The team did find that fish appeared to move faster and evolve more rapidly in periods when temperature changes were more rapid.

However, they cautioned, there is no precedent for the current warming rates.

Until relatively recently fish have only had to cope with average ocean temperature increases that reached some 1.44°F (0.8°C), the researchers explained.

This is considerably lower than current warming rates which, according to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, have been as high as 0.324°F (0.18°C) per decade since 1981.

They found that warming waters in the past led to a reduction in the size of fish , as a result of the need to adapt their metabolism to the increasing temperature. Pictured: a Silver Atlantic herring

Although the team focussed on the Clupeiformes, the concerning findings have implications for all fish species, the team said.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Nature Climate Change.

The study comes shortly after the UN published a worrying report, warning that the Earth is likely to warm by 1.5C within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 1.5C above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040.

The world's largest ever report into climate change also said it was 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'.

Since 1970, global surface temperatures have risen faster than in any other 50-year period over the past 2,000 years, the authors said, while the past five years have been the hottest on record since 1850.

'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse,' said report co-author Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric Research. 'I don't see any area that is safe… Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Introducing animal genes into common crops has enabled scientists to massively increase their yield and make them more resistant to drought, according to a new study.

A consortium of researchers from the US and China manipulated the ribonucleic acid, or RNA, of potato and rice plants by adding a gene called FTO.

In humans, FTO has been linked to obesity—in the crops, it led to them growing three times bigger and producing three times the yield.

When they tried it out in real field tests, the vegetables grew 50 percent more mass and yielded 50 percent more plants.

In addition to growing significantly larger, the plants increased their rate of photosynthesis and produced longer root systems, which could enable them to better withstand a drought.

The research, published in the journal Nature Biotechnology, adds a new wrinkle in the ongoing debate about genetically-modified foods.

'The change really is dramatic,' co-author Chuan He, a chemical biologist at the University of Chicago, said in a statement. 'What's more, it worked with almost every type of plant we tried it with so far, and it's a very simple modification to make.'

Scroll down for video

Scientists spliced potatoes with the FTO gene (bottom) , resulting in vegetables that were 50 percent larger. They maintain the process could be a major solution to food insecurity and climate change

Nobel-prize winning economist Michael Kremer, who was not involved in the research, suggested in the university's statement that the process could 'help address problems of poverty and food insecurity at a global scale—and could also potentially be useful in responding to climate change.'

In 2011, He's lab determined that RNA molecules in mammals don't just blindly follow a DNA blueprint—they can actually regulate which genes get expressed and which don't, via chemical markers that control which proteins are made and how many.

He and Guifang Jia, a molecular engineer at China-based Peking University, wanted to explore how that would impact plant biology.

FTO is known to erase some of the chemical markers on RNA that control genetic instructions—the researchers believe, when introduced into the crops, it 'muffles' some of the signals telling them to reduce growth.

Pictured: An RNA gene-edited rice plant (far right) in comparison to untreated samples. In addition to being larger, the spliced crops grow longer roots, enabling them to better withstand drought conditions

Pictured: A farmer harvests potatoes in Gaza City

After seeing results with rice plants, they tried with potatoes, part of an unrelated plant family, and the outcome was just as impressive.

'That suggested a degree of universality that was extremely exciting,' Professor He said. 'We rely on plants for many, many things—everything from wood, food, and medicine, to flowers and oil—and this potentially offers a way to increase the stock material we can get from most plants.'

The impressive results involved splicing FTO into a plant, raising the hackles of animal rights advocates.

'These experimenters might just be depriving vegetable growers of their main market—vegans and vegetarians who avoid animal bits and pieces in their food,' PETA senior vice president Kathy Guillermo told DailyMail.com.

But Professor He believes ultimately the same results could be achieved without adding animal genes.

Critics complain that genetically modifying foods can have unintended consequences on both the environment and human consumers. While the new research involved splicing an animal gene into vegetable crops, the scientists believe they can refine the process 'using the plant's existing genetics'

'This is a brand new type of approach, one that could be different from GMO and CRISPR gene editing; this technique allows us to 'flip a switch' in the plants at an early point in development, which continues to affect the plant's food production even after we remove the switch,' He said.

'It seems that plants already have this layer of regulation, and all we did is tap into it. So the next step would be to discover how to do it using the plant's existing genetics.'

Professor He imagines other benefits to bulking up flora beyond bumper crops.

'Perhaps we could engineer grasses in threatened areas that can withstand drought,' He said. 'We could teach a tree in the Midwest to grow longer roots, so that it's less likely to be toppled during strong storms. There are so many potential applications.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elon Musk has confirmed that Tesla will allow owners of other company's electric vehicles to charge up at its Supercharger stations—adding the option will be available before the end of 2021.

'We're making our Supercharger network open to other EVs later this year,' the 50-year-old CEO tweeted Tuesday.

In the US, Tesla's cars use the company's proprietary connector, which means automakers who want to access the 900-plus charging stations the company operates domestically would have to provide an adapter to its drivers.

In Europe, Tesla uses a CCS direct current connector, which has become an international standard.

In a followup tweet, Musk confirmed all of the company's 25,000 Superchargers would eventually be available to non-Tesla drivers.

Elon Musk confirmed Tuesday that Tesla's network of more than 25,000 Supercharger stations at more than 2,700 locations will open up to drivers of other EVs by the end of 2021

In a tweet revealing the Supercharger network will be open to other EVs this year, Elon Musk said the company created its own proprietary charging connector because, at the time, there was no industry standard

It's hardly the first time Musk has discussed opening up the Supercharger network.

'We're happy to support other automakers and let them use our Supercharger stations,' Musk said in 2018, according to TechCrunch. 'This is not a walled garden.'

Other EV manufacturers 'would just need to pay the share of the cost proportionate to their vehicle usage,' he added. 'And they would need to be able to accept our charge rate or at least — and our connector, at least have an adapter to our connector.'

But this is the first time he's given any sort of timeline.

While Musk said all of the company's 25,000 Superchargers would eventually be available to non-Tesla drivers, its not clear if the service will be available in Europe first or rolled out simultaneously worldwide

Reaction to the news on Twitter was mixed, with one user saying they were okay with opening up the network 'as long as non-Tesla's pay an annual membership fee of some sort and that the experience charging does not change.'

Another Tesla owner in California called it a 'horrible move,' suggesting it would increase the wait time to get to a full charge.

'Some superchargers have a wait of 30 minutes at times with other Teslas,' wrote @LAdetectives. 'Mix in other EVs and it's gonna be a real cluster----.'

Musk's confirmation came in response to a tweet from a user who defended Tesla against those who criticized it for building its own charging network.

Musk's comments on opening up Supercharger stations came in response to a tweet defending Tesla against those who criticized it for building its own charging network

'Funny how many people are now questioning why Tesla created their own proprietary charging connector and that it's not fair for other EVs,' tweeted @Teslatino.

'How about no support for @elonmusk when he was advancing the technology. His team created a reliable way to charge the fleet? Deal with it!.'

In response, Musk said his company created its own connector because there was no industry standard in 2012, 'and Tesla was [the] only maker of long range electric cars.'

'It's one fairly slim connector for both low & high power charging,' he added. That said, we're making our Supercharger network open to other EVs later this year.'

The acknowledgment comes about a month after reports indicated the Supercharger network would be open to non-Tesla cars starting next year.

Tesla started with six Supercharger locations throughout California, but has grown to a worldwide operation with 2,700 stations across North America, Asia and Europe, and parts of the Middle East

The Palo Alto, California-based company had apparently told Norwegian officials it would start the process in September 2022, as originally reported by Electrek.

According to minutes of Tesla's meeting with Vestland fylkeskommune, the governing body of Norway's Vestland county, 'The condition for benefits is that infrastructure must be developed with a publicly available offer.'

Tesla had also reportedly been speaking with officials in Germany about opening up its network for other automakers.

It's unclear at this point if Tesla will start with Superchargers in one region or open up its global network all at once.

The fact that its European models use the same connectors as other EVs suggests that's where the program would begin, TechCruch reported.

Tesla unveiled its Supercharger network in September 2012, several months after the release of its Model S sedan

Tesla unveiled the first Supercharger stations in September 2012, several months after the release of its Model S sedan.

It started with six locations throughout California, but has grown to a worldwide operation with locations across North America, Asia and Europe, and parts of the Middle East.

Initially, Tesla offered free supercharging for both its Model S and Model X vehicles, but Musk said several years ago the perk was not 'really sustainable' as production of the vehicles ramped up.

It brought back free supercharging for the Model 3 during a period in 2018, but has more recently ended the perk.

Pricing varies by location and it may change from time to time, Tesla has said previously.

In 2018, CEO Elon Musk said he wanted to put a restaurant at one of the company's Los Angeles Supercharger stations

In May, Tesla filed a trademark application for takeout, pop-up, self-serve and sit-down restaurants, an idea first brought up by Musk several years ago.

It's possible the 'restaurant services' could be located at or near the company's Supercharger stations.

In 2018, Musk tweeted that he wanted to put 'an old-school drive-in,' with roller-skating waitresses and a diner at one of the company's Supercharger stations in L.A.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The director of a new Anthony Bourdain documentary admits he used artificial intelligence and computer algorithms to get the late food personality to utter things he never said on the record.

Bourdain, who killed himself in a Paris hotel suite in June 2018, is the subject of the new documentary, Roadrunner: A Film About Anthony Bourdain.

It features the prolific author, chef and TV host in his own words—taken from television and radio appearances, podcasts, and audiobooks.

But, in a few instances, filmmaker Morgan Neville says he used some technological tricks to put words in Bourdain's mouth.

As The New Yorker's Helen Rosner reported, in the second half of the film, L.A. artist David Choe reads from an email Bourdain sent him: 'Dude, this is a crazy thing to ask, but I'm curious...'

Then the voice reciting the email shifts—suddenly it's Bourdain's, declaring, '. . . and my life is sort of s**t now. You are successful, and I am successful, and I'm wondering: Are you happy?'

Rosner asked Neville, who also directed the 2018 Mr. Rogers documentary, Won't You Be My Neighbor?, how he possibly found audio of Bourdain reading an email he sent someone else.

It turns out, he didn't.

'There were three quotes there I wanted his voice for that there were no recordings of,' Neville said.

So he gave a software company dozens of hours of audio recordings of Bourdain and they developed, according to Neville, an 'A.I. model of his voice.'

The director of a new documentary about Anthony Bourdain admits he used AI to re-create quotes in the food personality's voice in several scenes

Ian Goodfellow, director of machine learning at Apple's Special Projects Group, coined the phrase 'deepfake' in 2014, a portmanteau of 'deep learning' and 'fake'.

It's a video, audio or photo that appears authentic but is really the result of artificial-intelligence manipulation.

A system studies input of a target from multiple angles—photographs, videos, sound clips or other input— and develops an algorithm to mimic their behavior, movements, and speech patterns.

Rosner was only able to detect the one scene where the deepfake audio was used, but Neville admits there were more.

Morgan Neville said he gave a software company a dozen hours of audio tracks, and they developed an 'A.I. model of his voice,' so that Neville could have Bourdain read aloud from an email he sent to a friend about whether he felt happy

'If you watch the film, other than that line you mentioned, you probably don't know what the other lines are that were spoken by the A.I., and you're not going to know,' he told her. 'We can have a documentary-ethics panel about it later.'

But the use of deepfakes, even in seemingly benign ways, has already sparked an ethical debate.

Earlier this year, a deepfake video viewed on TikTok more than 11 million times appeared to show Tom Cruise in a Hawaiian shirt doing close-up magic.

Viral clips from March showing Tom Cruise doing magic tricks and walking through a clothing store turned out to be deepfakes. Although they were for entertainment purposes, experts warn that such content can easily be used to manipulate the public

While the clips seemed harmless enough, many believed they were the real deal, not AI-created fakes.

Another deepfake video, of Speaker Nancy Pelosi seemingly slurring her words, helped spur Facebook's decision to ban the manufactured clips in January 2020 ahead of the presidential election later that year.

In a blog post, Facebook said it would remove misleading manipulated media edited in ways that 'aren't apparent to an average person and would likely mislead someone into thinking that a subject of the video said words that they did not actually say.'

It's not clear if the Bourdain lines, which he wrote but never uttered, would be banned from the platform.

After the Cruise video went viral, Rachel Tobac, CEO of online security company SocialProof, tweeted that we had reached a stage of almost 'undetectable deepfakes.'

'Deepfakes will impact public trust, provide cover & plausible deniability for criminals/abusers caught on video or audio, and will be (and are) used to manipulate, humiliate, & hurt people,' Tobac wrote.

'If you're building manipulated/synthetic media detection technology, get it moving.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tesla has rolled out the next iteration of its 'Full Self-Driving' (FSD) software, which purportedly gives its cars the ability to automatically obey traffic lights and change lanes.

But CEO Elon Musk is telling owners to 'be paranoid' about unknown issues and avoid becoming over-reliant on the assisted driving technology.

In a series of tweets on Thursday, Musk claimed 'safety is always top priority at Tesla.'

The official FSD v9 beta release notes also warn drivers against being overconfident, according to screenshots taken by driver @TeslaRaj.

'Full Self-Driving is in early limited access Beta and must be used with additional caution,' the notes read. 'It may do the wrong thing at the worst time, so you must always keep your hands on the wheel and pay extra attention to the road. Do not become complacent.'

Tesla has baked in some features to the software update to make sure that doesn't happen: The car will issue 'audible alerts' for example, if it detects drivers aren't minding the road, according to Business Insider.

The FSD upgrade was made available overnight on Friday for members of its early access program.

Scroll down for video

Release notes for the FSD 9 beta warn 'it may do the wrong thing at the worst time'

Just hours after the drop, Tesla driver Chuck Cook posted a video on his YouTube channel of a 4am drive in his Model 3.

Cook indicated much remains the same, though the graphic interface is smoother.

At one point, Cook's Model 3 attempts a trio of left-hand turns across a six-way divided highway and 'flunks hard,' according to CNET's Road Show.

The first time it gets to the median safely—though the human driver has to complete the maneuver—but it fails spectacularly in the other other attempts.

Tesla driver Chuck Cook posted a video on his YouTube channel of a 4am drive in his Model 3 after downloading the beta upgrade. He praised the improved graphics but the system failed to successfully negotiate a left turn across a highway

In another video, early adopter Kim Paquette said her FSD v9-booted Tesla successfully maneuvered a blind left turn on a corner and responded well to pedestrians.

Driver Whole Mars Catalog also attested his Tesla hit the brakes when a kid ran into the street.

kid runs in front of Tesla on FSD Beta 9 $TSLA @elonmusk pic.twitter.com/6I9xcvQaqc — Whole Mars Catalog (@WholeMarsBlog) July 11, 2021

Musk has been banging the drum for 'Full Self-Driving' (FSD) for more than five years, but emails leaked in March revealed the technology is far from providing hands-free capabilities.

There are five levels of automotive autonomy, according to the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE),

Level 0 through Level 2 states humans must drive cars with hands on the wheel and supervise partially automated functions.

In Level 3 through Level 5, vehicles are capable of taking over more responsibility, with Level 5 described as 'fully autonomous' under all traffic and weather conditions.

Documents between Tesla attorneys and the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) that surfaced in March said vehicles using the firm's latest beta version, known as 'Autosteer on City Streets,' will not surpass Level 2 autonomy.

Kim Paquette said her FSD v9-booted Tesla successfully maneuvered a blind left turn on a corner and responded well to pedestrians

That requires drivers to remain aware and control the brake, accelerator and steering - despite Musk promising 'full self driving' by 2021.

'City Streets continues to firmly root the vehicle in SAE Level 2 capability and does not make it autonomous under the DMV's definition, wrote Eric Williams, Tesla associate general counsel, in a statement attached to an email with the California DMV posted to PlainSite.

In an email dated November 20, 2020, Eric C. Williams, Tesla associate general counsel for regulatory matters, reiterated that the 'Full Self-Driving' program 'continues to firmly root the vehicle in SAE Level 2 capability and does not make it autonomous under the DMV's definition,' Ars Technica reported.

Williams told regulators the FSD beta can't recognize or react to a host of obstacles—including 'static objects and road debris, emergency vehicles, construction zones, large uncontrolled intersections with multiple incoming ways, occlusions, adverse weather, complicated or adversarial vehicles in the driving path, and unmapped roads.'

He indicated that will not change anytime soon, writing in December that, 'we expect the functionality to remain largely unchanged in a future, full release to the customer fleet.'

Despite the 'full self driving' appellation, Williams said Tesla didn't expect 'significant enhancements' that would 'shift the responsibility for the entire dynamic driving task to the system.'

In 2019. Musk proudly boasted Teslas would be cruising the streets at Level 5 autonomy by the end of 2020. In December 2020, he pushed that to late 2021. Right now the cars are at Level 2

In 2019. Musk proudly boasted Level 5 Tesla vehicles would be cruising the streets by the end of 2020. Of course the pandemic may have messed up his timeline: In December 2020, the South African-born entrepreneur said he expected Tesla to reach Level 5 autonomy by late 2021

In 2019. Musk proudly boasted Level 5 Tesla vehicles would be cruising the streets by the end of 2020.

Of course the pandemic may have messed up his timeline: In December 2020, the South African-born entrepreneur said he expected Tesla to reach Level 5 autonomy by late 2021.

But in an email to regulators that same month, Williams said 'true autonomous features' were still under development and 'any such features will not be released to the general public until we have fully validated them.'

Tesla offers FSD for $10,000, though it has been teasing a monthly subscription model that Musk insisted would 'for sure' be available in the second quarter of 2021 (which ended in June).

Tesla first launched its 'Full Self-Driving' beta in October 2020 to a limited number of customers who were deemed 'expert and careful drivers.'

That upgrade provided features including Autopark, which automatically parks the vehicle, and Auto Lane Change, which assists in moving to an adjacent lane on the road.

It also offered automatic traffic-light and stop-sign response and specific features for highway assistance.

Experts have called the company's use of the term 'full self driving' misleading and irresponsible marketing that could make the roads more dangerous.

There have been at least seven deaths in the US associated with Tesla's 'Autopilot' feature, usually involving drivers who believed they could give up control of the car entirely.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@German automaker Audi unveiled its sleek new concept car, Skysphere, which can shift size depending on the driving mode and has a retractable steering column.

In a release, the Volkswagen-owned car manufacturer boasted Skysphere was 'two vehicles in one': A 623-horsepower sports car that can go from zero to 60 mph in 4 seconds and a 'grand touring' (GT) auto that expands the cabin about 10 inches for a roomier ride.

In GT mode, the Skysphere is designed to be a Level 4 autonomous vehicle, according to Audi, 'meaning in certain defined road and traffic situations, the driver can delegate complete responsibility to the car and no longer has to intervene.'

The luxury auto's rear-mounted electric motor has a range of about 310 miles before it needs a charge.

'This is not rather a car, it's an experience device,' Audi CEO Henrik Wenders, said at the unveiling Tuesday at 2021 Monterey Car Week on Tuesday.

Scroll down for video

Audi's new Skysphere concept car can transform into two different modes: A sports car with a low clearance and a grand touring model with autonomous driving

In the autonomous GT mode, the Skysphere is a 17-foot coach offering more legroom and touch monitor surfaces that can display the Internet, video conferences, or streamed movies.

'The steering wheel and pedals move into an invisible area,' according to the release, 'the feeling of space in the concept car opens up completely new realms of possibility for such a sporty convertible.'

With the touch of a button, though, the car shifts into driver-operated 'Sports' mode, and pedals and a steering column emerge from under the dashboard.

The exterior length shrinks by about 10 inches, creating a 16.5-foot roadster with a reduced wheelbase and rear-wheel steering.

At the push of a button, the Skysphere changes into GT mode, with the steering wheel and pedals folding away

The two-door electric concept car, which has retractable cloth roof, can go about 310 miles before it needs charging

The vehicle's ground clearance is also lowered by nearly a half-inch to reduce aerodynamic drag.

The 'sphere' name is figurative, not literal—intended to symbolize how the 'the car was designed around the interior,' said ​​Gael Buzyn, head of Audi's design studio, at the unveiling.

CNBC described the Skysphere as 'sinister-looking' and combining 'Batmobile-like technologies and aggressive design characteristics with luxury amenities.'





However, Buzyn called it a 21st-century update to the Horch 853, a two-door cabriolet designed by Voll & Ruhrbeck in 1937.

Audi says Skysphere is a 21st-century update to the Horch 853 (pictured), a two-door cabriolet designed by Voll & Ruhrbeck in 1937

In its 'Sports' configuration, the Skysphere has 623 horsepower and can go from zero to 60 in about 4 seconds

Beneath its rear-hinged doors, LED-lit grille and retractable cloth roof, there are Art Deco touches inside.

'Crystal flourishes and backlit control panels accent the interior, with a small analog clock neatly positioned in the center console,' reported CNET's Road Show, 'a small bit of old-school in this incredibly forward-thinking car.'

Skysphere isn't the car for a big shopping trip but its boat tail rear houses a set of custom luggage under glass, while the long hood has space for a pair of custom golf bags.

Eucalyptus wood and vegan leather in the interior prove the design also has an eye toward sustainability.

Storage is limited in the two-seat luxury car but its boat tail rear houses a set of custom luggage under glass

The Skysphere is the first of a new line of Audi concept vehicles: The next, the Grandsphere, is slated to be unveiled on September 1, 2021, with the Urbansphere rolling out in the first half of 2022.

'These concept cars feature a new design that ultimately reimagines the interior, the passenger compartment, as the center of the vehicle and no longer subordinates the passenger experience to the requirements of the technology,' the company said in the release.

While concept cars are often never put into production, Buyzn said 'a lot of elements' of Skysphere will make it into real-world vehicles.

Audi has announced plans to roll out its final internal-combustion engine auto in 2026 and only produce electric vehicles starting in 2033.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Expressions of outrage are effectively encouraged on platforms like Facebook and Twitter because they are rewarded with 'likes' and 'shares', a study has concluded.

Researchers from Yale University used artificial intelligence to scan the tweets of more than 7,000 individuals and see how levels or moral outrage changed with time.

Their analysis revealed that the more positive responses people got for expressing outrage online, the more likely they were to post more indignant content in future.

They also found politically moderate individuals to be more susceptible to the social rewards of expressing outrage — showing how they may be radicalised over time.

These findings challenge the claims of social media firms that their platforms just provide a neutral venue for conversations that would otherwise happen elsewhere.

Expressions of outrage are effectively encouraged on platforms like Facebook and Twitter because they are rewarded with 'likes' and 'shares', a study has concluded

'Amplification of moral outrage is a clear consequence of social media's business model, which optimises for user engagement,' said paper author and psychologist Molly Crockett of Yale University.

'Given that moral outrage plays a crucial role in social and political change, we should be aware that tech companies, through the design of their platforms, have the ability to influence the success or failure of collective movements.

'Our data show that social media platforms do not merely reflect what is happening in society. Platforms create incentives that change how users react to political events over time.'

In their study, Professor Crockett and colleagues developed a machine-learning powered AI system that was capable of detecting moral outrage in Twitter postings.

Using this, they analysed a total of 12.7 million tweets from 7,331 individuals to determine if users tended to express more outrage over time.

The team found that those users who received more 'likes' and 'retweets' in response to their expressions of outrage were significantly more likely to express outrage in the subsequent post that they made.

To validate these findings, the researchers went on to perform two controlled behavioural experiments involving 240 volunteers who used a simulated, Twitter-like social media platform.

These tests also found that being rewarded for expressing outrage encouraged users to act more outraged over time.

Based on their original analysis, the team also found that outrage was more extensively expressed among members of politically extreme online networks — but that politically moderate users of social media were more influenced by the rewards.

'Our studies find that people with politically moderate friends and followers are more sensitive to social feedback that reinforces their outrage expressions,' explained Professor Crockett.

'This suggests a mechanism for how moderate groups can become politically radicalised over time — the rewards of social media create positive feedback loops that exacerbate outrage.'

'This is the first evidence that some people learn to express more outrage over time because they are rewarded by the basic design of social media,' said paper author and psychologist William Brady, also of Yale.

He added: 'Social media's incentives are changing the tone of our political conversations online.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Science Advances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

From a plastic bag tightly wrapped around a stag's mouth to a hedgehog entangled in a balloon, these shocking images reveal the distressing effects of litter on wildlife in London parks.

Pizza boxes, glass bottles, dog waste bags and PPE have all been proving hazardous to animals and birds during the various coronavirus lockdowns and beyond.

In the last year 1,982 tonnes of waste — the equivalent weight of 157 new London Routemaster buses — was collected from parks and green spaces across the capital.

Scroll down for video

Heartbreaking: From a plastic bag tightly wrapped around a stag's mouth (pictured) to a hedgehog entangled in a balloon, a series of shocking images have been released to highlight the distressing effects of litter on wildlife in London parks this year

This image captured in one of London's parks shows a pelican playing with a plastic bottle after it was discarded as litter

One of the distressing images shows a cormorant with a plastic beer-pack ring round its neck. In the last year 1,982 tonnes of waste — the equivalent weight of 157 new London buses — was collected from parks and green spaces across the capital

WHAT IS THE ROYAL PARKS CHARITY? The Royal Parks charity manages green spaces in London as well as the capital's eight historic parks. They are: Regent's Park Green Park St James's Park Richmond Park Kensington Gardens Hyde Park Greenwich Park Bushy Park The charity was created in March 2017 and officially launched in July that year to support and manage 5,000 acres of Royal parkland across London. It also manages Brompton Cemetery, Victoria Tower Gardens, Canning Green and Poet's Corner. The parks are owned by the Queen but the responsibility for them falls on the government, and the charity manages the green spaces on its behalf. Advertisement

Small animals and birds can climb inside plastic bags or get their heads stuck in bottles or cans and suffocate, experts warn, while wildlife attracted to left-over picnic scraps can accidentally eat plastic waste, clogging up their intestines and causing them pain or even death by starvation.

Now the Royal Parks charity, which manages London's eight historic parks and other green spaces in the capital, is highlighting the impact of discarded rubbish as part of its 'Help Nature Thrive' campaign this summer.

The campaign is asking visitors to 'leave no trace' and to take their litter home or put it in bins if there is space.

It is illegal to leave litter in the Royal Parks and, under the park regulations, offenders could be fined.

It costs The Royal Parks charity at least £1.3million a year to collect and dispose of rubbish discarded across the 5,000 acres of parkland in order to protect wildlife and keep the parks clean.

Sir David Attenborough said: 'In busy London, the Royal Parks are a haven for wildlife and there are simple things we can all do to protect it and help it thrive.

'Litter, and especially plastic, is a growing danger to wildlife worldwide, and we can all help by taking it home or using the bins.

'Please also leave the wildflowers and fungi, the acorns and deadwood where they are; all of them are vital parts of the parks' ecology. Remember to tread lightly and leave no trace of your visit.'

Parks staff are asking people not to picnic in, or pick flowers from, wildflower meadows, which provide food for pollinators such as bumblebees and butterflies.

Exercise equipment should also not be attached to trees because this can severely damage the trunk and branches, they warn.

Meanwhile, visitors have been urged to 'leave no trace' by not lighting BBQs, which are not allowed in the parks and can prove hazardous to wildlife, particularly when the grass is dry.

Tom Jarvis, director of parks at The Royal Parks, said: 'Sadly, we've all too often seen the devastating impact that dumping litter, leaving BBQs smouldering or treading into protected areas of the parks can have on the environment and wildlife.

'Taking that moment to decide to clear away a bottle or small piece of plastic rather than leaving it behind could make all the difference to the lives of the parks' wonderful wildlife.

This heartbreaking image shows several lizards killed by a BBQ fire. As part of the campaign, visitors have been urged to 'leave no trace' by not lighting BBQs, which are not allowed in the parks and can prove hazardous to wildlife

Small animals and birds can climb inside plastic bags or get their heads stuck in bottles or cans and suffocate, experts warn, while wildlife attracted to left-over picnic scraps can accidentally eat plastic waste, clogging up their intestines and causing them pain or even death by starvation

This image taken in Richmond park shows the damage down after someone lit a BBQ and the fire spread across the dry grass

Other pictures show a sofa jammed into a tree (left) and the remnants of a bonfire plus several beer cans left behind (right)

It costs The Royal Parks charity at least £1.3million a year to collect and dispose of rubbish discarded across the 5,000 acres of parkland in order to protect wildlife and keep the parks clean

'We work round the clock to keep the parks beautiful, safe places for everyone to enjoy, but keeping the parks litter-free comes with a huge price tag. This is time and money that could be better spent on preserving the natural environment.

'We want to call upon park visitors to ask them to "help wildlife thrive" and to "leave no trace" by caring for the parks.

'Please take your litter home – or use the bins as a last resort.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Summer has taken hold of the US, bringing hot temperatures that force people to lather up on deodorant, sun block and bug spray, but a new study finds these fragrant products are responsible for a large amount of smog hanging over cities.

New research, conducted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), found evaporative ingredients used in such fragrant goods are typically sourced from fossil fuels. With millions of people applying these products in close proximity, the particles greatly add to ozone pollution – even more than traffic.

The team collected air samples in New York City during 2018, which showed fragrant personal care products generated nearly half of the 78 percent of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that came from people.

CIRES scientist and study co-author Georgios Gkatzelis said he was initially skeptical that consumer products could play such a big role in ozone pollution.

'Seeing all those cars when biking to work in Boulder, Colorado convinced me they had to be the dominant VOC source,' Gkatzelis said in a statement.

'But after driving our NOAA van though New York City and watching our instrument displays, Matt [Coggon, the study's lead author] and I were often shouting at each other in amazement at what we were seeing.'

Scroll down for video

The team collected air samples in New York City during 2018, which showed fragrant personal care products generated nearly half of the 78 percent of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that came from people

The researcher's new study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, uses the New York City case to look at other urban areas, such as Los Angeles and Las Vegas.

Utilizing what they learned previously, as published earlier this year in Environmental Science & Technology, the team has been driving around cities in the US Southwest, conducting mobile laboratory and ground-site measurements to how much personal care products account for VOCs.

VOCs are a primary ingredient in the formation of ground-level ozone and are mostly found in human-made chemicals used in paints, pharmaceuticals and personal products.

They are emitted as gases, which can trigger health issues in people of all ages who suffer from lung diseases, such as asthma.

Coggon, a CIRES scientist working at NOAA, said in the statement: 'The big takeaway is how much VOC emissions from consumer products increase as urban population density increases, and how much these chemicals actually matter for producing ozone.'

He and his team previously found products with volatile chemicals - paints, cleaners and personal care products – were responsible for 78 percent of the Manhattan VOC budget, versus just 22 percent for transportation.

Similar measurements were also taken in Boulder, Colorado to see if a less dense city would have the same results. The team found that volatile consumer products were still responsible for 42 percent of human-caused VOCs, but traffic contributed the most with 58 percent

Similar measurements were also taken in Boulder, Colorado to see if a less dense city would have the same results – Boulder has a population of 329,316 and Manhattan's is 1.63 million.

The researchers found that volatile consumer products were still responsible for 42 percent of human-caused VOCs, but traffic contributed the most with 58 percent.

Coggon said the current generation of air quality models do not accurately simulate both the emissions and atmospheric chemistry of these consumer products and must be updated in order to capture their full impact on urban air quality.

In areas where ozone pollution is a problem, new strategies to control VOC sources may need to be devised, he said.

'We know now that these products are making ozone pollution worse,' Coggon explained. 'We can't control what the trees are emitting, but what we can do is look for ways to make these common everyday products less polluting.'

VOCs arise from both natural (biogenic) and man-made sources, whereas NOx is emitted by human activities

Another group of researchers published a study in February 2021 that detailed even more about the effects of air pollution, finding it can increase the risk of heart and lung disease.

A team of Harvard University researchers used the addresses of 63 million US adults aged 65 and older to assess their exposure to particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and ozone (O3).

'Long-term exposure to air pollution was associated with an increased risk of hospital admissions with cardiovascular and respiratory outcomes on an additive scale among the elderly population of the United States,' said the researchers, who are from the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health in Boston.

'Each unit increase in levels of particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, and ozone were associated with thousands of additional admissions each year.

'Air pollution should be considered as a risk factor for cardiovascular and respiratory disease.

'The risk persists even at levels below current national and international guidelines.'

Pollution exposure was then compared to whether they went on to experience a heart attack, stroke, atrial fibrillation and pneumonia.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some 4.5 billion years ago, a lump of molten rock began to form in the solar system that eventually evolved into present-day Earth.

David A. Roberts, an artist and computer scientist, created the evolutionary story of the planet in a mesmerizing video that puts billions of years of transitions into a four-minute simulation.

The epic tale starts with an extremely hot and crater filled protoplanet that is still forming into a stable world.

The video transitions to a flat view of Earth, showing plate tectonics beginning to form, approximately 3 billion years ago.

Moving along the evolutionary timeline, Robert shows viewers colorful features that represents water flowing on the planet and continents rising above the surface.

The end of the video shows bright lights shining from continents worldwide, indicating that the once red hot world is now inhabited by humans.

'Concluding the prelude on the early earth, the pace slows to a cycle between day and night, terrain becoming fixed as tectonic movements become imperceptible,' Roberts shared in a blog post.

'Soon the night reveals unprecedented patterns of light, as humanity proceeds to colonize the surface of the planet.'

Scroll down for videos

The epic tale starts with an extremely hot and crater filled protoplanet that is still forming into a stable world

Roberts created the captivating simulation in GLSL fragment shaders, which are part of the graphics programming language OpenGL.

The opening shot is of the crater-filled protoplanet, which was said to have hellish conditions like those presently on Venus.

The crust was unstable, and bombardment by asteroids and comets that gave way to extreme heat that lingered for millions of years.

Then, around two to three billion years ago, tectonic plates began to form one by one.

The video transitions to flat view of Earth, showing plate tectonics begging to form, which was about three billion years ago

Scientists suggest a plume of molten mantle may have risen up from deep inside the planet, pooling beneath the surface causing the hard crust, or lithosphere, above to weaken. This weak spot would have stretched over time as more material from the deep mantle pooled there and it would have created a tear that then grew to create the boundaries of the tectonic plates

A 2015 study suggests a vast plume of molten mantle may have risen up from deep inside the planet, pooling beneath the surface causing the hard crust, or lithosphere, above, to weaken.

This weak spot would have stretched over time as more material from the deep mantle pooled there and it would have created a tear that then grew to create the boundaries of the tectonic plates.

'The simulation randomly generates seed locations for plates, with an initial velocity, Roberts shared in a blog post.

'The plates grow in size over time with a simple generation model, which randomly selects neighboring points and adds them to a plate if the have not already been assigned to another plate.'

The next segment of the video shows the creation of flowing water and continents on a much more stable planet. Oceans began to form about 3.8 billion years, when gas in the atmosphere cooled and transformed into water that condensed into rain which filled the basins that we now know as our world ocean

The next segment of the video shows the creation of flowing water and continents on a much more stable planet.

Oceans began to form about 3.8 billion years ago, when gasses like hydrogen sulfide, methane in the atmosphere cooled and transformed into water that condensed into rain which filled the basins that we now know as the Earth's ocean, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

As the water drained into the great hollows in the Earth's surface, the primeval ocean came into existence, and the forces of gravity prevented the water from leaving the planet.

After the water was flowing on Earth, continents began to emerge around the same time, which scientists say was due to the onset of Earth's plate tectonics.

Robert also captured atmospheric climate patterns circling Earth that change the planet's terrain and seasons

Pangea, a supercontinent, existed about 300 million years ago and it began to break apart into pieces that formed the continents we know today.

Robert also captured atmospheric climate patterns circling Earth that change the planet's terrain and seasons.

'The climate influences the distribution of life on a planet,' Roberts shared.

'Rainfall patterns and temperature variations dictate rates of plant growth.

'As the seasons change, herbivores migrate to regions with enough vegetation to sustain them.

'And as they follow the vegetation, predators follow them.'

Toward the end of Roberts' simulation, the notions that humans have taken over the world become obvious

The once barren terrain was shining with bright lights signaling a technologically advanced civilization that uses fossil fuels which are polluting the planet

Toward the end of Roberts' simulation, the notions that humans have taken over the world become obvious.

The once barren terrain was shining with bright lights signaling a technologically advanced civilization that uses fossil fuels which are polluting the planet.

'The final section is intended to illustrate a possible future, though perhaps an improbable one,' Roberts told Motherboard.

'I wanted it to be dramatic, so it is an illustration of a particularly extreme outcome where literally all of the fossil fuels are burned, but I tried to keep the effects realistic otherwise, based on scientific articles I've read about such a hypothetical.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced the social media giant's next product release – the long-rumored Ray-Ban 'smart glasses.'

The reveal was made during an earnings call on Wednesday, where Zuckerberg also mentioned the hardware is 'part of a much larger goal to help build the metaverse.'

'It's a virtual environment. We can be present with people in digital spaces. And you can kind of think about this is an embodied Internet that you're inside of rather than just looking at,' Zuckerberg said as an explanation for what the metaverse is.

'And we believe that this is going to be the successor to the mobile Internet.'

The glasses are set to be a key player in creating this virtual world, but unlike previous devices – Google's failed Google Glass, for example – Facebook plans to utilize Ray-Ban's iconic form factor.

Scroll down for video

Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced the social media giant's next product release – the long-rumored Ray-Ban 'smart glasses.' The reveal was made during an earnings call this week, where Zuckerberg also mentioned the hardware is 'part of a much larger goal to help build the metaverse'

Google pioneered the smart glasses industry, releasing its Google Glass in 2014.

However, the device fell flat among consumers because its creators failed because the creators neglected to define and validate the users and what it was solving for them.

Google Glass did get a second life when it was adopted by doctors working in hospitals, allowing them to discover serious conditions in patients and conduct tasks while keeping their hands free.

Snapchat parent company Snap also released its own smart glasses in 2016 called Spectacles, but were never really picked up by consumers.

The glasses are set to be a key player in creating this virtual world, but unlike previous devices – Google's failed Google Glass – Facebook plans to utilize Ray-Ban's iconic form factor

Google was the pioneer in smart glasses, releasing its Google Glass in 2014. However, the device fell flat among consumers because its creators failed because the creators neglected to define and validate the users and what it was solving for them

Discussions about Facebook's Ray-Ban smart glasses first surfaced in 2019 when sources told CNBC that the firm was working with Ray-Ban owner EssilorLuxottica on AR eyewear nicknamed 'Orion.'

Although Zuckerberg did not mention the name of the upcoming eyewear, he confirmed the partnership with EssilorLuxottica during this week's call.

The smart glasses, along with Oculus' Quest VR headset, are Facebook's stepping stones to transition into a metaverse company, rather than being just a social media platform, Zuckerberg explained.

Snapchat has also released its own in 2016 called Spectacles, but the technology also failed

Consumers will be able to access the virtual world 'from all different devices and different levels of fidelity from apps on phones and PCs to immersive virtual and augmented reality devices,' said Zuckerberg.

'In many ways, the metaverse is the ultimate expression of social technology,' he added.

'Some of the experiences that I've dreamed of building since well before I started Facebook are only starting to become possible now.'

Zuckerberg told The Verge last week that he sees the metaverse coming together in the next five years.

Although the concept sounds like something out of science fiction, The New York Times recently detailed some areas where the 'metaverse' is already starting to happen, including Nintendo's popular Animal Crossing, or video games such as Roblox and Fortnite, all of which can be played on mobile devices and game consoles.

Discussions about Facebook's Ray-Ban smart glasses first surfaced in 2019 when sources told CNBC that the firm was working with Ray-Ban owner EssilorLuxottica on AR eyewear nicknamed 'Orion.' Pictured is an early prototype of Facebook's smart glasses

Zuckerberg's vision is that all of the aforementioned devices combine into a 'persistent, synchronous environment where we can be together,' resulting in a 'hybrid' between today's social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram and Twitter and an environment where you can 'be' present, even if you are not physically there.

Science fiction writer Neal Stephenson's Snow Crash, published in 1992, touches on the subject.

After a fictionalized worldwide economic collapse outlined in the book, the US has been broken up into different regions owned by powerful organizations and entrepreneurs who use their regions for various purposes, often nefarious in nature.

People spend much of their time in the 'Metaverse', a virtual multi-player world where people own virtual homes, visit 'bars' and go celebrity spotting. Stephenson is credited with creating the 'metaverse' phrase as a successor to the internet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The US Air Force is investigating 'directed energy' (DE) technologies they hope could turn beams of energy into a force field that could be used to destroy enemy missiles.

In a new report, titled 'Directed Energy Futures 2060,' DE is described as 'a focused beam of electro-magnetic energy that is used to enable or create military effects, when used in conjunction with other military systems, including kinetic weapons.'

This can include lasers, radio frequency devices, high power microwave, millimeter wave, and particle beams, all of which could create at least five military effects: 'deny, degrade, damage, destroy or deceive.'

The report suggests the force field would be created by trucks or satellites equipped with lasers or other systems, which could potentially be used to form a dome-like, invisible barrier over the entire nation.

Any enemy missile or aircraft attempting to penetrate that forcefield would be destroyed by coming into contact with those high-energy beams.

In a press release sent to The Drive, the Air Force Research Laboratory's (AFRL) Directed Energy Deputy Chief Scientist Jeremy Murray-Krezan adds that current directed energy technology is 'not quite Star Wars,' but adds the AFRL is 'getting close' -the Star Wars films feature glowing energy shields that protect troops, machines and spacecraft.

The US Air Force is developing 'directed energy' (DE) technologies to create a force field over military vehicles or even the entire US that would deflect incoming enemy weapons – and the innovation could be ready by 2060

'By 2060 we can predict that DE systems will become more effective, and this idea of a force field includes methods to destroy other threats too,' Murray-Krezan shared in the press release.

'Eventually there may be potential to achieve the penultimate goal of a Nuclear or ballistic missile umbrella.

'It's fun to think about what that might be in 2060, but we don't want to speculate too much.'

DailyMail.com has contacted AFRL for more information about its DE system.

The report suggests the force field would be created by trucks or satellites (concept image) equip with lasers or other systems, which would form a dome-like, invisible barrier over the entire nation

The report notes DE systems currently play important military roles worldwide, in that they are already being used in counter-air defense, target identification, tracking, counter intelligence search & reconnaissance (ISR) and electronic warfare (EW).

However, for the technology to produce a powerful force field by 2060, particle beams, lasers and other systems 'must propagate militarily relevant distances,' according to the report, suggesting they must be turbocharged to make them effective over longer distances.

'Electron beams are currently considered to be the most likely to find military application, albeit that today, due to technological limitations, propagation can only be achieved poorly in the earth atmosphere,' the report continues.

'Militarily relevant systems are currently limited to less than a few hundred meters of effective range.'

Once the technology is capable of reaching farther ranges, AFRL suggests placing the force field at altitudes above 30,000 feet 'where human exposure is less likely.'

Once the technology is capable of reaching farther ranges, AFRL suggests placing the force field at altitudes above 30,000 feet 'where human exposure is less likely. Pictured is a Multi-Mission High Energy Laser (MMHEL) prototype aboard a U.S. Army Stryker Infantry Carrier Vehicle

In a press release, the Air Force Research Laboratory's (AFRL) Directed Energy Deputy Chief Scientist Jeremy Murray-Krezan adds that current directed energy technology is 'not quite Star Wars,' but adds the AFRL is 'getting close

Not only does the report lay out how AFRL would develop the technology, but it also urges officials to get behind the innovation for the sake of the nation.

'It is not a certainty that U.S. servicemen and women will be members of the most technologically sophisticated military in future conflicts,' the report reads.

'DEWs are currently being rapidly developed and proliferated around the world, and DE is globally considered to be a gamechanging military technology.'

'Moreover, it is anticipated that peer-competitors, rogue nations, terrorist and criminal organizations will continue to possess similar DEWs that can degrade, disrupt, deny, damage, and even destroy equipment.

'Therefore, the U.S. should invest in technologies to at least maintain parity in DE areas, which includes counter measures to shore up known vulnerabilities in case of either a high-end conflict or a 9/11, terrorist style, DE attack.'

United States officials are behind in the DE movement, as other nations are already using similar technologies in the battlefield - and Israel is one of them.

The country has been using its Iron Dome since 2011, which is an anti-missile defense system that uses radar technology and interceptors (missiles) to track and destroy incoming rockets.

Iron Dome is constantly on the lookout for incoming rockets and when one is detected, the information is processed and sent to the missile battery system.

Information about the incoming rocket’s speed and trajectory is used to direct an interceptor towards it.

ITs interceptor locks on to the incoming rocket and explodes as it gets very near to it, destroying the rocket in mid-air.

The Iron Dome can detect rockets from 2.4 miles to 43.4 miles away.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A website that uses machine-learning to quickly turn innocuous photos of famous and everyday women into realistic deepfake nudes is racking up howls of outrage—and millions of page views.

The year-old site has garnered more than 38 million hits since the start of 2021, The Huffington Post reported, with five million in June alone, according to BBC News.

HuffPo declined to name the website, but the BBC identified it as Deepsukebe, with both outlets referring to language on the site claiming its mission is to 'make all men's dreams come true.'

On its now-suspended Twitter page, Deepsukebe referred to itself as an 'AI-leveraged nudifier.'

It claims it doesn't save the fake photos it generates, but an 'incentive program' rewards posters who share links of their deepfakes.

Users who get enough people to click on them can 'nudify' more pictures faster. (Users can also pay a monthly fee in cryptocurrency to bypass the limit of one picture every two hours.)

'It's unknown who is behind the site, which is riddled with spelling and syntax errors, just as it's unclear where they are based,' wrote HuffPost tech reporter Jesselyn Cook.

Scroll down for video

DeepSukebe invites users to post photos to be 'nudified,' with a realistic depiction of the subject wearing no clothes. Media reports indicate the site garnered more than 5 million hits in one month

'Last month, the U.S. was by far the site's leading source of traffic, followed by Thailand, Taiwan, Germany and China. Now-deleted Medium posts demonstrating how to use the site featured before-and-after pictures of Asian women exclusively.'

After HuffPost contacted its host provider, IP Volume Inc., the DeepSukebe site went down briefly on Monday.

Scamalytics, an anti-cyberfraud company used by many online dating sites, ranked IP Volume Inc. 'a potentially high​ fraud risk ISP.'

'They operate 14,643 IP addresses, almost all of which are running servers, anonymizing VPNs, and public proxies, the report stated.

While critics worry about deepfakes impact on celebrities and politicians, more than 90 percent of deefakes are of women being co-opted into pornographic imagery



'We apply a risk score of 43/100 to IP Volume inc, meaning that of the web traffic where we have visibility, approximately 43% is suspected to be potentially fraudulent.'

In less than 24 hours, Deepsukebe was back online with a new ISP provider.

The company's logo is a star with an eye in the middle, with the slogan, "We seek truth, we strip fakes, we deny lies."

A statement on the Deepsukebe website claims the nudifier is a 'state of the art AI model' developed with millions of data points and years of research, including months of AI model training.

'DeepSukebe was born by burning huge time & money,' it reads in halting English.

But Roy Azoulay, founder and CEO of Serelay, which verifies video and photo assets, told DailyMail.com the tech used to nudify images the way Deepsukene does is readily available in 'published papers and open-source libraries.'

It's because of that easy availability, that 'there's very little that can be done in the way of protection or keeping this technology out of the hands of malicious users,' Azoulay said.

He said solutions would have to come from lawmakers or moderation by sites like Google, Facebook, Twitter and Telegram.

Facebook blocked the site's URL from its platform after being made aware of its nature, HuffPost reported, and Twitter has suspended its account.

After Huffington Post reported on the site, Deepsukebe's URL was blocked from Facebook and its Twitter page was suspended

Initially, deepfake porn videos primarily focused on female celebrities, as there would have to be a significant amount of available footage of the person to insert them seamlessly into a scene.

But now, deepfake porn stills can be made with just a single image of any female. (Pictures of men are just given female sex organs.)

While fake celebrity nudes are common, 'the vast majority of people using these [tools] want to target people they know,' Deepfake expert Henry Ajde told HuffPo.

And the crisis is growing exponentially: ​​Deepfake research firm Sensity AI reports the number of deepfake videos has doubled every six months since 2018.

Significant attention has been given to deepfakes of politicians and celebrities, but the vast majority target women, according to Sensity AI: Since December 2018, between 90 and 95 percent of deepfakes are fake nudes of women.

'This is a violence-against-women issue,' Adam Dodge, the founder of EndTAB, a nonprofit that educates people about technology-enabled abuse, told Technology Review in February.

'What a perfect tool for somebody seeking to exert power and control over a victim.'

As is often the case, the law is trailing technology: legislators in the US and Great Britain are working to ban non-consensual deepfake porn, but many of their colleagues don't understand the technology or argue proposed regulations are overly broad or unenforceable.

'Black Widow' star Scarlett Johansson says going after perpetrators of deepfake porn is a 'useless pursuit'

'The UK currently has no laws specifically targeting deepfakes and there is no 'deepfake intellectual property right' that could be invoked in a dispute,'according to an opinion piece in the March edition of The National Law Review.

'Similarly, the UK does not have a specific law protecting a person's 'image' or 'personality'. This means that the subject of a deepfake needs to rely on a hotchpotch of rights that are neither sufficient nor adequate to protect the individual in this situation.'

In the US, the 2019 Deepfakes Accountability Act, which addressed both political deepfakes and nonconsensual porn, failed to make it out of committee.

Actress Scarlett Johansson, the target of deepfake porn watched millions of times, argues there's little point going after perpetrators.

'I think it's a useless pursuit, legally, mostly because the internet is a vast wormhole of darkness that eats itself,' she told The Washington Post in 2018.

'​​Obviously, if a person has more resources, they may employ various forces to build a bigger wall around their digital identity,' she added.

'But nothing can stop someone from cutting and pasting my image or anyone else's onto a different body and making it look as eerily realistic as desired. There are basically no rules on the internet because it is an abyss that remains virtually lawless.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A bright orange, shape-shifting whalefish was spotted by scientists at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute off the California coast – a remarkable find since only 18 have ever been seen during the researchers' more than three decades of exploration.

The female recently observed offshore of Monterey Bay, was seen 'half-swimming, half-gliding' 6,000 feet below the surface, while the researchers were using a remote submarine to study the depths of the Pacific Ocean.

'Whalefish have rarely been seen alive in the deep, so many mysteries remain regarding these remarkable fish,' the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute tweeted.

'With each deep-sea dive, we uncover more mysteries and solve others.'

The whalefish, first observed in 1895, was a long-held mystery to the scientific community due to the different body shapes it takes on during its lifetime.

A bright orange, shape-shifting whalefish was spotted by scientists using a remote submarine to study the depths of the Pacific Ocean

The first whalefish was described by two Smithsonian scientists who observed it at least 3,280 feet below the ocean's surface.

The researchers named the discovered 'whalefish' due to its whale-like appearance, but this was only the start of the mystery of the shape-shifting creature.

The fish begin what is called 'tapetail,' which is the larva stage where the scale-less fish has a long, streamer-like tail and upturned mouth.

The whalefish goes through an astonishing transformation when it reaches adulthood, but the outcome depends on its gender.

The whalefish, first observed in 1895, was a long-held mystery to the scientific community due to the different body shapes it takes on during its lifetime. Pictures is a close up of the female spotted offshore of California

For male tapetails, scales form along its body, their jawbone disappears and a large nose appears at the front, Live Science reports.

The inside of their body also experiences a complete transformation: its esophagus and stomach disappear and are replaced by sex organs and a gigantic liver.

Instead of eating prey, the male whalefish swallows crustaceans alive and whole, and keeps them in its body to generate fuel.

The female whalefish, on the other hand, endures fewer changes than its male counterpart.

It develops a body similar to a baleen whale, which is what Smithsonian scientists may have observed more than a century ago, and is much larger than a male.

The different transformations is what led scientists on a wild goose chase for more than a century – teams found the fish at different stages and assumed it was a completely new specimen

The female recently observed offshore of Monterey Bay, California was seen 'half-swimming, half-gliding' 6,000 feet below the surface

The female comes in a range of stunning oranges and reds, while males are just a orangish hue.

The different transformations is what led scientists on a wild goose chase for more than a century – teams found the fish at different stages and assumed it was a completely new specimen.

It wasn't until 2003, however, when Japanese scientists analyzed the DNA of tapetails and whalefish, which revealed these two very different looking fishes were almost identical in one specific gene.

An international team of marine biologists took a closer look at specimens of tapetails, bignose fish (male) and whalefish (female) in museum collections.

'This is an incredibly exciting finding,' Smithsonian ichthyologist Dave Johnson said in a statement.

'The answer to the puzzle was right under our noses all along—in the specimens. We just needed to study them more carefully.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The blonde coats seen on dogs like golden retrievers originated in an extinct canid that split off from grey wolves more than two million years ago, a study has found.

It had long been assumed that thousands of years of selective breeding at our hands was behind the diversity of dog coat patterns — but this is seemingly not the case.

To give their coats colour and patterns, dogs and wolves use a combination of two types of pigment — eumelanin, which is black, and pheomelanin, which is yellow.

Production of the latter is controlled by the so-called agouti signalling protein, or ASIP for short, which is in turn regulated by the gene that makes this protein.

Researchers led from the University of California, Davis found that variations in two locations of the ASIP gene are responsible for creating five distinct coat patterns.

These are 'dominant yellow', 'shaded yellow', 'agouti' (alternate dark and light bands), 'black saddle' and 'black back'.

The blonde coats seen on dogs like golden retrievers (pictured) originated in an extinct canid that split off from grey wolves more than two million years ago, a study has found

THE FIVE PATTERNS According to Professor Bannasch and her colleagues, dogs' coats come in five distinct patterns. These are: Dominant yellow

Shaded yellow

Agouti (dark and light bands)

Black saddle

Black back According to the team, dominant yellow evolved more than 2 million years ago — long before dogs were domesticated. Advertisement

The study was conducted by geneticist Danika Bannasch of the University of California, Davis and her colleagues.

'While we think about all this variation in coat colour among dogs, some of it happened long before "dogs" were dogs,' Professor Bannasch said.

'The genetics turn out to be a lot more interesting because they tell us something about canid evolution.'

In their study, Professor Bannasch and colleagues analysed the genomes of 77 dogs and wolves with known colour patterns.

Their analysis revealed that no single genetic mutation could account for the five different coat patterns seen on dogs.

Instead, variations in two different locations on the ASIP gene are involved - one related to belly hair and the other to the cycle of hair growth.

Furthermore, the team found that the genetic combination for the 'dominant yellow' pattern, which is shared with arctic white wolves, was much older than expected, dating back from a canid that split from grey wolves some two million years ago.

For comparison, dogs were not domesticated until some 30,000 years ago, the researchers explained.

'We were initially surprised to discover that white wolves and yellow dogs have an almost identical ASIP DNA configuration,' explained paper author Chris Kaelin of the HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology in Huntsville, Alabama.

'But we were even more surprised when it turned out that a specific DNA configuration is more than 2 million years old.'

This, he explained, is 'prior to the emergence of modern wolves as a species.'

Researchers led from the University of California, Davis found that variations in two locations of the ASIP gene are responsible for creating five distinct coat patterns. These are 'dominant yellow', 'shaded yellow', 'agouti' (that is, with alternate dark and light bands), 'black saddle' and 'black back'. Pictured: examples of different dogs with the five coat patterns

The researchers believe that the ancient canid lived in an arctic environment during a period of glaciations 1.5–2 million years ago, where lighter coat colours would have been advantageous and naturally selected for.

This, they added, would explain how the coat pattern persisted into the population that eventually gave rise to modern dogs and wolves.

In contrast, the black back pattern was identified in a 9,500-year-old sample, showing that the rich variation in coat colours was present in the earliest of our canine companions.

'While we think about all this variation in coat colour among dogs, some of it happened long before "dogs" were dogs,' Professor Bannasch said. 'The genetics turn out to be a lot more interesting because they tell us something about canid evolution.' Pictured a DNA strand

While this study is complete, Professor Bannasch is still working with dogs, with her ongoing work focussing on identifying the molecular causes underlying inherited diseases that impact both canines as well as horses.

The geneticist is also an avid raiser and trainer of dogs and counts among her pets both a 'black back' and a 'dominant yellow' patterned Danish–Swedish farmdog.

All she needs now, she joked, is the other three coat patterns for a 'full set'.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Nature Ecology & Evolution.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than three million children in England attend schools in areas with toxic air pollution, a new study has warned, while 99 per cent of Londoners live on streets with dangerous air quality.

The analysis also found that children in the capital are four times more likely to go to school in areas with pollution levels that exceed World Health Organization (WHO) limits than youngsters in the rest of England.

Studies have previously found that poor air quality stunts the growth of children's lungs and worsens chronic illnesses, such as asthma, lung and heart disease.

Scroll down for video

Concerning: More than three million children in England attend schools in areas with toxic air pollution, a new study has warned (stock image)

Air pollution increases the risk of several conditions, such as heart attack, stroke and diabetes

WHAT IS PARTICULATE MATTER (PM)? Particulate matter refers to tiny parts of solids or liquid materials in the air. Some are visible, such as dust, whereas others cannot be seen by the naked eye. Materials such as metals, microplastics, soil and chemicals can be in particulate matter. Particulate matter (or PM) is described in micrometres. The two main ones mentioned in reports and studies are PM10 (less than 10 micrometres) and PM2.5 (less than 2.5 micrometres). Scientists measure the rate of particulates in the air by cubic metre. Particulate matter is sent into the air by a number of processes including burning fossil fuels, driving cars and steel making. Particulates are dangerous because those less than 10 micrometres in diameter can get deep into your lungs, or even pass into your bloodstream. Particulates are found in higher concentrations in urban areas, particularly along main roads. Advertisement

The new analysis, carried out by the mayor of London's office, found that 3.1 million English children are attending schools in areas exceeding WHO limits for PM2.5.

PM2.5 is a form of particulate air pollution considered to be particularly dangerous because the particles are small enough to transfer from the lungs into the bloodstream and affect many other parts of the body.

It is mostly produced by vehicles and industry, burning coal, wood stoves, forest fires, smokestacks and other human processes that involve burning.

A landmark study of the impact of London's air pollution found children growing up in polluted parts of the capital had significantly smaller lung volume than their peers in the rest of England.

Children in the most polluted areas had on average 5 per cent less lung capacity, according to researchers from three universities who monitored pupils from 28 schools.

Research also showed that those exposed to the worst air pollution are more likely to be deprived Londoners and from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities.

Mayor of London Sadiq Khan said: 'I'm doing everything in my power to stop young Londoners breathing air so filthy that it damages their lungs and causes thousands of premature deaths every year.

'This is why I'm expanding the Ultra Low Emission Zone later this year.

'I want to make sure all of London meets the World Health Organization limits for particulate matter. But I can't do it alone and I want to work with Government to achieve this goal.'

He added: 'We can't sleep walk from the health crisis of Covid back into complacency over the major impact of toxic air on everyone's health.'

Harriet Edwards, senior policy manager for air quality at Asthma UK and the British Lung Foundation, said: 'Each year, the capital's poor air quality contributes to around 1,000 emergency hospital admissions for children with asthma and other respiratory conditions.

'Children should feel safe when they are at school, but instead they are being exposed to dangerous levels of air pollution which could be damaging their lungs and future prospects.'

In June it was revealed that tougher air pollution laws will be brought in after the death of a girl from an asthma attack caused by traffic fumes – but they won't take effect until next year at the earliest.

Last year a coroner ruled that air pollution contributed to the death of Ella Adoo-Kissi-Debrah (pictured), nine, who lived 80ft from the South Circular road in Lewisham, south-east London

A Southwark coroner ruled in December that air pollution – including illegal levels of nitrogen dioxide – contributed to the 2013 death of Ella Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, nine, who lived 80ft from the South Circular road in Lewisham, south-east London.

As part of the ruling, he asked the Government to explain how it would prevent future deaths – leading to the pledge from ministers to set aside an extra £6million for local authorities to improve air quality and raise public awareness.

The coroner's report, following a second inquest which ruled that air pollution contributed to Ella's death, called for legally binding goals for dangerous pollutant particulate matter (PM2.5) that are in line with WHO guidelines.

These suggest keeping an average concentration of PM2.5 under 10 micrograms per cubic metre of air (µg/m3), to prevent increased deaths.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Another day, another snake on the loose.

A West African banded cobra was reported missing by its owner this week, the Grand Prairie Police Department announced on Wednesday.

Officials are asking those who spot the highly venomous and poisonous snake, which is considered aggressive, to not approach it.

'Residents who live in the area and see any type of snake believed to be the missing cobra, are asked to call 911 immediately,' the Police Department wrote in a press release.

'Do not approach or attempt to capture the venomous snake.'

The snake has been missing from its enclosure since Tuesday, August 3, around 5 pm.

A West African banded cobra (similar to the one above) has been reported missing by its owner in Texas

The snake went missing in Grand Prairie on August 3 around 5 pm. Officials ask residents who spot the venomous snake to not approach it

The police department said it is partnering with the local fire department to alert area hospitals of the missing snake and initiate a protocol to treat someone if they are bitten by the snake.

The owner, who has not been identified, was permitted to have the snake by the State of Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.

However, they told NBC 5 it's possible the cobra may have been caught inside the walls of his house and died or died from the Texas heat.

'I did make a mistake and I feel very sorry for the community,' the owner told NBC 5.

'I left to go get food for my other animals down the street and I came back, and the cage door was open by an inch,' he said. 'She must have found a way to open it up.'

Although recently new to science, according to a study published in 2018, a bite from the West African Banded Cobra is considered lethal to humans.

Although recently new to science, a bite from the West African Banded Cobra is considered lethal to humans. These snakes can reach up to 9 feet in length, but bites are considered rare

It is considered a subspecies of the forest cobra, one of the most venomous snakes in the world, according to Animal Diversity Web.

According to the African Snake Bite Institute, these snakes can reach up to 9 feet in length, but bites from this group are considered rare.

In June, a spitting zebra cobra escaped from its owner's house in Raleigh, North Carolina, sparking fear in the neighborhood.

However, that snake was eventually captured by Raleigh's police department after they used glue traps to 'locate and safely remove' the reptile.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A group of New York University researchers say they have been banned from Facebook for looking into political ad transparency and misinformation on the ubiquitous social network.

Members of the NYU Tandon School of Engineering, who call themselves Cybersecurity for Democracy (CFD) created Ad Observer, a browser plug-in that automatically scrapes data on what political ads users are being shown and why.

On its website, the group insists the plug-in does not collect personal information, like names, Facebook friends, or how users interacted with the ads.

Claiming their work was non-partisan, they say it's 'important to democracy to be able to check who is trying to influence the public and how.'

But in a blog post Tuesday, Facebook project management director Mike Clark said the personal accounts of three CFD members were suspended because the Ad Observer plug-in used 'unauthorized means to access and collect data from Facebook, in violation of our terms of service'.

Scroll down for video

Members of NYU's engineering school created a plug-in that scrapes political ads, like this for Marjorie Taylor Greene, from Facebook users' feeds to show visitors when the ad ran, its reach, how much it cost and who paid for it

'Today, we disabled the accounts, apps, Pages and platform access associated with NYU's Ad Observatory Project and its operators,' Clark wrote in a post titled 'Research cannot be the justification for compromising people's privacy.'

CFD says the plug-in was developed to examine the origin, reach and cost of political ads on Facebook.

Using its search capabilities, site visitors can see ads commissioned by politicians like Marjorie Taylor Greene, Jon Ossoff and Donald Trump, even if they never made it into their personal Facebook feed.

Once you choose to download the extension 'it copies the ads you see on Facebook and YouTube, so anyone can see them in our public database,' the CFD explained on its website.

NYU academics who created a plug-in that scraps info from Facebook users about political ads say the social media site has suspended their personal accounts. But the members of Cybersecurity for America says their Ad Observer extension helps improve ad transparency by showing people how they're targeted by politicians

Facebook acknowledged in blocked the accounts of at least three members of Cybersecurity for Democracy because their Ad Observer plug-in violated its terms of service

The plug in scrapes the text of the ad, along with any images or links and the advertiser's name, and provides information on when the ad was shown, how much it cost, and information Facebook provides about how and why it was targeted to the user.

Cybersecurity for Democracy member Laura Edelson (pictured) said she was one of the NYU researchers suspended from Facebook for launching a plug-in that scrapes accounts for political ads. She said the social media giant 'is silencing us because our work often calls attention to problems on its platform'

'If you want, you can enter basic demographic information about yourself in the tool to help improve our understanding of why advertisers targeted you. However, we'll never ask for information that could identify you.'

In a tweet Tuesday evening, CFD's Laura Edelson confirmed Facebook had suspended her personal account and 'the accounts of several people associated with Cybersecurity for Democracy.'

'This has the effect of cutting off our access to Facebook's Ad Library data, as well as Crowdtangle,' Edelson, a PhD engineering student at NYU, said.

'Facebook has also effectively cut off access to more than two dozen other researchers and journalists who get access to Facebook data through our project, including our work measuring vaccine misinformation with the Virality Project and many other partners who rely on our data.'

In a May blog post, CFD argued that while Facebook does share some information on ad sources and has pledged to fight disinformation, it doesn't offer full transparency or fact-check political ads.

Edelson said their project had uncovered 'systemic flaws in the Facebook Ad Library, that identified misinformation in political ads, 'including many sowing distrust in our election system.'

In a series of tweets, Edelson criticized Facebook for silencing their research. Worst of all, Facebook is using user privacy, a core belief that we have always put first in our work, as a pretext for doing this,"

Clark said the social media giant had tried 'for months' to work with NYU to provide the team 'the precise access they've asked for in a privacy protected way.'

'The researchers gathered data by creating a browser extension that was programmed to evade our detection systems and scrape data such as usernames, ads, links to user profiles and 'Why am I seeing this ad?' information, some of which is not publicly-viewable on Facebook,' he said.

Claiming also claimed the extension collected data about Facebook users who didn't install it and archived it offline.

Edelson countered the company 'is silencing us because our work often calls attention to problems on its platform'.

'Worst of all, Facebook is using user privacy, a core belief that we have always put first in our work, as a pretext for doing this,' she said in a statement shared with Mail Online. 'If this episode demonstrates anything it's that Facebook should not have veto power over who is allowed to study them.'

CFA says it doesn't gather personal information of people who download the Ad Observer extension, but Facebook claims the plug-in collects data about users who didn't install it and archived it offline.

Facebook says its tried since summer 2020 to work with NYU and the members of Cybersecurity for Democracy. Pictured: A political ad for Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene that appears in the Ad Observatory database, with details on when it ran, who paid for it, and why the user was targeted

Clark says Facebook first told Edelson's team the Ad Observer extension was in violation last summer, even before it launched.

'In October, we sent them a formal letter notifying them of the violation of our Terms of Service and granted them 45 days to comply with our request to stop scraping data from our website.'

The deadline ended on November 30, well after Election Day, but Clark said Facebook kept trying to work with Edelson and her colleagues on privacy concerns 'and offered them ways to obtain data that did not violate our terms.'

The company offered the three access to its US 2020 Elections ad targeting data, which it says is more comprehensive than their plug-in, 'but they declined.'

'While the Ad Observatory project may be well-intentioned, the ongoing and continued violations of protections against scraping cannot be ignored and should be remediated,' Clark added..

'Today's action doesn't change our commitment to providing more transparency around ads on Facebook or our ongoing collaborations with academia,' he said.

'We'll continue to provide ways for responsible researchers to conduct studies that are in the public interest while protecting the security of our platform and the privacy of people who use it. '

An ad for Georgia Sen. Jon Ossoff from the Ad Observor site

Cybersecurity for Democracy co-founder Damon McCoy, a professor of computer science and engineering at NYU, called Facebook's ban 'disgraceful.'

'Facebook is attempting to squash legitimate research that is informing the public about disinformation on their platform,' McCoy said in a statement shared with Mail Online.

'With its platform awash in vaccine disinformation and partisan campaigns to manipulate the public, Facebook should be welcoming independent research, not shutting it down.'

In advance of the 2020 elections, Facebook launched an theoretically objective oversight board to mediate thorny questions about who should be allowed on the site and what they could share.

In response critics formed a rival organization, 'The Real Facebook Oversight Board,' (RFOB), of which Edelson, is a member.

In a statement on Wednesday, the RFOB claimed that, 'Like the authoritarian governments they court, Facebook is cracking down on its critics.'

'As Facebook expands its stranglehold on the academic community studying the impacts of digital technology and social media, this is sure to have a chilling effect on other academic institutions,' it added. 'We can't allow it. The NYU Ad Observatory researchers are performing a critical service for democracy that must be protected.'

Insisting the information the Ad Observatory gathered was already public, the board called on the site to restore the members' accounts immediately.

It's not entirely clear who besides Edelson was banned: Facebook cited three members of Cybersecurity for Democracy, though the group's website lists seven main members.

Facebook did not respond to a request for comment about whether the suspensions were temporary or permanent, or if the banned members had the option to appeal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From under-eye bags to headaches, many of us suffer the side effects if we've not had a decent night's sleep.

Now, a study has revealed that a poor night's snooze may also increase the risk of you firing off grumping work emails in the morning.

The research shows tiredness is linked to 'cyber incivility' - rudeness or impoliteness in emails or text messages.

Scroll down for video

A study has revealed that a poor night's snooze may increase the risk of you firing off grumping work emails in the morning (stock image)

RECOMMENDED SLEEP DURATION - Preschool (3-5 years): 10-13 hours - School-age (6-13 years): 9-11 hours - Teen (14-17 years): 8-10 hours - Young adult (18-25) 7-9 hours - Adult (26-64): 7-9 hours - Older adult (65 or more) 7-8 hours Source: Sleep Foundation Advertisement

In the study, researchers from West Texas A&M University worked with 131 full time working adults, who completed surveys twice a day for two weeks, measuring sleep duration, tiredness and cyber incivility.

Questionaires were sent at 7am each workday, which included how much sleep they had the night before.

At 4pm each workday, another questionnaire was sent which measured how tired they were and if they had sent off rude or impolite emails that day.

A total of 945 morning surveys and 843 afternoon surveys were completed.

Examples of cyber incivility measures were 'ignored a request to schedule a meeting that someone made through email' and 'made demeaning or derogatory remarks through email'.

The study found that, after a shorter night of sleep, employees had more self regulatory fatigue and therefore engaged in higher levels of cyber incivility at work, especially if they scored low in agreeableness.

Sleep duration was negatively associated with self-regulatory fatigue, which was positively related to cyber incivility.

Agreeableness moderated the relationship between sleep duration and self-regulatory fatigue, as well as the indirect effect of sleep duration on cyber incivility.

Study lead author Trevor Watkins said: 'Our findings build on previous research that suggests that self-control is restored while people sleep, to the extent that after a poor night's sleep, people lose their self-restraint and are more likely to engage in cyber incivility at work the next day.'

Sleep duration was negatively associated with self-regulatory fatigue, which was positively related to cyber incivility (stock image)

The researchers said that as information technology has advanced, employees have shifted an increasing amount of their interactions with each other to electronic means such as email, discussion boards, video conferencing, and text messages.

They said: 'This has provided many benefits, including efficient and timely communication across vast distances.

'However, in addition to these benefits, electronic communication also presents the possibility of cyber incivility. Cyber incivility is defined as 'communicative behaviour exhibited in computer mediated interactions that violate workplace norms of mutual respect.

'Thus, contemporary workplaces which lean heavily on electronic communication expose employees to cyber incivility.'

Previous research has focussed on incivility in the workplace in general.

The authors wrote: 'Although this research was useful in making important initial steps in the incivility literature, this approach of focusing on individual differences and organisational contexts promotes the implicit assumption that workplace incivility and by extension workplace cyber incivility is determined solely by workplace phenomena.

'We maintain employees' ability to resist this temptation and suppress urges to engage in workplace cyber incivility should be determined in part by their ability to exert self-control.

'Existing research indicates that self-control is restored while people sleep, such that after short nights of sleep people suffer a lack of self-control.

'Accordingly, we propose that sleep at home on a given night will influence cyber incivility the next day, with self-regulatory fatigue as the causal mechanism. In other words, sleep is an important causal determinant of cyber incivility that originates from outside of the work context.'

The findings are published in the journal Sleep Health.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Malaria kills nearly 500,000 people globally every year, but scientists have now figured out a way to use CRISPR gene-editing technology to make female mosquitoes infertile, described as a 'game-changer' for ending the deadly disease.

Researchers from Imperial College London, Genomics Genetics and Biology, and the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine were able to use a gene drive for the first time to not only show that blocking female reproduction worked in a lab setting, but natural-like setting as well.

The researchers targeted the mosquito species Anopheles gambiae, which is responsible for the majority of malaria transmissions in sub-Saharan Africa.

The gene-drives targets the gene known as 'doublesex' in these mosquitoes.

Scientists used CRISPR gene-editing technology to make female mosquitoes infertile. Researchers used a gene drive for the first time in a natural-like setting

The gene-drives targets the gene known as 'doublesex' in these mosquitoes

In the new study, in the real-world setting, there was a 'complete population suppression within 560 days,' with 95 percent of the simulations reaching a state of no more offspring in 399 and 329 days 'for the low and high gene-drive frequency releases, respectively.'

During a previous study conducted in 2018, the researchers put nearly 600 mosquitoes into a small cage and once the gene drive was used, no more offspring were produced within 7 to 11 generations.

'The challenges facing malaria elimination have intensified in recent years, due in part to the spread of insecticide resistance and large gaps in funding for parts of sub-Saharan Africa,' said the study's co-author, Imperial College London and Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute scientist Dr Drew Hammond in a statement.

There was a 'complete population suppression within 560 days. 95 percent of the simulations saw no more offspring after 399 and 329 days using low and high gene-drive frequency releases

'Sadly, researchers estimate that COVID-19 related disruptions may have doubled mortality from malaria in 2020, threatening a setback of several decades.

'Gene drive is a self-sustaining and fast acting technology that can work alongside existing tools such as bed nets, insecticides and vaccines – and could be a game-changer in bringing about malaria elimination.'

In an interview with the Guardian, Hammond said gene drive technology 'could be a game-changer in bringing about malaria elimination.'

Although there are more than 3,500 mosquito species around the world, only a small fraction of them carry malaria.

In 2019, there were 229 million cases of malaria and 409,000 deaths, with children under 5 the most vulnerable, according to the World Health Organization.

Last month, the WHO declared China malaria-free, after it successfully implemented its 1-3-7 strategy. In the 1940s, China routinely reported 30 million cases annually.

The life-cycle of the parasite, Plasmodium, that causes malaria

The researchers hope that a mosquito with the gene drive could be released in the future, and eventually spread the tweak to female mosquitoes and lead to infertility of the species.

'The gene-drive element spreads rapidly through the populations, fully suppresses the population within one year and without selecting for resistance to the gene drive,' the researchers wrote in the study's abstract.

The new cages were designed to produce 'complex mating and oviposition behaviors' such as egg laying that were not available in the previous small cages.

The temperature and the humidity inside the cage were controlled and the researchers put natural landmarks and specialized lighting designed to simulate sunrise and sunset to induce swarming.

Each of the large cages showed 'a rapid spread of the gene drive and complete population collapse within one year,' the statement added.

There is concern over gene drives, as mutations can become resistant to technology, but the experts said this strain is the first and only one that did not show any signs of resistance.

'Our large-cage studies provide a greater selection pressure for resistance to the gene drive to arise, as there may be additional 'fitness costs' when the mosquitoes exhibit natural mating and egg-laying behaviors that are impacted in ways we couldn't predict from small-cage studies,' co-lead authors of the study, Dr Tania Persampieri and Paola Pollegioni, said.

'However, no modifications arose that could render the mosquito doublesex gene resistant to our gene drive, suggesting our modification driving female infertility is robust.'

The findings were published earlier this week in Nature Communications.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The world's richest man Jeff Bezos described his journey to space as the 'perfect mission' and a 'tiny little step' in his masterplan to build a road to space where he thinks the world's major industries will be able to operate in the future to save planet Earth.

Bezos and the crew of Blue Origin took off from their base at Van Horn, Texas, at 9.12am EST on Tuesday, the 52nd anniversary of the moon landing, 12 minutes behind schedule. They ascended for four minutes before the New Shepard rocket booster separated from their capsule, leaving them floating in zero gravity for four minutes.

Bezos and Mark floated about, pretended to swim and tossed skittles in each other's mouths while in the air, they said afterwards. They had written 'Hi' and 'Mom' on their palms and put their hands together for their mother Jacklyn while in space.

They were joined by 18-year-old Oliver Daemen - the word's first paying customer to buy his flight - and 82-year-old Wally Funk, who passed NASA's space program in the 1960s but never made it to space because the women's flight was canceled.

They then returned to earth with parachutes controlling the pace of their descent, touching down in the Texas desert at 9.22am EST, 10 minutes and 20 seconds after liftoff.

The 10 minute journey cost $5.5billion - $550million per minute. Bezos, who stepped down as Amazon CEO earlier this year and will now split his time between Blue Origin and his environmental charity, said at a press conference after the flight: 'For every amazon customer, you guys paid for all this so thank you from the bottom of my heart.'

The comment that is likely to sting critics who say the commercial space race between Bezos and fellow billionaires Elon Musk and Richard Branson is elitist and unfair when so many others will never be able to afford the experience.

Bezos' Blue Origin crew traveled 66 miles above the surface of Earth - 13 miles higher than Virgin Galactic billionaire Branson. He tweeted his congratulations to the team afterwards.

Bezos says his goal is to move the world's major industries that are damaging the planet to space in order to preserve Earth's environment. He wants to develop space travel like aviation pioneers did with commercial airliners, and says eventually, it'll become more affordable.

On Tuesday he revealed he has already sold $100million in tickets for future flights. Blue Origin will perform another two commercial flights this year using the same capsule but different boosters.

Scroll down for video

Jeff Bezos and his brother Mark hold up their palms to spell out 'Hi Mom' while floating in space in their capsule on Tuesday during their 10 minute space flight, the first commercial flight in history

Bezos floats in space after being launched 66 miles into space on Tuesday morning by the New Shepard rocket

Jeff Bezos tosses a skittle into the mouth of 18-year-odl Oliver Daemen as the Blue Origin crew float in space on Tuesday

The New Shepard launched at 9.12am EST on Tuesday, 12 minutes after schedule. At 9.16am EST - four minutes later - the booster separated from the capsule, where the four crew members floated in zero gravity for four minutes before starting their descent. First, three parachutes deployed then another three before the capsule touched back down in the Texas desert at 9.22am EST

At the press conference, Bezos also announced that he had created a new philanthropic award of $100million and the first winner is CNN anchor Van Jones, who has a prison reform non-profit.

It's unclear how he will use the money but Jones, speaking at the event, said: 'Sometimes dreams come true. Sometimes dreams come true.'

'The headlines around the world should be anything is possible if you believe. Lauren and Jeff don't do nothing small - they just don't do it. They dream big, they love big, they bet big. You bet on me and I appreciate it.'

Wally Funk joined the pair along with Dutch teen Oliver Daemen, the first person ever to have paid to travel to space. Funk, at the press conference afterwards, thanked Bezos for finally getting her to space.

'I want to thank you sweetheart- you made it possible for me. I've been waiting a long time to finally get up there... I loved it. I want to go again!'

Bezos gifted Wally Funk the goggles that Amelia Earhart wore to fly solo over the Atlantic Ocean. He gave his mother a feather that he wore on a necklace on the flight.

Oliver's private equity boss father was the runner-up in an auction for the seat, the winner of which withdrew after dropping $28million for his fare.

Bezos said he was grateful for the love of his family and girlfriend and that it was 'sweet' to hug them when he returned to Earth.

The rocket launched at 9.12am EST, 12 minutes behind schedule

The Blue Shepard launches the capsule carrying Jeff Bezos and three other passengers into space on Tuesday, 25 seconds after lift off

This is the moment the booster separated from the capsule at 283,595 ft - 53 miles above ground

This is the moment the rocket booster returned to ground after successfully launching the capsule and separating from it

The capsule descended without parachutes for a brief moment on Tuesday before the first three were deployed

Jeff Bezos and the rest of crew Blue Origin return to earth in their capsule as it descends with three blue parachutes slowing its pace on Tuesday

The capsule had to be 'charged' before the astronauts could exit. This involved sending a large static charge to 'ground it'. It touched down 10 minutes and 19 seconds after lift-off

Lauren Sanchez kisses Jeff Bezos on the cheek after he touches down in Van Horn, Texas, after returning from space on New Shepard on Tuesday morning with Wally Funk, far right, Oliver Daemen, far left, and his brother Mark, not shown. Mark's wife is shown approaching Wally in white to celebrate the successful space flight

Dutch teenager Oliver Daemen became the youngest person to ever travel to space after the Blue Origin flight. He is shown celebrating with Sanchez, Bezos' girlfriend, after they touched down

Daemen hugged his parents after landing before being given a hug by Bezos' girlfriend Sanchez (shown)

Jeff Bezos hugs his mother Jacklyn after returning to earth with his crew mates on Tuesday morning

Bezos and Funk after the successful flight on Tuesday. She later thanked him for taking her on the mission, which she'd waited 60 years for

Oliver Daemen, Mark Bezos, Jeff Bezos and Wally Funk appear at a press conference on Tuesday morning after returning from space

Bezos girlfriend Lauren Sanchez watched on lovingly as he spoke at the press conference after the flight. She wore a diamond encrusted Rolex, an enormous diamond necklace, diamond earrings and a large diamond ring on her engagement finger, though she and Bezos have never announced that they are engaged

Mark Bezos, the Amazon founder's younger brother, receives his pin after the successful space flight on Tuesday

Wally Funk, 82, is the oldest person to have ever gone to space and Oliver Daemen, 18, is the youngest to have gone to space

Bezos announced a new philanthropic award for $100million - the first recipient of which is CNN's Van Jones who runs a non profit called Dream Corps which is a 'bi-partisan' organization whose core values include prison reform and racial justice

Van Jones was at Van Horn to accept the award. He said Bezos called him at the weekend to tell him he was impressed with his work. Chef Jose Andres was also given $100million to fund his anti-hunger projects

Bezos revealed he owned Amelia Earhart's goggles from her 1932 solo flight across the Atlantic. It's unclear when he bought them or how much he paid for them. He gave them to Wally Funk as a gift. She thanked him for inviting her on the flight, saying: ''I want to thank you sweetheart- you made it possible for me. I've been waiting a long time to finally get up there... I loved it. I want to go again!'

The 57-year-old Amazon founder also gave his mother a feather that he wore on a necklace on the flight. She is shown, right, with his sister Christina

The Amazon billionaire was almost euphoric after returning to Earth with his crewmates. He described it as a 'perfect mission'

Team Blue Origin after returning from their mission to space on Tuesday morning in Van Horn, Texas

The crew experienced weightlessness for about four minutes, before falling back to Earth to land in Texas.

While the crew were enjoying their time in space, the booster returned to the landing pad for use on a future flight.

During the weightlessness time you could clearly hear Wally Funk shouting 'it is dark up here', followed by a status check call from each of the four, with Jeff Bezos having to remind Wally and Oliver to confirm.

Sir Richard Branson tweeted his congratulations to the fellow astronauts after they landed back on Earth.

He said: 'Well done @blueorigin , @jeffbezos , Mark, Wally and Oliver. Impressive! Very best to all the crew from me and all the team at @virgingalactic.'

Jeff Bezos' girlfriend Lauren Sanchez planted a kiss on her billionaire beau just moments after he safely returned to earth this morning following his successful space launch.

The 51-year-old was spotted hugging and kissing her Amazon founder boyfriend soon after he emerged from the capsule in Texas on Tuesday morning.

Bezos could also be seen hugging his sister Christine immediately after stepping from the capsule before then turning to his girlfriend.

Bezos' billionaire space race rivals Elon Musk and Richard Branson wished him well before the mission. Branson congratulated him

The crew walked out to the rocket about 45 minutes before launch, stepping into a capsule that has 10 times the volume of the one Alan Shepard used to become the first American in space.

Wally Funk says she is looking forward to all aspects of the flight, from liftoff, flight and being able to look out the window at Earth. She plans to take a photo of herself with the American flag up to space.

She was one of the first up the stairs to the capsule, excited to finally get to space 62 years after undergoing the same training as the NASA Mercury 7 astronauts in 1959.

'Good Morning astronauts and welcome aboard the RSS First Steps', was the first message heard from Capcom once all four astronauts were strapped into their five point harnesses in the capsule.

This was followed by a communications check, with Jeff Bezos having to remind Wally Funk to 'press the button' in order to confirm her comms were working properly.

Christina Bezos sent a message of support to her brothers as they prepare for their trip to the edge of space, reminding them of time in the car pretending to be the crew of the Enterprise.

'We are so excited for this monumental launch, Jeff this is something you've dreamed off your whole life,' she said, adding that Mark is an inspiration.

She said Jeff would play the part of Captain Kirk during a long car ride as children, Mark taking on the role of, Sulu, and 'I would be and Uhura, as we would battle Klingons while firing torpedoes.

'Mark fire those torpedoes if ordered to do so,' she said, adding they should 'hurry up and get your asses back so I can give you hug, god speed New Shepard.'

'Good Morning astronauts and welcome aboard the RSS First Steps', was the first message heard from Capcom onoce all four astronauts were strapped into their five point harnesses in the capsule

The crew walked out to the rocket about 45 minutes before launch, stepping into a capsule that has 10 times the volume of the one Alan Shepard used to become the first American in space

Wally Funk says she is looking forward to all aspects of the flight, from liftoff, flight and being able to look out the window at Earth. She plans to take a photo of herself with the American flag up to space

Funk was one of the first up the stairs to the capsule, excited to finally get to space 62 years after undergoing the same training as the NASA Mercury 7 astronauts in 1959

The Amazon founder will fly from Texas with his brother Mark, Dutch teenager Oliver Daemen, who will become the youngest person in space, and former NASA trainee Wally Funk, 82, who will become the oldest

The crewe were driven out to the rocket ahead of launch, after mission control gave the 'go for load' command

They will go up for about four minutes until the capsule separates from the rocket, float for four minutes, then falls to Earth due to the force of gravity, coming down with the help of parachutes in the Texas desert.

Funk, an aviation pioneer, was part of the 1960s Women in Space training scheme, until it was shut down during the Cold War. Despite besting some of the Mercury 7 astronaut scores, she never got to go to space.

She will become the oldest person in space; Daemen, at 18, the youngest; and Bezos, with his $203 billion fortune, the richest person to leave the Earth when they launch from Launch Site One in Van Horn, Texas.

Before going to space the 'astronauts' were put through two days of training, including lessons on what to experience, as well as experiencing the entire launch in a 'capsule simulator'.

The New Shepard rocket was rolled out on to the launch pad this morning at Launch Site One in West Texas ready for its historic first crew flight

The crew of four will move into the capsule before take-off. Blue Origin is live streaming the launch from 12:30 BST, with the launch scheduled for 14:00 BST

Blue Origin confirmed sales are now open for tickets, with the next few flights already booked up by people who bid in the auction for a seat on this flight. They didn't confirm the cost but it is rumoured to be $200,000

While only four astronauts are going up on this test flight, future launches will use all six seats, with a 'crew member seven' who acts as 'capcom' staying connected with the crew throughout the flight

Jeff Bezos will fly into space today with his brother Mark (left), Dutch 18-year-old physics student Oliver Daemen - whose father paid for the flight - and former NASA trainee Wally Funk, 82, who was passed over in the 1960s because she was a woman. She will become the oldest person ever to go to space; Daemen the youngest; and Bezos the richest

During training they learn the system, get to know the team and learn procedures such as ingress and egress, but spend most of their time inside the capsule so they can focus on the real experience when they go to space.

As well as large windows, inside the capsule they have special reclining seats that 'absorb the G-force' as the rocket takes them up to three times the pressure felt on the ground, before floating in space.

Sir Richard Branson, who became the first 'founder-billionaire' to fly to space in his own firm's launch vehicle on July 11, replied to a video shared by Bezos on Instagram to say 'Best wishes @JeffBezos and the @BlueOrigin crew from all of us at @VirginGalactic.'

Elon Musk, founder of competitor SpaceX, wished the Blue Origin team 'best of luck' ono Twitter. Musk has purchased a ticket to go to space with Richard Branson's Virgin Galactic.

Jeff Bezos has been sharing the build up to the big event on his Instagram account, with more details coming from the Blue Origin twitter profile.

The 57-year-old posted account footage of last minute preparations including a tour of the inside of the capsule, where all appeared relaxed and smiling. Funk looked out the window and beamed.

Bezos handed out food for the gathered media at the launch site of his New Shepard space rocket on Monday afternoon, while joking with a reporter who asked if it was 'his last meal'.

'Did somebody say last meal?' Bezos responded as he set out the food on a table. 'I don't think you have to put it that way!' he joked, saying 'let's talk about it in a different way!', to laughter from the crowd.

Those inside the capsule will be able to recline and take in the view. They do not have to assist in any way with the mission: it is piloted from the Earth, and they are passengers

Blue Origin has provided illustrations of what the capsule will look like in space

The menu consisted of chicken thighs, mac 'n' cheese and black-eyed peas, and is said to be a Bezos 'family favorite'.

The 'last meal' quip came just hours before the billionaire is due to blast off in his Blue Origin rocket for an 11-minute rocket-powered excursion to the edge of space in the first crewed flight of his rocket ship.

The four will travel in a capsule with the biggest windows flown into space, offering stunning views of the Earth, according to the space tourism company.

It is going to be a competitive market, with some estimates suggesting it could be worth up to seven trillion dollars in future, with tickets costing up to $250,000 initially for a single seat to the edge of space.

Earlier, Bezos agreed with critics who have described space flights such as his as simply 'joyrides for the wealthy.'

The menu consisted of chicken thighs, mac 'n' cheese and black-eyed peas which is apparently a 'family favorite'

Bezos gave an interview to CNN on Monday where he addressed critics who argue the billionaire should instead be using his money to focus on problems on Earth instead of blasting off into space at a cost of tens of millions of dollars.

TEAM BLUE ORIGIN: MARK BEZOS, AVIATION HERO WALLY FUNK AND A DUTCH TEEN WHOSE DAD PAID FOR HIS FLIGHT Oliver Daemen, Wally Funk, Jeff Bezos and Mark Bezos Mark Bezos, 53 The Amazon founder's brother has a private equity firm HighPost Capital and is also a volunteer firefighter. Bezos said they are the 'closets of friends' and have spent their whole lives talking about going to space. The pair also have a sister, Christina, who is not taking part in the mission. He said he was 'awestruck' to have been asked by his brother to join him on the flight. 'What a remarkable opportunity, not only to have this adventure, but to be able to do it with my best friend. Wally Funk, 82 Funk was one of 13 women who passed NASA's astronaut training program in the 1960s. Then a 21-year-old pilot, she was the youngest of the 13 women who passed the same rigorous testing as the Mercury Seven male astronauts in NASA's program that first sent Americans into space between 1961 and 1963, but were denied the chance to become astronauts themselves because of their gender. Funk was one of 13 women who passed NASA's astronaut training program in the 1960s. At 82, she will be the oldest person to go to space on Tuesday. She said in an interview about the mission: 'I didn't think I'd ever get to go up!' She was also the first female flight instructor at a U.S. military base and the first woman to become an air safety investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board. Oliver Daemen, 18 Oliver Daemen, 18 Daemen is the son of financier Joes Daemen, the founder and CEO of Dutch private equity firm Somerset Capital Partners, who paid for the seat and chose to let fly Oliver instead. 'I am super excited to go to space,' Oliver said in a video message. 'I've been dreaming about this all my life and I will become the youngest astronaut ever because I'm 18 years old. I am super excited to experience zero G. Oliver will be the 'first paying customer' Blue Origin said in an email, flying to the edge of space, alongside Bezos, his brother Mark, aviation pioneer Mary Wallace 'Wally' Funk and two other passengers. The company said Oliver 'has been fascinated by space, the Moon and rockets since he was four'. A Blue Origin spokesperson told DailyMail.com they are not disclosing the price paid for Oliver's seat, but confirmed he participated in the auction. Advertisement

'There have been a chorus of critics saying that these flights to space are just joyrides for the wealthy and that you should be spending your time and your money and energy trying to solve problems here on Earth. So what do you say to those critics?' asked CNN’s Rachel Crane.

'Well, I say they're largely right. We have to do both,' Bezos responded.

'We have lots of problems here and now on Earth and we need to work on those, and we always need to look to the future. We've always done that as a species, as a civilization. We have to do both.'

Bezos explained that Blue Origin's mission was to practice 'operational space travel' so that it might become comparable to commercial airline travel.

'If we can do that then we'll be building a road to space for the next generations to do amazing things there, and those amazing things will solve problems here on Earth…So, the real answer is, yes, we have to do both.'

The mission comes just over a week after fellow billionaire Richard Branson successfully launched into space aboard a winged rocket ship developed by his company Virgin Galactic.

To prepare for the historic launch, on the 52nd anniversary of the first moon landing, they had to test every aspect of the rocket 'far beyond operational testing' to ensure it is both robust and safe.

All four of the crew to travel aboard New Shepherd are at Launch Site One ready for the trip, with Bezos warmly welcoming Funk and Daemen to the facility in a video uploaded to his Instagram account.

The rocket has been successfully flown 15 times, but this will be the first with humans on board.

On Monday, Funk - who was the youngest woman to pass NASA's training in the 1960s aged 21 - said: 'I had a lot of training those weeks before in 1960... not only in America but I went to Russia and trained with the cosmonauts.

'Not until about two or three weeks after my training was I told that I did better than the men.

'I feel like I am 24! It's great. I love being here!'

She said she was most looking forward to doing 'summersaults in space.'

She will beat the record set by John Glenn, who took a space shuttle flight in 1998 at the age of 77.

Bezos joked: 'We've been training with Wally here in west Texas and I can tell you, she is still doing better than the men. She can outrun all of us.'

Daemen's private equity boss father paid for his flight.

It's unclear how much but he was the runner-up in an auction in which the winner paid $28million for the seat, before having to drop out.

He said on Monday morning: 'I don't think I've realized yet how special it is to become the youngest person ever. It's such an opportunity - also to be an example for other kids that it is able now.

'Blue Origin has made the opportunity for more and more people to go. It's so amazing, I still can't believe it.'

Mark Bezos said he was 'thrilled' to have been asked by his brother to join him on the flight.

'Jeff and I have gone on a lot of adventures together. He's my best friend. I was just, over the moon so to speak. It was remarkable.

'I'm so excited to be there to support him, and representing our mom, dad and sister Christina. It is just an absolute thrill.'

Bezos – who has an estimated personal worth of $207 billion – is one of a number of billionaire entrepreneurs fueling what has been dubbed the 'new space race', with each pumping billions of dollars into their respective start-ups with the aim of creating cheap, commercialized space travel.

He founded Blue Origin in September 2000 and is currently funding the company to the tune of about $1 billion per year through the sale of his shares in Amazon.

His launch into space is the culmination of more than two decades of work for Bezos.

Blue Origin named the New Shepard program after astronaut Alan Shepard, who was the first American to fly into space 60 years ago.

The flight will mark a huge milestone in the mission to send paying customers to the edge of space, and continue a rapid expansion of the space tourism industry.

'Ever since I was five years old, I've dreamed of traveling to space,' Bezos posted to his Instagram account, adding that he want to go on the flight because 'it's a thing I've wanted to do all my life. It's an adventure. It's a big deal for me.'

His brother added: 'I wasn't even expecting him to say that he was going on the first flight.

'And then when he asked me to go along, I was just awestruck. What a remarkable opportunity, not only to have this adventure, but to be able to do it with my best friend.'

The sign outside of Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin operations in West Texas on July 19, 2021 in Van Horn, Texas

The gate to Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin operations in West Texas on July 19, 2021 in Van Horn, Texas. Mr. Bezos is scheduled to lift off from the launch pad at 8am local time (9am EST/2pm GMT) on Tuesday in Blue Origin's sub-orbital New Shepard rocket in the first human spaceflight for his company

Oliver took the seat on the July 20 flight after the anonymous winning bidder decided to fly on a future New Shepard mission instead, due to undisclosed scheduling conflicts, Blue Origin said.

'I am super excited to go to space,' Oliver said in a video message.

'I've been dreaming about this all my life and I will become the youngest astronaut ever because I'm 18 years old.

'I am super excited to experience zero G.'

The auction gift has allowed Club for the Future to donate $1 million each to 19 non-profit organizations, which are all supporting living and working in space.

It also, for many, marks the correction of a historic wrong.

Mercury 13, or the First Lady Astronaut Trainees, were a group of 13 women pilots who were qualified to go to space, but were excluded due to their gender.

Funk was among them.

While in training, Funk scored higher than Glenn - who was one of the Mercury 7 astronauts chosen to fly on Project Mercury in the 1960s - on some astronaut testing.

In a video for Blue Origin, Funk recalled: 'They told me that I had done better and completed the work faster than any of the guys.

So I got ahold of NASA, four times. I said I want to become an astronaut, but nobody would take me. I didn't think that I would ever get to go up.'

She said people told her 'Wally, you're a girl, you can't do that. I said guess what, doesn't matter what you are, you can still do it if you want to do it.'

The launch site for Blue Origin's first human flight will be in a remote location north of Van Horn, Texas, where the firm has launched New Shepard for previous flights.

On Monday, Blue Origin received approval Monday from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to carry humans on the New Shepard rocket into space on July 20.

New Shepard, which stands 60 feet tall, was specifically designed for Blue Origin's space tourism venture and has successfully completed 15 test launches, with the latest on April 14.

The capsule that rides atop New Shepard seats six passengers and is equipped with reclining seats.

Each of the seats has a window that are said to the 'the largest to fly into space.'

Cameras line the interior, allowing travelers to share their memories that are truly out of this world.

Jeff Bezos (left) welcomes auction runner-up Oliver Daemen (centre) to Launch Centre One in Texas ahead of the trip

Wally Funk (left) takes a hat from Jeff Bezos (centre) as they prepare for the first crewed Blue Origin flight on July 20

The crew of four will fly above 80 miles to pass the Karman line aboard the Blue Origin New Shepard rocket from Texas

The crew is set to travel 62 miles above Earth's surface, where they will experience weightlessness due to the zero gravity and see the curve of the planet with the darkness of space as the backdrop.

It is not clear how long they will spend just beyond the edge of space, but Blue Origin has stated in the past that paying customers will spend as much as 10 minutes in zero gravity before returning to Earth.

The billionaire space race is fueled by optimism that space travel will become mainstream as nascent technology is proven and costs fall, fueling what UBS estimates could be a $3 billion annual tourism market by 2030.

Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic, as well as Musk's SpaceX, have also discussed using their rockets to link far-flung global cities.

UBS says that long-haul travel market could be worth more than $20 billion, though several barriers such as air-safety certification could derail the plans.

Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas said: 'Putting the world's richest man and one of the most recognized figures in business into space is a massive advertisement for space as a domain for exploration, industrialization and investment.'

Branson is shown floating in zero gravity on board Unity after reaching the edge of space above Spaceport America near Truth or Consequences, New Mexico, U.S. July 11, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It may seem like your dog will eat anything that falls on the floor, but research indicates canines only became omnivores about 8,000 years ago.

For millennia after that, they still couldn't produce much amylase, an enzyme that turns starch into sugars – essential for digesting the complex carbohydrates in vegetables, grains and fruits.

Now, scientists have discovered that gut microbes in prehistoric pooches helped them digest starches long before their DNA adapted to enable them to produce more amylase.

A team led by Simone Rampelli, a biochemist at the University of Bologna, sequenced DNA in 13 fossilized pieces of dog poop, known as coprolites found on the site of a Bronze Age agricultural community in Solarolo, Italy, about 80 miles from Bologna.

The coprolites, which dated from between 3,450 and 3,600 years ago, contained both animal and vegetable matter—traces of wheat, grape and sheep DNA—but they also indicated the dogs had fewer copies of the amylase gene compared to modern-day canines.

The researchers also found 56 microbe species, some of which are common in the guts of modern-day dogs.

Some of these microbes produce their own amylase, almost double what's in contemporary dog's guts, and would have metabolized the starch for them.

Scroll down for video

Dogs became omnivorous thousands of years before their bodies produced enzymes that could digest starch. A new report indicates they had abundant gut microbes to do the trick before their DNA adapted to produce more enzymes naturally

The scientists say their findings suggest Neolithic dogs responded to the transition to a starch-rich diet 'by expanding microbial functionalities devoted to starch catabolism, thus compensating for delayed host response,' according to the study published in iScience.

Without those microbes, the dogs would have excreted starchy vegetables and grains undigested, without absorbing their nutrients.

'The Solarolo dogs were probably already fully domesticated, eating some plant-based foods that humans left to them, but also livestock carcasses when possible,' Rampelli told New Scientist. 'This constituted a new 'gut condition' that selected different microbes.'

Exactly when dogs became domesticated is a subject of great debate, with some experts putting the date at 14,000 years ago, and others as far back as 40,000 years.

A chart indicating how Bronze Age dogs in Italy were able to enjoy an omnivorous diet without naturally producing enough amylase enzyme to digest starch

WHEN WERE DOGS DOMESTICATED? A genetic analysis of the world's oldest known dog remains suggests canines were domesticated by humans living in Eurasia between 20,000 to 40,000 years ago. 'The process of dog domestication would have been a very complex process, involving a number of generations where signature dog traits evolved gradually,' Krishna Veeramah, a professor of evolutionary science at Stony Brook University, told MailOnline. 'The current hypothesis is that the domestication of dogs likely arose passively, with a population of wolves somewhere in the world living on the outskirts of hunter-gatherer camps feeding off refuse created by the humans.' Wolves that were less aggressive would have been more successful in this strategy, Veeramah said. Eventually they would have developed a mutually beneficial relationship with humans, 'evolving into the dogs we see today.' Advertisement

Once they started hanging around humans, though, the canine diet shifted greatly—from almost exclusively carnivorous to more omnivorous.

A report from April suggests some Bronze Age canines ate almost no meat.

Researchers examining proteins in the bones of dogs at an archaeological site near Barcelona found many were fed a diet of cereal grains, like millet.

That menu may have been a necessity, since their human companions had little meat themselves.

Dogs were often put to work herding livestock or protecting the homestead and a carb-heavy diet ensured they had the energy for their demanding jobs.

A team led by Silvia Albizuri, a zooarchaeologist at the University of Barcelona, studied the remains of 36 dogs found in Can Roqueta, a site first inhabited in the Stone Age.

The canines lived in the area between 1,300 and 550 BC and were buried in pits, suggesting they were cared for by humans.

Albizuri's team studied carbon and nitrogen levels in the dogs' bones, which can give clues to their diet.

Ten of the dogs were omnivorous, and nine had a diet high in meat.

The remaining 17 pups showed almost no signs of eating animal flesh—in fact, some had carbon and nitrogen levels barely distinguishable from the cattle they guarded.

Over generations, a vegetarian diet would have led the dogs to evolve jaws that were weaker than their wolf ancestors—as well as smaller, flatter teeth to better chew plants and grains.

But the shift wasn't universal, according to a Albizur's research, published in Journal of World Prehistory: In colder climates, where hunter-gatherer societies persisted, dogs still lived primarily on meat.

'In today's dog breeds, there are significant genetic differences related to starch metabolism,' Albizuri said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Instagram has launched a series of new tools to tackle abuse from trolls — including one that allows users to automatically hide comments from anyone who doesn't follow them.

The aim of the Limits feature is to stop waves of abuse from accounts who 'pile on in the moment', the Facebook-owned service said.

It comes amid ongoing scrutiny of social media and how it handles abuse following the racist attacks on England footballers Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Bukayo Saka after the Euro 2020 final.

Scroll down for video

Instagram has launched new tools to tackle abuse from trolls — including Limits (pictured) that allows users to automatically hide comments from anyone who doesn't follow them

Police arrest 11 people over racist social media abuse of England stars after Euro 2020 defeat As of August 5, police had arrested 11 people aged between 18 and 63 in connection with the racist social media abuse of England footballers Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Bukayo Saka after the Euro 2020 final. They include three people from London, two from Christchurch, Dorset, one from Runcorn, Cheshire, one from Sale, Greater Manchester, one from Folkestone, Kent, one from Reading, one from Shrewsbury and one from Worcester. The UK Football Policing Unit said that of the 207 social media posts deemed to be criminal, 34 came from accounts in Britain and 123 in other countries. Yesterday Twitter said the UK was 'by far' the main origin of the 'abhorrent racist abuse' on its platform after England's penalty shootout defeat against Italy. The social media network said 99 per cent of the accounts it suspended over the abuse were not anonymous, although it did not disclose how many accounts were suspended. Advertisement

Limits will let people automatically hide comments and direct message requests from other users who do not already follow, or have only recently followed them.

It is being rolled out to all Instagram users globally from today and will enable people to decide for how long they would like to hide comments and message requests from non-followers and those who only started following them in the last week.

Instagram has strengthened the in-app warnings it shows to those who attempt to post abuse – warning users they face having their account removed if they continue to send abusive comments.

It is also launching its Hidden Words filter tool to all users globally, allowing people to filter out words, phrases and emojis they don't want to see.

The company said the aim of the new features was to give people more control while ensuring they feel safe when using the platform.

Instagram's public policy manager for Europe, Tom Gault, said that the Limits tool was being introduced to combat incidents like the Euro 2020 final, when public figures see a sudden spike in targeted comments and message requests in the wake of an event.

'Our own research, as well as feedback from public figures, shows that a lot of the negativity directed at high-profile people comes from those who don't follow them or who recently followed them,' he said.

'And this is the kind of behaviour that we saw after the Euros final.'

Yesterday Twitter said the UK was 'by far' the main origin of the 'abhorrent racist abuse' on its platform after England's penalty shootout defeat against Italy in the Euro 2020 final.

The social media network said 99 per cent of the accounts it suspended over the abuse were not anonymous, although it did not disclose how many accounts were suspended.

As of last week, police had arrested 11 people aged between 18 and 63 in connection with the abuse directed at Marcus Rashford, Bukayo Saka and Jadon Sancho after they missed penalties in England's loss.

The UK Football Policing Unit said that of the 207 social media posts deemed to be criminal, 34 came from accounts in Britain and 123 in other countries.

The aim of the Limits feature is to stop waves of abuse from accounts who 'pile on in the moment', Instagram said. It is also launching its Hidden Words filter tool (pictured) to all users globally, allowing people to filter out words, phrases and emojis they don't want to see

It comes amid ongoing scrutiny of social media and how it handles abuse following the racist attacks on England footballers Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Bukayo Saka (pictured with manager Gareth Southgate) after the Euro 2020 final

Middle-aged MUMS 'are the most likely to troll social media influencers' Middle-aged mums are the most likely to troll social media influencers, an Instagram star told MPs last month. Em Sheldon, who documents her lifestyle to more than 117,000 Instagram followers, warned the relentless daily attacks could lead to more depression and suicide. The 27-year-old said how there were people in a 'dark space of the internet' who saw it as their 'sole mission to ruin our lives'. Many become obsessed and write abuse about them all day, she said, becoming particularly 'angry' when they started earning money through adverts. But the 'saddest part about it' was that it predominantly came from 'grown women' with children and decent jobs. Ms Sheldon was speaking to the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee, who are looking into the growth of 'influencer culture' and its effect on society. Advertisement

Mr Gault said Instagram had also found that some celebrities and public figures did not want to cut off comments entirely because they often received a lot of messages of support.

'Often the incident that caused the spike in comments is one which also leads to huge volumes of supportive messages from longer-term followers. People still want to hear from that community as well,' he said.

'So, that is why we genuinely think this feature will be so effective, it means you can hear from your returning followers, while limiting contact with people who might be coming to your account to target you.'

The tool could also be expanded in the future to automatically prompt users to turn on Limits when the platform detects a user may be experiencing a spike in comments and direct messages.

Writing in a blog post announcing the new features, Instagram boss Adam Mosseri said: 'We don't allow hate speech or bullying on Instagram, and we remove it whenever we find it.

'We also want to protect people from having to experience this abuse in the first place, which is why we're constantly listening to feedback from experts and our community, and developing new features to give people more control over their experience on Instagram, and help protect them from abuse.

'We hope these new features will better protect people from seeing abusive content, whether it's racist, sexist, homophobic or any other type of abuse.

'We know there's more to do, including improving our systems to find and remove abusive content more quickly, and holding those who post it accountable.

'We also know that, while we're committed to doing everything we can to fight hate on our platform, these problems are bigger than us.

'We will continue to invest in organisations focused on racial justice and equity, and look forward to further partnership with industry, governments and NGOs to educate and help root out hate. This work remains unfinished, and we'll continue to share updates on our progress.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

US President Joe Biden has sounded the alarm on climate change following the release of a bombshell United Nations report dubbed a 'a code red for humanity.'

'We can't wait to tackle the climate crisis. The signs are unmistakable. The science is undeniable. And the cost of inaction keeps mounting,' Biden said in a statement Monday, as he urged the US and world nations to swiftly limit greenhouses gasses.

The Earth is likely to warm by 2.7F within the next 20 years — a decade earlier than previously expected — and heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense, according to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment.

On Monday, 234 experts warned in the report that the US is headed for disaster. Flooding, deadly fires and heat waves will not only become the norm but will intensify in a warming world, warns the 3,949-page assessment.

Humans have already heated the planet by roughly 2 degrees Fahrenheit (1.1C), since the 19th century, largely by burning coal, oil and gas for energy – with the US being one of the world's top producers.

Scientists had expected temperatures to rise by 2.7F (1.5C) above pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 but now believe it will happen between this year and 2040.

The consequences are already ripping across the nation: This summer alone, blistering heat waves have killed more than 3,000 American and wildfires have cost at least $8 billion, while flooding has caused nearly $75 billion in damages in the past 30 years.

California is currently being scorched by its second worst wildfire on record, the Dixie Fire. The fire, which is just 21 percent contained, has destroyed 404 buildings, plus 185 minor structures and damaged 38 additional structures - altogether it has burned around 463,477.

Linda Mearns, a senior climate scientist at the U.S. National Center for Atmospheric Research and co-author of the report, said in a statement: 'It's just guaranteed that it's going to get worse. Nowhere to run, nowhere to hide.'

Scroll down for videos

If temperatures continue to rise, there could be devastating effects here on Earth, including a dramatic loss of sea-life, an ice-free Arctic and more regular 'extreme' weather

On Monday, 234 experts warned in the report that the US is headed for disaster. Flooding, deadly fires and heat waves will not only become the norm but will intensify in a warming world, warns the 3,949-page assessment

The consequences are already ripping across the nation: This summer alone, blistering heat waves have killed more than 3,000 American and wildfires have cost at least $8 billion, while flooding has caused nearly $75 billion in damages in the past 30 years. Pictured are fires currently blazing in California

Flooding, deadly fires and heat waves will not only become the norm but will intensify in a warming world, warns the 3,949-page assessment

The 2.7F (1.5C) mark is considered to be the point where climate change becomes increasingly dangerous.

The 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change committed countries to limiting warming to 2.7F (1.5C) but they have already risen by 2.2F (1.2C).

UN Secretary-General António Guterres called the new report a 'code red for humanity'.

He warned: 'The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.'

These graphs show how human influence has warmed the climate at a rate unprecedented in at least the last 2,000 years

The UN scientists modelled the changes in annual mean temperatures worldwide based on 2.7F (1.5C), 3.6F (2C) and 7.2F (4C) global warming

The projected changes in extremes are larger in frequency and intensity with every additional increment of global warming

The key findings of the report are:

· Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels

· It is 'virtually certain' that heatwaves 'have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions'

· A rise in sea levels approaching 6 feet by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out'

· The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050

· Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are higher than they have been for three million years Some changes, such as sea level rises, will be 'irreversible' for hundreds to thousands of years

Anthony Blinken, US Secretary of State, said in a statement: 'Today, the United States joined nearly 200 IPCC member governments in approving the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report.

'The report finds we are already edging closer to a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] warmer world, and every day emissions rise the prospects for averting the worst impacts of climate change become dimmer. This is why it is essential that all countries – in particular the major economies –do their part during this critical decade of the 2020s to put the world on a trajectory to keep a 1.5 degrees Celsius [2.7F] limit on warming within reach.

'This is why the United States has committed to a 50-52 percent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels in 2030 and is marshaling the entire federal government to tackle the climate crisis. We cannot delay ambitious climate action any longer.'

US Secretary of State Anthony Blinken's remarks about the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) report The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) newest report makes it clear – climate change is already a crisis. Today, the United States joined nearly 200 IPCC member governments in approving the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report. This is the first volume in a series of four reports that the IPCC will release for the Sixth Assessment. This report evaluates the physical science of climate change – looking at the past, present, and future climate and revealing how human-caused emissions are altering our planet and what that means for our collective future. The report highlights that our climate is rapidly changing due to human influence and is already altering our planet in drastic ways – Arctic sea ice is at its lowest level in more than 150 years; sea levels are rising faster than at any time in at least the last 3,000 years; and glaciers are declining at a rate unprecedented in at least 2,000 years. Weather and climate events – such as extreme heat, heavy rainfall, fire conditions, and droughts – are becoming more severe and frequent because of climate change. We are seeing the detrimental impacts of these events on the lives and livelihoods of people around the world. Most importantly, the report finds we are already edging closer to a 1.5 degrees Celsius warmer world, and every day emissions rise the prospects for averting the worst impacts of climate change become dimmer. This is why it is essential that all countries – in particular the major economies – do their part during this critical decade of the 2020s to put the world on a trajectory to keep a 1.5 degrees Celsius limit on warming within reach. This is why the United States has committed to a 50-52 percent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels in 2030 and is marshaling the entire federal government to tackle the climate crisis. We cannot delay ambitious climate action any longer. As countries prepare for the 26th UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, this report is a stark reminder that we must let science drive us to action. This moment requires world leaders, the private sector, and individuals to act together with urgency and do everything it takes to protect our planet and our future in this decade and beyond. Advertisement

As the planet warms, places will get hit more not just by extreme weather but by multiple climate disasters at once, the report said.

That's like what's now happening in the Western US, where heat waves, drought and wildfires compound the damage, Mearns said.

This year, 37,803 fires have burned more than 3 million acres across the US, which is a major increase from last year's fire season that saw 32,059 fires scorch a total of 2.1 million acres.

This year, 37,803 fires have burned more than 3 million acres across the US, which is a major increase from last year's fire season that saw 32,059 fires scorch a total of 2.1 million acres. California's Dixie Fire (pictured), the states second largest on record, is still spreading across Plumas, Butte, Tehama and Lassen counties and has now scorched more than 463,000 acres

The Dixie blaze is the largest active wildfire in the United States, but one of only 11 major wildfires in California. Over the weekend it surpassed the 2018 Mendocino Complex Fire to make it the second-worst fire in state history, the authorities said

Wildfire activity continues in 15 states across the countr

And wildfire activity continues in 15 states across the country.

California's Dixie Fire, the states second largest on record, is still spreading across Plumas, Butte, Tehama and Lassen counties and has now scorched more than 463,000 acres.

The Dixie blaze is the largest active wildfire in the United States, but one of only 11 major wildfires in California. Over the weekend it surpassed the 2018 Mendocino Complex Fire to make it the second-worst fire in state history, the authorities said.

Crews estimate the fire, which began July 13, will not finally be extinguished before August 20.

Environmentalist and former US Vice President Al Gore, who has been ringing the alarm on climate change for decades, shared his take on the report to his twitter account: 'The consequences of continuing to spew greenhouse gases into the atmosphere have never been starker. We've seen devastating heatwaves, historic droughts, & wildfires and floods that have wiped out entire towns. Today's @IPCC_CH report shows that this is part of our new normal.'

Along with a surge in wildfires, much of the US is experience historic droughts that are draining rivers, lakes and reservoir to nearly bone-dry basins.

As of August 3, 39.99 percent of the US and 43.6 percent of the lower 48 states are in drought.

Along with a surge in wildfires, much of the US is experience historic droughts that are draining rivers, lakes and reservoir to nearly bone-dry basins. Lake Powell, America's second largest reservoir, hit its lowest level last month

As of August 3 (pictured), 39.99 percent of the US and 43.6 percent of the lower 48 states are in drought

Lake Powell, America's second largest reservoir, hit its lowest level last month since it was first filled fifty years ago amid a climate-fueled drought and increasing demand for water.

Key findings from the UN's new climate science report – It is 'unequivocal' that human activity has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land – with widespread and rapid changes across the world. – Many of the changes are unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years, with the world warming at a rate unprecedented in at least 2,000 years. – Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are higher than they have been for three million years and methane concentrations are higher than they have been for 800,000 years, with rises in both greenhouse gases well above natural changes seen for hundreds of thousands of years. – Global average temperatures were nearly 2F (1.1C) higher in the last decade than in pre-industrial times, or the period 1850-1900, driven by emissions caused by human activities such as burning fossil fuels and deforestation. – Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region around the world, with stronger evidence of more frequent or intense heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts and tropical cyclones and the role humans play in driving the changes. – Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels. The rate of sea level rise is speeding up. – Global surface temperatures will continue to increase until at least mid-century, and the world will reach or exceed 1.5C of warming over the next 20 years. – Global warming of 2.7F and 3.6 F (1.5C and 2C) – limits countries have committed to in order to avoid the most dangerous impacts of climate change – will be exceeded in the 21st century unless deep reductions in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions occur in the coming decades. – Continued warming will drive increases in the frequency and intensity of hot extremes, marine heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts in some regions, the proportion of intense tropical cyclones, and reductions in Arctic sea ice, snow cover and permafrost. – Every additional increment of warming causes larger changes in extremes, with every extra 0.5C temperature rises leading to clear increases in the intensity of heatwaves, heavy rain that can cause flooding, and droughts. – Under scenarios for the future with increasing carbon dioxide emissions, the ocean and land carbon sinks such as forests are projected to be less effective at slowing the accumulation of the greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. – Changes to oceans, sea levels and melting permafrost and glaciers are irreversible for decades, centuries or even millennia as a result of past and future warming. – Strong, rapid and sustained reductions in emissions of methane would help curb warming, and would also improve air quality Advertisement

The rate at which both Lake Powell and the nearby Lake Mead in Nevada - America's largest reservoir - have drained this year has alarmed scientists and officials.

Warnings over the water levels at the key reservoirs come as over 95 percent of the Western US is experiencing drought conditions.

US Senator of Vermont, Bernie Sanders, responded to the report by sharing a message on his twitter account: 'The IPCC is telling us what every sane person knows. Unless there is BOLD action to combat climate change, the planet we will be leaving our kids and future generations will be increasingly uninhabitable. Now is the time for action.'

The report also confirms that global sea level rise is accelerating.

Globally, sea levels rose about 8 inches on average between 1901 and 2018, although the water rose much more in some places, including in some cities on the East Coast and Gulf Coast of the US.

'Around North America, relative sea level has increased over the last 3 decades at a rate 39 lower than global mean sea level (GMSL) in the subpolar North Atlantic and in the East Pacific, while it has increased at a rate higher 40 than GMSL in the subtropical North Atlantic,' authors shared in the report.

'Observations indicate that episodic coastal flooding is increasing along many coastlines in North America.

'Shoreline retreat rates of around 1 m yr–1 41 have been observed during 42 1984–2015 along the sandy coasts of Northwestern North America and Northern Central America, while portions of the United States Gulf Coast have seen a retreat rate approaching 2.5 m yr–1 43.

'Sandy shorelines 44 along Eastern North America and Western North America have remained more or less stable during 1984– 2014, but a shoreline progradation rate of around 0.5 m yr–1 45 has been observed in Northeastern North America.'

The report also notes heat wave that used to happen only once every 50 years now happens once a decade, and if the world warms another degree Celsius (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit), it will happen twice every seven years.

The western US was covered in a heat dome throughout June that rose temperatures above 49C (121F) and killed at least 500 people across Oregon, Washington and up into Canada.

More than 30 million Americans in western states were under excessive heat warnings or advisories early July.

US Special Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry said: 'The impacts of the climate crisis, from extreme heat to wildfires to intense rainfall and flooding, will only continue to intensify unless we choose another course for ourselves and generations to come.'

Scientists say this kind of heatwave is a once in a 50 year type of event, but the report from the UN warns scorchers like this will happy every decade if the world warms another degree Celsius (1.8F).

Report co-chair Valerie Masson-Delmotte, a climate scientist at France's Laboratory of Climate and Environment Sciences at the University of Paris-Saclay, said in a statement: 'Our report shows that we need to be prepared for going into that level of warming in the coming decades.

'But we can avoid further levels of warming by acting on greenhouse gas emissions.'

'There is also a way for the world to stay at the 2.7-degree threshold with extreme and quick emission cuts, but even then, temperatures would rise 2.7F (1.5C) in a decade and even beyond, before coming back down, said co-author Maisia Rojas Corrada, director of the Center for Climate and Resilience Research in Chile.

'Anything we can do to limit, to slow down, is going to pay off,' Tebaldi said. 'And if we cannot get to 1.5 [2.7F], it's probably going to be painful, but it's better not to give up.'

In the report's worst-case scenario, the world could be around 3.3 degrees Celsius (5.9F) hotter than now by the end of the century.

But that scenario looks increasingly unlikely, said report co-author and climate scientist Zeke Hausfather, climate change director of the Breakthrough Institute.

'We are a lot less likely to get lucky and end up with less warming than we thought,' Hausfather said.

'At the same time, the odds of ending up in a much worse place than we expected if we do reduce our emissions are notably lower.'

The sweltering temperatures are being caused by a heat dome of static high-pressure hot air which traps the heat in one location

The report said ultra-catastrophic disasters — commonly called 'tipping points,' like ice sheet collapses and the abrupt slowdown of ocean currents — are 'low likelihood' but cannot be ruled out. The much talked-about shutdown of Atlantic ocean currents, which would trigger massive weather shifts, is something that's unlikely to happen in this century, report co-author Bob Kopp of Rutgers University said

A 'major advance' in the understanding of how fast the world warms with each ton of carbon dioxide emitted allowed scientists to be far more precise in the scenarios in this report, Mason-Delmotte said.

The report said ultra-catastrophic disasters — commonly called 'tipping points,' like ice sheet collapses and the abrupt slowdown of ocean currents — are 'low likelihood' but cannot be ruled out.

The much talked-about shutdown of Atlantic ocean currents, which would trigger massive weather shifts, is something that's unlikely to happen in this century, report co-author Bob Kopp of Rutgers University said.

Separate work from the University of Arizona Department of Geosciences attributed an increase in sea levels from New York to Newfoundland to the slowing down by 30 percent from 2009 to 2010, as well as unusual wind currents that pushed ocean waters towards the coast.

If the ocean currents would come to a halt, winters in the US would become colder and stronger, and water would flow more inland on the east coast.

Climate activist Greta Thunberg said the report 'confirms what we already know... that we are in an emergency.'

'We can still avoid the worst consequences, but not if we continue like today, and not without treating the crisis like a crisis,' she wrote on Twitter.

The UN's assessment does not shy away from noting that climate change is because of humans' disregard for the planet in the last few centuries.

Humans are 'unequivocally' to blame

UN scientists said humanity's damaging impact on the climate was a 'statement of fact', adding that it is 'unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, oceans and land'.

The authors of the IPCC report considered scenarios where global temperatures increased by 2.7F (1.5C), 3.6F (2C) and 7.2F (4C)and the impact each one would have on mean temperatures and precipitation across Europe

The report also looked at how these scenarios would affect mean temperatures and precipitation levels in North America

Humans are very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers, decline in sea ice, warming oceans and rising sea levels, the report said.

It also found that human activity is already responsible for 1.98F (1.1C) of global warming since 1850, while temperatures will continue to increase until at least the middle of this century.

What will happen if temperatures continue to increase? Coastal regions and islands underwater Sea level rises are 'irreversible' for hundreds or perhaps thousands of years, the report warned. It 'cannot be ruled out' that sea levels could rise by around 2m by the end of this century and 5m by 2150. This could lead to more flooding, the displacement of millions of people and a loss of land for food growing. An ice-free Arctic The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050, UN scientists said. This is causing animals such as polar bears to suffer because of their shrinking habitat. Extreme weather commonplace It is 'virtually certain' that heatwaves, flooding and droughts will become more frequent and intense across the world. Hot extremes have become more prevalent since the 1950s, while cold events have become less frequent and less severe. Dramatic loss of sea-life The Earth's oceans will continue to warm and become more acidic, killing coral reefs and harming infant cod, blue mussels, starfish and sea urchins in particular. Advertisement

Scientists said the world will reach or exceed 2.7F (1.5C) of warming over the next 20 years.

US Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm commented on Monday's report sayin: 'The planet is on fire, and our hair should be on fire about this! We need to move faster to deploy, deploy, deploy clean energy and make our communities more resilient.'

Weather will become more extreme

Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region around the world, the landmark report said, with stronger evidence of more frequent or intense heatwaves, heavy rain, droughts and tropical cyclones and the role humans play in driving the changes.

Heatwaves, flooding and droughts will only become more frequent and intense, the UN scientists warned.

Severe heatwaves that happened only once every 50 years are now happening roughly once a decade, while most land areas are seeing more rain or snowfall in a year and severe droughts are happening 1.7 times as often.

Arctic summers may soon be free of ice

The Arctic is likely to be 'practically sea ice-free' in September at least once before 2050, according to the IPCC's most optimistic scenario.

The region is the fastest-warming area of the globe — at least twice as fast as the global average.

While Arctic sea ice levels vary throughout the year, the average lows during summer have been decreasing since the 1970s and are now at their lowest levels in 1,000 years. This melting creates a feedback loop, with reflective ice giving way to darker water that absorbs solar radiation, causing even more warming.

Sea level rises are 'irreversible'

Scientists warned that a rise in sea levels approaching six feet by the end of this century 'cannot be ruled out', adding that these changes would be 'irreversible' for hundreds to thousands of years.

Warming in the polar regions is not only melting sea ice but also causing thermal expansion, where the water expands as sea temperatures rise. Both of these phenomena are factors in rising sea levels.

If they keep rising as fast as they are then coastal regions and islands could be flooded or left underwater, leading to the displacement of millions of people and the loss of land for food growing.

The report 'provides a strong sense of urgency to do even more,' said Jane Lubchenco, the White House deputy science adviser.

This graphic from the UN report shows scientists' prediction of future emissions including CO2, methane and nitrous oxide

Human activity is already responsible for 1.1C of global warming since 1850, while temperatures will continue to increase until at least the middle of this century. The temperature changes from human influence, including greenhouse gas emissions, aerosols, land-use changes and aviation vapor trails are shown above

In a new move, scientists emphasized how cutting airborne levels of methane — a powerful but short-lived gas that has soared to record levels — could help curb short-term warming.

Lots of methane the atmosphere comes from leaks of natural gas, a major power source.

Livestock also produces large amounts of the gas, a good chunk of it in cattle burps.

More than 100 countries have made informal pledges to achieve 'net zero' human-caused carbon dioxide emissions sometime around mid-century, which will be a key part of climate negotiations this fall in Scotland.

As for the US, President Joe Biden promised to rejoin the Paris Agreement earlier this year and set a course for the United States to tackle the climate crisis at home and abroad, reaching net zero emissions economy-wide no later than 2050.

The report said those commitments are essential.

'It is still possible to forestall many of the most dire impacts,' said IPCC Vice Chair Ko Barrett, senior climate adviser for the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Keeping your exes on the 'back burner' leads to negative feelings all around — even if you don't actually jump back into bed with them — a study has warned.

Experts led from the University of Oklahoma surveyed nearly 400 adults in long-term relationships to find that more than half were keeping someone else 'in spare'.

However, doing so led to bad feelings about both the other person and themselves, especially when the flirt is supposedly in an exclusive relationship.

Keeping your exes on the 'back burner' leads to negative feelings all around — even if you only message and don't actually jump back into bed with them — a study has warned

EX COMMUNICATIONS According to the team, some two-thirds of participants reported keeping in touch with their exes. A separate study found that 54 per cent of women have engaged in sex with an ex, compared to just 44 per cent of the men. Of those who had sex with their ex-partners, the lion's share said that they did it because being with an old flame was comforting. However, 14 per cent of those surveyed admitted that they had sex with the ex in the hope of reconciling. Advertisement

The study was conducted by interpersonal communication expert John Banas of the University of Oklahoma and his colleagues.

'If having ex-partner back burners cascades into increased communication, increased sexual activity, and bad feelings for the admirer,' began Dr Banas.

Then, he continued, 'those in committed relationships might wish to exercise greater caution before forming a back-burner relationship with an ex-partner.'

In their study, the researchers surveyed 397 adults in committed romantic relationships with an average length of seven years.

The team found that the majority of subjects — 62 per cent — admitted to keeping someone on the proverbial back burner.

This is even though 85 per cent said they were married and 93 per cent said their relationship with their partner was exclusive.

And of those keeping someone — or multiple people — in their back pocket, half said that they were stringing along one or more exes.

'As we see society re-opening, there appears to be a surge in the use of dating apps during what has been dubbed "The Summer of Love",' said psychologist Brenda Wiederhold of California's Interactive Media Institute, who was not part of the study.

This, she continued, makes it 'ever more important to study new trends in connecting for friendship and romance.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@By uprooting carbon trapped in the soil, wild pigs release some 4.9 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide across the globe each year, a study has warned.

This is the equivalent of the carbon emissions of 1.1 million cars, said experts from the Universities of Queensland, Australia, and Canterbury, New Zealand.

In their study, the researchers combined predictive population models with advanced mapping techniques to determine the impact of wild pigs on the climate.

The team simulated 10,000 maps of potential wild pig densities across five continents based on existing data on the animals' numbers and distribution.

They then modelled how much soil would be disturbed by these pigs based on previous studies into foraging damage across various climatic conditions.

The findings, the team said, highlight the impact that invasive species like wild pigs can have and the need for better controls to manage the their populations.

Wild pig populations are typically managed using approaches like hunting, baiting, deploying traps and installing barriers to stop their spread into new areas.

By uprooting carbon trapped in the soil, wild pigs release some 4.9 million metric tonnes of carbon dioxide across the globe each year, a study has warned. Pictured: a wild pig

The team simulated 10,000 individual maps of potential wild pig densities across five continents (as pictured) based on existing data on the animals' numbers and distribution

'Wild pigs are just like tractors ploughing through fields, turning over soil to find food,' said paper author and spatial ecologist Christopher O'Bryan of the University of Queensland.

'When soils are disturbed from humans ploughing a field or, in this case, from wild animals uprooting, carbon is released into the atmosphere.'

'Since soil contains nearly three times as much carbon than in the atmosphere, even a small fraction of carbon emitted from soil has the potential to accelerate climate change,' he explained.

According to Dr O'Bryan, the world's growing populations of feral pigs may pose a significant threat to the climate.

'Our models show a wide range of outcomes, but they indicate that wild pigs are most likely currently uprooting an area of around 36,000 to 124,000 square kilometres [13900–47,877 square miles], in environments where they're not native.'

'This is an enormous amount of land — and this not only affects soil health and carbon emissions, but it also threatens biodiversity and food security that are crucial for sustainable development.'

The findings, the team said, highlight the impact that invasive species like wild pigs can have and the need for better controls to manage the their populations. Pictured: wild pigs

'Invasive species are a human-caused problem, so we need to acknowledge and take responsibility for their environmental and ecological implications,' said paper author and environmental scientist Nicholas Patton of the University of Canterbury.

'If invasive pigs are allowed to expand into areas with abundant soil carbon, there may be an even greater risk of greenhouse gas emissions in the future.'

'Because wild pigs are prolific and cause widespread damage, they're both costly and challenging to manage.'

'Wild pig control will definitely require cooperation and collaboration across multiple jurisdictions, and our work is but one piece of the puzzle, helping managers better understand their impacts.'

'It's clear that more work still needs to be done, but in the interim, we should continue to protect and monitor ecosystems and their soil which are susceptible to invasive species via loss of carbon.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Global Change Biology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Climate change has dramatically altered the Swiss Alps by transforming glaciers into nearly 1,200 new lakes since 1850 – and 1,000 of them still exist today.

A team of scientists from the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag) combined aerial photo data of the massive mountain range and years of data on glaciers in Switzerland to determine the inventory of lakes.

The analysis also revealed 180 of the existing lakes had only been created from 2006 through 2016, when 18 new bodies of water appeared each year.

This, Eawag said, is 'visible evidence of climate change in the Alps.'

'On the one hand, we were surprised by the sheer numbers and on the other by the marked acceleration in formation,' Daniel Odermatt, Head of the Remote Sensing Group at the aquatic research institute Eawag, said in a statement:

'At the beginning of the project, we expected a few hundred glacial lakes. Now there are over a thousand, and 180 have been added in the last decade alone.'

Scroll down for video

Climate change has dramatically altered the Swiss Alps by transforming glaciers into nearly 1,200 new lakes since 1850 – and 1,000 of them still exist today. Pictured is Steisee, Canton of Berne

The Alps are the highest and most extensive mountain range system that lies entirely in Europe, stretching approximately 745 miles across eight European countries of Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Slovenia and Switzerland.

However, this mighty mountain range has fallen victim to climate change, which has melted massive glaciers into nothing more than pools of water.

According to the scientists, glaciers lost a full two percent of their volume last year alone.

A quarter of the newly formed lakes have either shrunk or disappeared altogether.

The Alps are the highest and most extensive mountain range system that lies entirely in Europe, stretching approximately 745 miles across eight European countries of Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Slovenia and Switzerland. Pictured is the Aletsch Glacier above Bettmeralp

The analysis also revealed 180 of the existing lakes had only been created from 2006 through 2016, as 18 new bodies of water appeared each year on average. Pictured is Griesseeli, Canton of Uri, between Clariden and Klausenpass

For the study, the team recorded the location, elevation, shape and area of the 1,200 lakes at different times, along with the type and material of the dam, surface drainage and recorded development of the lake.

The assessment showed that there was an initial peak in glacial lake formation in the Swiss Alps between 1946 and 1973, when nearly eight new lakes appeared on average each year.

From there a brief decline was observed, but then picked up again between 2006 and 2016, when 18 new lakes appearing each year on average, while the water surface swelled by over 4,300 square feet annually.

Pictured Michael Plüss, technician at Eawag's department Surface Waters, installs a thermistor chain on Lake Stei (Canton Bern, at the Susten Pass). Through automatic series of measurements of water temperature at various depths over several years, the researchers are gaining a better understanding of the general development of high-alpine lakes and their seasonal fluctuations

The comprehensive inventory was made possible by large troves of data gathered from the Switzerland's glaciers since the mid-19th century.

In total, the researchers were able to draw on data from seven periods between 1850 and 2016.

For each of the 1,200 lakes formed since 1850, the scientists recorded the location, elevation, shape and area of the lake at the different times, as well as the type of material of the dam and surface drainage.

Scientists warned that the growing number of glacial lakes increases the risk of such outbursts and thus the danger of flood waves for the settlements below. Pictured is Griesseeli, Canton of Uri, between Clariden and Klausenpass

Based on this information, researchers can estimate hazards, including the risk of a sudden emptying in the event of a dam failure.

Eawag warned that the growing number of glacial lakes increases the risk of such outbursts and thus the danger of flood waves for the settlements below.

'The new inventory is a valuable basis for the calibration and further development of satellite-based remote sensing,' said Odermatt.

'It also provides a good starting point to monitor and analyze the impact of climate change on glacial lakes.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They say every dog has its day, but for Spot, the oft-dancing robot canine from Boston Dynamics, that time may soon be up, thanks to a new rival joining the scene.

Developed by the Chinese tech firm Xiaomi, 'CyberDog' boasts an economical price tag of just $1,540 (£1,115), compared to Spot's whopping $74,500 (£53,774).

The four-legged robot is also slightly smaller and much lighter, standing at just 15.7 inches and weighing only 31 lbs, compared to Spot's 24 inch stature and 72 lb heft.

This, combined with powerful servo motors, gives CyberDog a top speed of 7.2 mph — around twice that of Spot's 3.5 mph — and even the ability to perform backflips.

With both remote and voice control, the cyber canine can follow its owner, navigate around obstacles and perform other tricks including begging and shaking a paw.

Furthermore, its open source nature will allow developers to build on the design and customise it — and even add hardware — to suit a variety of different applications.

CyberDog is the not the only cheaper robotic rival to move in on Spot's market — last year, Chinese tech firm Unitree released the tiny 'Go1', while sells for $2,700 (£1,948).

Spot robots have found various applications, from surveying dangerous explosives and explore active crime scenes to reminding people to social distance.

Scroll down for video

They say every dog has its day — but for Spot, the famous robot canine from Boston Dynamics, that time may soon be up, thanks to a new rival (CyberDog, pictured) joining the scene

Developed by the Chinese tech firm Xiaomi, 'CyberDog' (pictured) boasts an economical price tag of just $1,540 (£1,115), compared to Spot's whopping $74,500

The four-legged robot is also slightly smaller and much lighter that Spot — standing at just 15.7 inches and weighing only 31 lbs, compared to Spot's 24 inch stature and 72 lb heft

CyberDog is the not the only cheaper robotic rival to move in on Spot's market — last year, Chinese tech firm Unitree released the tiny 'Go1', while sells for $2,700. Pictured: Spot

XIAOMI'S CYBERDOG VS BOSTON DYNAMICS' SPOT Cost Length Width Height Weight Max. load Speed Released Cameras Battery life Full charge CyberDog $1,540 30.4" 14.0" 15.7" 31 lbs 6.6 lbs 7.2 mph 2021 Three 60 mins 160 mins Spot $74,500 43.3" 19.7" 24.0" 72 lbs 31 lbs 3.5 mph 2020 Five 90 mins 120 mins Advertisement

'CyberDog is Xiaomi’s first foray into quadruped robotics for the open source community and developers worldwide,' the firm said in a press release.

'Robotics enthusiasts interested in CyberDog can compete or co-create with other like-minded Xiaomi Fans, together propelling the development and potential of quadruped robots.'

To this end, they explained, they are establishing a 'Xiaomi Open Source Community' through which developers around the world can share upgrades to CyberDog.

The Beijing-based firm has also promised to establish a robotics laboratory, aiming to provide 'a platform for engineers to continue the pursuit of future innovations.'

According to Xiaomi, the initial release of CyberDog will see the sale of only 1,000 units of the robot, with a target market of engineers, roboticists and Xiaomi fans.

In order to navigate and interact with varied environments like a real-life animal, CyberDog is equipped with 11 high-precision sensors of various types, including GPS modules, ultrasonic transducers, touch sensors and multiple cameras.

'Built upon this vision sensor system are autonomous object tracking, simultaneous localization and mapping and centimetre-scale obstacle avoidance and navigation,' a Xiaomi spokesperson explained.

'This means that CyberDog can analyse its surroundings in real-time, create navigational maps, plot its destination, and avoid obstacles.

'Coupled with human posture and face recognition tracking, CyberDog is capable of following its owner and darting around obstructions.'

The robotic hound's hardware is driven by the so-called NVIDIA® Jetson Xavier™ NX platform, which Xiaomi describe as being an 'AI Supercomputer for Embedded and Edge Systems.' It runs a version of the Ubuntu operating system.

With powerful servo motors, CyberDog has a top speed of 7 .2 mph — around twice that of Spot's 3.5 mph — and even the ability to perform backflips

With both remote and voice control, the cyber canine can follow its owner, navigate around obstacles and perform other tricks including begging and shaking a paw

In order to navigate and interact with varied environments like a real-life animal, CyberDog is equipped with with 11 high-precision sensors of various types, including GPS modules, ultrasonic transducers, touch sensors and multiple cameras

CyberDog sports both three USB-C and one HDMI ports by which developers can tweak its onboard software and also link up additional hardware — such as, for example, panoramic or motion cameras, lidar sensors or search lights.

The robot will be controllable via an accompanying remote and a specially designed smartphone app.

However, the firm said, a built-in voice assistant also allows owners to give their robot commands just as if it were a real life pet pooch.

'CyberDog can be called on for the most unique tasks, and the ways in which it can be interacted with holds unforetold possibilities,' Xiaomi concluded.

CyberDog sports both three USB-C and one HDMI ports by which developers can tweak its onboard software and also link up additional hardware — such as, for example, panoramic or motion cameras, lidar sensors or search lights

The robot will be controllable via an accompanying remote and a specially designed smartphone app — however, the firm said, a built-in voice assistant also allows owners to give their robot commands just as if it were a real life pet pooch
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Your metabolism — the rate at which your body burns off calories — stays stable for decades and doesn't begin to decline until you're in your sixties, a study has found.

Researchers led from Duke University in the US tested more than 6,600 individuals of various ages — from birth to late in life — to see how metabolic rates change.

They found the highest rate of calorie consumption among young infants, with our metabolism remaining constant from our twenties until late adulthood.

Your metabolism — the rate at which your body burns off calories — stays stable for decades and doesn't begin to decline until you're in your sixties, a study has found (stock image)

In their study, Professor Pontzer and colleagues analysed the total energy expenditure (left axis) burned by more than 6,600 people with ages ranging from just one week old up to the age of 95 (bottom axis) — finding that metabolism peaks during early infancy before gradually falling until our twenties, after which it remains stable until our sixties before decreasing more

HOW MANY CALORIES DO I NEED EACH DAY? The basic amount of calories an average adult needs per day is 2,000kcal for women or 2,500kcal for men. This is based on the amount of energy the body needs to carry out basic functions and to walk and work throughout the day. People who exercise a lot need to eat more calories to fuel their efforts, and young people and children burn more energy, too. If you eat more calories than you burn in a day, you will get fatter. Eating fewer calories than you burn will make you lose weight. Foods which are processed and have high levels of carbohydrate, sugar and salt have higher calorie numbers than fresh fruit and vegetables. Example calorie counts include: A McDonald's Big Mac contains 508kcal

A two-finger KitKat contains 106kcal

A banana contains 95kcal

An apple contains 47kcal Source: NHS Advertisement

'There are lots of physiological changes that come with growing up and getting older — think puberty, menopause, other phases of life,' said evolutionary anthropologist Herman Pontzer of Duke University of North Carolina.

He added: 'What's weird is that the timing of our "metabolic life stages" doesn't seem to match those typical milestones.'

In their study, Professor Pontzer and colleagues analysed the total average daily calories burned by more than 6,600 people from 29 different countries — who had ages ranging from just one week old up to the age of 95.

Unlike most previous large-scale metabolism studies, the researchers wanted to go beyond just the energy the body uses to perform vital bodily functions such as breathing, pumping blood and digesting food.

This expenditure, they explains, accounts for only 50–70 per cent of the calories we burn on a daily basis, with the rest coming from all the other stuff we get up to — from walking the dog and working out to washing the dishes or even just thinking.

To track each participant's total daily energy expenditure, the researchers used the so-called 'doubly labelled water' method, in which subjects are made to drink water made up of rarer, 'heavy' isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen.

Urine testing is then used to determine how quickly these heavy isotopes are flushed out of the body — which provides a proxy for one's metabolism.

While the expensive nature of the test had previously limited its use to small-scale studies, multiple labs opted to collaborate and share their data, letting the team undertake a more substantial study than would otherwise have been possible.

By gathering data from across the entire human lifespan, the team were able to reach some unexpected conclusions.

Most people, for example, would point to their teenage years and young adulthood as the time of life when their metabolism was at its peak. However, the researchers found that, pound for pound, metabolic rates were actually highest among infants.

In fact, it seems like our energy needs escalate during the first 12 months after birth, such that a one-year-old child burns calories 50 per cent faster for their body size than an adult does — and not even because babies grow so much in their first year.

'Of course they're growing, but even once you control for that, their energy expenditures are rocketing up higher than you'd expect for their body size and composition,' said Professor Pontzer.

This finding may explain why those children who are undernourished during this key window of development are significantly less likely to survive and grow up to become healthy adults.

As Professor Pontzer added: 'Something is happening inside a baby’s cells to make them more active, and we don't know what those processes are yet.'

Most people would point to their teenage years and young adulthood as the time of life when their metabolism was at its peak. However, the researchers found that, pound for pound, metabolic rates were actually highest among infants. Pictured: a young baby (stock image)

After infancy, the team found our metabolism slows by around 3 per cent annually until we reach our twenties — at which point, it settles into a new normal.

'We really thought puberty would be different and it’s not,' Professor Pontzer, said, noting that, once they took body sizes into account, they found that adolescence — despite being a time of growth spurts — did not see an uptake in calorie needs.

Another surprise came in midlife. While many adults might like to blame their ballooning waistlines on a decreased metabolism, it seems that the rate at which we burn calories doesn't really change until much later in life.

In fact, the team said, even amid pregnancy calorie requirements remain as expected based on overall weight, even though women are growing a baby.

It was only after the subjects had passed the age of 60 that the team began to see a decrease in metabolic rates — but even this was gradual, at just 0.7 per cent a year.

According to the team, an individual in their nineties needs to consume around 26 per cent fewer calories than their counterparts in their midlife, part of which may be down to how age leads to a loss of muscle mass, which burns calories more than fat.

However, this is clearly not the entire picture, Professor Pontzer noted, adding: 'We controlled for muscle mass. It’s because their cells are slowing down.

'All of this points to the conclusion that tissue metabolism, the work that the cells are doing, is changing over the course of the lifespan in ways we haven’t fully appreciated before,' he continued.

'You really need a big data set like this to get at those questions.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Science.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The BepiColombo spacecraft snapped 86 haunting images of Venus during its flyby of the hellish planet on Tuesday.

The European Space Agency (ESA) shared the stunning collection Thursday, which shows Venus in a glowing white as it hangs in the blackness of space.

The spacecraft captured the images as it skimmed past Venus for a gravity assist maneuver during its epic journey to Mercury.

During the approach, Venus filled the entire field of view, but as the spacecraft changes its orientation, the planet was seen passing behind the panels.

The sequence includes images from all three Monitoring Cameras (MCAM) onboard the Mercury Transfer Module, which provides black-and-white snapshots in 1024 x 1024 pixel resolution.

BepiColombo, a joint mission with ESA and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), is on a seven-year mission to study the structure and atmosphere of Mercury and learn more about how it interacts with the sun.

Scroll down for videos

During the approach, Venus filled the entire field of view, but as the spacecraft changes its orientation, the planet will be seen passing behind the panels

JAXA tweeted: '[It] will not begin orbiting Mercury until the end of 2025, the spacecraft will make the first swing-by of Mercury this October. Stay tuned!'

These flybys, coupled with the spacecraft's solar electric propulsion system, is what is required to steer into Mercury's orbit against the gravitational pull of the sun.

However, it is not possible to take high-resolution imagery of Venus with the science cameras onboard either mission, which is why the images are simply black-and-white clips of the planet.

Thursday's series of images provides a view as if you were riding aboard BepiColomob as it skims past Venus and highlights each part of the gravity maneuver.

BepiColombo, a collaboration between the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), snapped a black and white image of Earth's twin when it was 977 miles away

The European Space Agency (ESA) shared the stunning collection Thursday, which shows Venus in a glowing white as it hangs in the blackness of space

This includes and up close shot of Venus, which turns into a small glowing orbit in the distance until it completely disappears into space.

ESA released the first image of Venus snapped by BepiColombo on Wednesday, which also shows the craft itself, akin to a selfie.

The image, taken 977 miles away, shows just a small section of Venus, capturing the detailed curve of the planet, and a few of BepiColombo's components.

It includes the high-gain antenna of the Mercury Planetary Orbiter and part of the body of the spacecraft.

The craft’s closest approach, however, was 340 miles from the planet’s surface.

Shortly after the flyby, data showed that BepiColombo's solar panels went from -148F to 50F, a sharp rise of 200 degrees, due to sunlight reflecting off of Venus.

Dr James O'Donoghue, a planetary scientist at JAXA, commented on the event via Twitter: 'Venus will find a way to be inhospitable to you, even when you fly by it from 550 km [341 miles] away.

This includes and up close shot of Venus, which turns into a small glowing orbit in the distance until it completely disappears into space

Pictured is a shot taken by the craft following its flyby, which shows Venus slowly disappearing into the darkness of space

BepiColombo arrived at Venus just 33 hours after fellow ESA probe, the Solar Orbiter, made its close approach to Venus - marking a double flyby.

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes.

Solar Orbiter is on its way to study the polar regions of the sun in a bid to better understand its 11-year cycle, and made its approach at 12:42am ET, ESA said, coming within 4,967 miles of the planet.

Both Solar Orbiter and BepiColombo have one more flyby of Venus this year.

BepiColombo will see Mercury for the first time overnight on October 1, making its first of six flybys of Mercury – with this one from just just over 100 miles.

Shortly after the flyby, data showed that BepiColombo's solar panels went from -148F to 50F, a sharp rise of 200 degrees, which was due to sunlight reflecting off of Venus

BepiColombo arrived at Venus for its gravity assist as it travels to Mercury - and did so just 33 hours after fellow ESA probe, the Solar Orbiter, made its close approach to Venus - marking a double flyby

The double flyby offers ESA astronomers a chance to study Earth's sister-planet Venus from different locations at the same time, and places rarely visited by probes

The two planetary orbiters will be delivered into Mercury orbit in late 2025, tasked with studying all aspects of this mysterious inner planet.

This includes its core to surface processes, magnetic field, and exosphere, to better understand the origin and evolution of a planet close to its parent star.

On November 27, Solar Orbiter will make a final flyby of Earth, coming just under 300 miles from the surface, kicking off the start of its main mission.

Both NASA and ESA are sending spacecraft to study Venus in more detail in the 2030s, where they will explore how it became so different to the Earth, despite having a similar origin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA has revealed new details about a worrying mishap that saw the International Space Station (ISS) thrown out of control by a 22-ton Russian research module.

The US space agency said the ISS backflipped and was left upside down when Nauka's jet thrusters misfired, just hours after docking with the space station.

When the incident happened last Thursday, NASA said it caused the ISS to move out of attitude – its orientation in relation to its direction of travel – by 45 degrees, or one-eighth of a complete circle.

However, the flight director who was in charge at the time has since revealed this was 'a little incorrectly reported' and the actual figure was closer to 540 degrees.

This means the ISS performed 1.5 backflips when it was sent spinning and required a 180-degree forward flip to regain its original position.

The station's position is key for getting power from its solar panels.

If this was lost, the ISS would 'decay', meaning it would get closer and closer to Earth before it came crashing down.

Scroll down for video

NASA has revealed new details about a worrying mishap that saw the International Space Station (ISS) thrown out of control by a 22-ton Russian research module. Nauka (left) is seen docked to the ISS next to the Soyuz MS-18 spacecraft on July 29, 2021

Russian cosmonauts aboard the ISS shared a glimpse of their new module Nauka earlier this week, after it made headlines when it inadvertently fired its thrusters after docking

THE NAUKA MODULE The Nauka module is designed to serve as a research lab, storage unit and airlock that will upgrade Russia's capabilities aboard the ISS. Nauka will be a new science facility, docking port and spacewalk airlock for future operations, along with providing additional crew quarters, a galley and a toilet. Nauka, which means 'science' in Russian launched on July 21 atop one of the country's Proton rockets. It docked with the ISS on July 29 - but for some reason mistakenly fired its thrusters and caused the ISS to move out of orientation. Advertisement

Zebulon Scoville told the The New York Times it was actually his day off from NASA's mission control center in Houston when the tumbling mishap took place.

He had led earlier preparations for Nauka's arrival and out of curiosity 'decided to put on a tie and just go and watch it [the docking] from the viewing gallery behind the control room'.

Nauka, which is designed to serve as a research lab, storage unit and airlock, docked at the ISS on Thursday at 9:29am EDT (2:29pm BST).

The flight director in charge had several meetings that afternoon so Mr Scoville was asked if he would step in to cover the second half of the shift.

But within seconds of taking over he said 'the caution warning board lit up.'

The US space agency said the seven crew members aboard – two Russian cosmonauts, three NASA astronauts, a Japanese astronaut and a European space agency astronaut from France – were never in any immediate danger.

However, Mr Scoville said it was the first time he had declared a 'spacecraft emergency' in his seven years as a NASA flight director.

'You get about half a breath of "Oh, geez, what now?" and then you kind of push that down and just work the problem,' he said.

The incident began about three hours after Nauka latched onto the ISS, as mission controllers in Moscow were performing some post-docking 'reconfiguration' procedures.

Nauka's jets inexplicably restarted, causing the entire station to pitch out of its normal flight position some 250 miles above the Earth, setting off a 'tug of war' between the two modules as NASA struggled to regain control of the ISS.

The space station performed a backflip at the rate of 0.56 degrees per second as the aft section was pulled down by the Russian module on its underbelly.

Onboard: This graphic offers a sneak peak inside the 22-ton Russian research module Nauka

Pictured is the current configuration of the International Space Station (ISS). Three spaceships are docked at the space station including the SpaceX Crew Dragon, Russia's Soyuz MS-18 crew ship and ISS Progress 78 resupply ship. The new Nauka Multipurpose Logistics Module (MLM) is now attached to the Zvezda service module's Earth-facing port

An unexpected drift in the station's orientation was first detected by automated ground sensors, followed 15 minutes later by a 'loss of attitude control' that lasted a little over 45 minutes, according to Joel Montalbano, manager of NASA's space station program.

Russian specialists were unable to stop Nauka's thrusters so tried to counteract the momentum by firing thrusters on both the Zvezda Service Module and a Progress cargo ship docked to the station.

For reasons unknown, the Nauka engines eventually cut off – perhaps because they ran out of fuel – before the ISS was stabilised and its orientation restored by activating thrusters on another module of the orbiting platform.

Communication with the astronauts was lost for several minutes twice during the disruption, but 'there was no immediate danger at any time to the crew', who 'really didn't feel any movement', Montalbano said.

Had the situation become dangerous enough to require evacuation, the crew could have escaped in a SpaceX capsule still parked at the outpost and designed to serve as a 'lifeboat' if needed.

Boeing's CST-100 Starliner spacecraft sits atop a United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket, on Space Launch Complex 41 at the Cape Canaveral Space Force Station ready for the second un-piloted test flight to the International Space Station. The launch was scheduled for July 30 but has been delayed until today

Explaining the cause of the problem, the Russian space agency Roscosmos said last Friday there was a software glitch on Nauka, and as a result, 'a direct command was given to fire the module's engines.'

A NASA spokesperson said the 45 degrees figure was reported as the drama was still unfolding and that the actual value of 540 degrees was only confirmed following post-incident analysis.

The malfunction forced NASA to postpone its planned launch of Boeing's new CST-100 Starliner capsule on a highly anticipated uncrewed test flight to the ISS until August 3, before a technical problem pushed that to today.

The Starliner, which will transport up to seven passengers to and from low-Earth orbit, had been set to blast off atop an Atlas V rocket on July 30 from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amazon is reportedly using artificial intelligence (AI) to determine how much its delivery drivers should be paid by and their employment status.

According to The Information, which first reported the news, the AI-powered surveillance cameras in delivery trucks are monitoring the driver's behavior and scoring them on safety infractions like tailgating, speeding or illegal U-turns.

The news outlet says it obtained confidential documents that reveal cameras inside vans count the number of potentially dangerous actions – most equal one point, but others like running a stop sign are worth 10 points.

The documents also states that contracted drives receive a report card each week, showing their performance that ranges from 'fantastic' to 'poor' that shows how many infractions occurred for every 100 trips.

Those with five or fewer violations per 100 trips usually receive a 'fantastic' score, according to The Information.

The Amazon documents also states that the firm will remove some infractions to balance to account for 'edge cases' where the cameras' AI software misidentifies violations.

However, a poor score could also lead to a driver being fired from the company.

An Amazon spokesperson also told DailyMail.com in an email that 45 percent of delivery vans are equip with the AI-powered cameras.

However, the person also notes that these systems have improved safety since being installed and allows delivery companies to help drivers avoid risky behavior while behind the wheel.

'Nothing is more important than the safety of drivers and the community, which is why we recently started rolling out industry-leading telematics and camera-based safety technology across our delivery fleet,' the Amazon spokesperson continued.

'This technology provides drivers real-time alerts to help them stay safe when they are on the road. We piloted the technology on over two million miles of delivery routes, and the results produced remarkable safety improvements—accidents decreased 48 percent, stop sign violations decreased 20 percent, driving without a seatbelt decreased 60 percent, and distracted driving decreased 45 percent.

Scroll down for video

The AI-powered surveillance cameras in delivery trucks are monitoring the driver's behavior and scoring them on safety infractions like tailgating, speeding or illegal U-turns

DailyMail.com has contacted Amazon for more information.

Amazon rolled out the AI-powered cameras in deliver vans this last February, which was first reported on by The Information, 'with a goal of improving safety.'

The camera, called Driveri, has four lenses that monitor the road, driver and interior of the van.

Each lens is powered by AI that can detect 16 safety issues, such as hard breaking and whether the driver is wearing a seat belt.

The Information claims it obtained confidential documents that reveal cameras inside vans count the number of potentially dangerous actions – most equal one point, but others like running a stop sign can see 10 points, according to the publication

According to the February report, the system is designed to identifying risky behavior, such as distracted driving, not stopping when required and speeding.

The 'Driveri' camera system is paired with the Mentor app that constantly monitors the driver's ever move and location, while also tracking some of the same safety violations.

In March, an Amazon driver told Reuters that this 'Big Brother' system first began with the Mentor app, which sends data to the higher ups.

'If we went over a bump, the phone would rattle, the Mentor app would log that I used the phone while driving, and boom, I'd get docked,' the driver told Reuters.

Then, Amazon started asking him to post 'selfies' before each shift on Amazon Flex, another app he had to install.

Amazon rolled out the AI-powered cameras in deliver vans this last February, which was first reported on by The Information, 'with a goal of improving safety'

'I had already logged in with my keycard at the beginning of the shift, and now they want a photo? It was too much,' he added.

The final indignity, he said, was Amazon's decision to install a four-lens, AI-powered camera in delivery vehicles that would record and analyze his face and body the entire shift.

However, the driver eventually quit, citing the surveillance as his reason for leaving.

Before employees started standing up against the surveillance, privacy advocates were already on the frontline just days after Amazon rolled out the AI-powered surveillance cameras.

Andrew Ferguson, a professor of law at DC's American University, told Reuters: 'Amazon is quite literally building mobile surveillance vans to film our neighborhoods, something that we would be rightly horrified about if our government did it.'

He said Amazon's private surveillance networks would further entrench the snooping powers of government.

'I don't think we want to join dystopia prime.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The two endangered snow leopards that tested positive for COVID-19 at the San Diego Zoo a week and a half ago are recovering, officials said in an update.

'The male and female snow leopards, suspected to have contracted the virus that causes COVID-19, are not showing any concerning signs of illness other than coughs that are diminishing,' a San Diego Zoo spokesperson told DailyMail.com on Monday. 'They are eating and moving about normally.'

Three-year-old Naphisa and 9-year-old Ramil tested positive late in July after experts at the zoo tested stool samples for both mammals, according to the San Diego Tribune.

Naphisa first showed symptoms the week of July 23, according to the zoo's Twitter account. A few days later, Ramil also began to show symptoms.

The two snow leopards that tested positive for COVID-19 at the San Diego Zoo last month are recovering. The leopards' coughs are diminishing and they don't show other signs, officials told DailyMail.com

Three-year-old Naphisa and 9-year-old Ramil tested positive late in July. It's unclear how the two big cats contracted the virus

The two Amur leopards that share the enclosure with the snow leopards have not shown any sign of illness.

'Our dedicated team of specialists will continue to provide all four leopards the best care available - monitoring them closely and treating symptoms as they may arise,' the spokesperson added.

It's unclear at this time how the two big cats contracted the virus, but the Tribune noted that other animals at the zoo have been infected.

In January, a gorilla troop became infected after they were exposed to a keeper who was also infected, but did not show symptoms. The gorillas have since recovered, the outlet added.

The snow leopards are the only two at the zoo, which has had the animals in its care since the first arrived in 1949. Thirteen cubs have been born at the park since then

The snow leopards are the only two at the zoo.

The zoo has kept snow leopards since 1949, and thirteen cubs have been born at the park since then.

There are an estimated 4,080-6,590 snow leopards - and 90 Amur leopards- in the wild, according to the World Wildlife Fund, but exact numbers are hard to come by because of the cats’ remote habitat and natural shyness.

Snow leopards are listed as 'vulnerable' by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, with poachers hunting them for their fur and mining in high mountain ranges meaning increased competition for space and food.

Scent sprays are added to boulders, logs, and ground cover in their rocky enclosure, and bones and other food items are placed in challenging areas, to encourage exercise and mental stimulation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The red supergiant star Betelgeuse experienced a massive dip in brightness due to a dark star-spot causing a 300F drop in surface temperature, a study claims.

The bright reddish star, the tenth brightest in the night sky, is located in the shoulder of the Orion constellation and can be seen by the naked eye in the night sky.

It is a variable star, so its brightness changes, but from October 2019 to March 2020, Betelgeuse's brightness dropped 2.5 times, the most significant observed drop in 50 years, according to experts from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.

The team, led by Professor Zhao Gang, observed the star in near-infrared wavelengths using the Weihai Observatory in Shandong from January to April 2020.

They created a new technique to take the temperature of the giant star and measured how warm the surface was at different points over the observation period.

At its dimmest in January it was 5,797 degrees Fahrenheit, and as the brightness recovered by April, it had increased to 6,103 degrees Fahrenheit.

Study authors say this was likely caused by a large dark spot on the surface of the massive star, but that they can't confirm this as they didn't observe the spot directly.

The red supergiant star Betelgeuse experienced a massive dip in brightness due to a dark star-spot causing a 300F drop in surface temperature, a study has revealed

This artists impression shows the supergiant star Betelgeuse as it would be if it were in the solar system - its outer edge would go as far out as Jupiter, swallowing the inner planets

WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT BETELGEUSE? Constellation: Orion

Orion Distance: 700 light years

700 light years Age: 8 to 8.5 million years

8 to 8.5 million years Type: Red Supergiant

Red Supergiant Surface Temperature: 5,800F

5,800F Diameter: 850 million miles

850 million miles Mass: 20 times the Sun Sitting in the constellation of Orion, it is the 10th brightest star in the sky. It is relatively young at about eight million years old and is 20 times larger than the Sun. As a supergiant it is likely to go supernova in 100,000 years - and likely becoming a black hole. It is a reddish variable star just 642 light years from Earth and is also known as Alpha Orionis. In near-infrared wavelengths it is the brightest star in the sky. Advertisement

Sitting in the constellation of Orion, Betelgeuse is 500 light-years from Earth and one of the brightest stars in the sky.

Betelgeuse is a so-called Red Supergiant, a star which, compared to our Sun, is about 20 more massive and roughly 1,000 times larger.

If placed in the centre of the solar system, it would almost reach the orbit of Jupiter.

It had dropped to 40 per cent of its usual luminosity by April 2020, leading to speculation it might go supernova.

A supernova is an explosion where a giant star reaches the end of its life and expels most of its mass into space - dimming is a sign it may happen.

Betelgeuse began to brighten again from April 2020, ruling out a supernova, and so astronomers set out to find a new theory to explain the unusual event.

Several scenarios have been put forward by astronomers around the world.

A leading theory was that a giant cloud of dust and gas had moved between the Earth and Betelgeuse obscuring parts of the massive star from view.

Other explanations include the possibility of obscure dust blocking parts of the stars' light reaching Earth, or changes in the photosphere of the star itself.

The new study by Professor Zhao Gang and colleagues explored the temperature of the star to look for mechanisms behind the dimming.

Scientists from Shandong University and the University of Missouri also joined this study published in the journal Nature Communications.

The surface of Betelgeuse has been captured by astronomers using the Very Large Telescope array (pictured). The bright reddish star, the tenth brightest in the night sky, is located in the shoulder of the Orion constellation and can be seen by the naked eye in the night sky

The research team investigated the high-resolution near-infrared spectra of Betelgeuse obtained at Weihai Observatory of Shandong University on January 31, March 19, April 4, and April 6, 2020.

This covered the dimming and post-dimming phases of the 'Great Dimming' period.

'Taking our advantage in spectroscopic analysis, we aim to understand the possible cause of the mysterious dimming of Betelgeuse,' said Prof Zhao Gang.

They created a special technique for determining the effective temperatures of red supergiants that involved looking for specific chemicals in its atmosphere.

'Our method is based on the measurement of titanium oxide (TiO) and cyanide (CN) molecular lines in stellar spectra,' said first author Dr Sofya Alexeeva.

'The cooler a star is, the more these molecules can form and survive in its atmosphere and the molecular lines are stronger in the stellar spectrum.

An artist's impression of Betelgeuse showing its surface covered by large star spots, which reduce its brightness

OTHER THEORIES BEHIND BETELGEUSE DIMMING Dust cloud A team of scientists found the massive star ejected a large gas bubble. This cooled and formed a dust cloud that temporarily blocked the star's light when viewed from the Earth. Star spots Researchers found evidence of giant 'cool star spots' covering 70 per cent of the surface of Betelgeuse. This in turn resulted in an overall drop in surface temperature of up to 400F and reducing its brightness. Early stage supernova Scientists suggest the star is in the early core helium-burning phase, one of the final steps before supernova. This happens when the core of a star reaches about 100 million degrees F, causing three helium nuclei to collide and fuse to form a carbon nucleus. Sometime after this, the core collapses, causing an explosion that results in a nebula. Advertisement

'In a hotter atmosphere, these molecules dissociate easily and do not survive,' explained Dr Alexeeva, adding they found the temperature rose with luminosity.

'We have found that at the minimum of its luminosity, the effective temperature of Betelgeuse on January 31, 2020, was 3476 Kelvins (5797F),' the author explained.

'However, after it recovered its brightness, on April 6, 2020, the effective temperature was 3646 Kelvins (6103F).

'The changing of the effective temperature by 170 K (306F) is sufficient to explain this mysterious dimming.'

This is similar to the surface temperature drop predicted by an earlier study that found evidence 70 per cent of the star's surface was covered in spots.

They believe the temperature drop could be caused by a large dark star-spot on the surface of Betelgeuse, a well-known phenomenon on red supergiants.

These spots are likely a consequence of convective flows or cool convective cells, which are widely believed to be present in such stars.

'Our findings offer insight in to the nature of red supergiants, the main contributors to the enrichment of heavy elements in the Universe,' said Prof Zhao Gang.

The earlier study, by the Max Planck Institute in Germany, suggested star spots cover 70 per cent of the surface of the red supergiant, lowering the temperature.

This lower temperature reduced its overall luminosity and making it appear less bright during the time of dimming.

Red giant stars like Betelgeuse undergo frequent brightness variations, which is why it took several months of observations to determine this episode was unusual.

The dimming of star Betelgeuse mystified astronomers who feared it would mean an end to the red supergiant, but a new discovery put this claim to rest. NASA's Hubble Space Telescope reveals the dimming was likely due to a traumatic outburst that ejected hot material into space

Lead author of the earlier study, Thavisha Dharmawardena said these star spots aren't unusual on giant stars but the ones on Betelgeuse are unusually large.

Dharmawardena says the temperature variations in the photosphere - the luminous surface of the star - caused the brightness of Betelgeuse as see from Earth to drop.

The most plausible source for such temperature changes are gigantic cool star spots, similar to sunspots, which, however, cover 50 to 70 per cent of the surface.

'Physical laws tell us that the luminosity of a star depends on its diameter and especially on its surface temperature,' the authors wrote.

'If only the size of the star decreases, the luminosity diminishes equally in all wavelengths.

'However, temperature changes affect the radiation emitted along the electromagnetic spectrum differently.'

According to the scientists, the measured darkening in visible light and submillimeter waves is therefore evidence of a reduction in the mean surface temperature of Betelgeuse, which they quantify at 392 F (200 K or 200 C).

The findings have been published in the journal Nature Communications.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Huge swathes of the oldest and thickest Arctic sea ice are at high risk of melting this summer, a new study has warned, after being blown into warmer waters by record-breaking winter winds.

The perennial ice, which is less prone to melting than new ice and has survived for at least one year, helps keep the Earth cool by reflecting sunlight.

It is also a vital part of the habitat of animals such as polar bears and seals.

But its coverage has reduced by about 50 per cent since 1984 and is currently at its lowest on record for this time of year.

Scroll down for video

Huge swathes of the oldest and thickest Arctic sea ice is at high risk of melting this summer, a new study has warned. The research vessel Polarstern is pictured drifting in Arctic sea ice

Record-breaking winter winds have driven eight per cent of the Arctic's entire perennial ice store into the Beaufort Sea, a southerly region where two thirds of ice melts in the summer

WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS OF LOWER SEA ICE LEVELS? The amount of Arctic sea ice peaks around March as winter comes to a close. NASA said in 2018 that the maximum amount of sea ice that year was low, following three other record-low measurements taken in 2015, 2016 and 2017. This can lead to a number of negative effects that impact climate, weather patterns, plant and animal life and indigenous human communities. Additionally, the disappearing ice can alter shipping routes and affect coastal erosion and ocean circulation. NASA researcher Claire Parkinson said: 'The Arctic sea ice cover continues to be in a decreasing trend and this is connected to the ongoing warming of the Arctic. 'It's a two-way street: the warming means less ice is going to form and more ice is going to melt, but, also, because there's less ice, less of the sun's incident solar radiation is reflected off, and this contributes to the warming.' Advertisement

The new study led by University College London (UCL) found that winds blowing persistently clockwise for most of the winter drove eight per cent of the Arctic's entire perennial ice store into the Beaufort Sea, a southerly region where two thirds of ice melts in the summer.

This means almost a quarter (23.5 per cent) of perennial ice is in melt-prone regions outside the central Arctic – the largest fraction since records began in 1989.

The winds, which normally blow weakly anti-clockwise, blew the sea ice clockwise about twice as hard as the previous record.

UCL PhD student Robbie Mallett, who led the study, said: 'In mid-February we saw that a strong weather system was literally spinning the Arctic sea ice around.

'When we looked closer we saw that the Arctic's older ice was drifting out of the "survival zone" – the shrinking area where ice can still survive the summer melt season.'

Co-author Professor Julienne Stroeve, of UCL Earth Sciences and the University of Colorado Boulder, said: 'Since perennial ice tends to be thicker ice that is more resistant to melting out during summer, the loss of this ice removes the ocean's reflective ice cover, allowing the ocean to absorb more heat and light, which in turn melts more ice and warms the planet.'

The persistent clockwise winds that spun the Arctic sea ice around were linked to a weakening of the polar vortex – a circulation of cold winds high up in the Arctic atmosphere.

This weakening caused cold weather to move southward, causing UK temperatures to fall to their lowest level since 1995. In Texas, extremely cold weather paralysed the power grid, leaving four million people without power.

The Arctic, meanwhile, had very high air pressure, warmer temperatures and unprecedented clockwise winds blowing more persistently than ever recorded.

The Arctic, together with the Antarctic, act as the world's refrigerator, with snow and ice in the region reflecting heat back into space, while other parts of the planet absorb heat

WHAT IS THE ARCTIC LAST ICE AREA? The Last Ice Area is thought to be home to the oldest and thickest sea ice in the Arctic. It is in a region located north of Greenland and the Canadian Arctic archipelago. This area is a safe haven for ice-loving animals, such as polar bears, and is usually covered in ice all year round. It is beginning to crumble due to rising temperatures in the region caused by climate change, according to scientists from the University of Washington in Seattle. Like other parts of the Arctic Ocean, the ice here has been gradually thinning, though last spring's sea ice was on average slightly thicker than previous years. The Last Ice Area was one of the last places where animals could seek refuge, but experts say it is unlikely to continue to offer ice all year round. Advertisement

In the study, researchers analysed weather data and satellite maps showing the thickness of sea ice, how it was moving around, and the coverage of perennial versus first-year ice, over December, January and February.

Using data from the European Space Agency's CryoSat-2 mission, they found that the movement of older, thicker ice to melt-prone regions contributed to a record low in the thickness of ice remaining in the Arctic Ocean 'survival zone' at the end of winter – the region where ice normally survives the summer melt season.

As well as being thinner, perennial ice is accounting for a highly diminished proportion of the Arctic region – its coverage was low at the start of the year, and is now at its lowest ever for this time of year, beating a previous record set in 2017.

'Last winter things started badly, and then they got worse,' Mallett said. 'We saw a record-late start to the winter growth season, from which the sea ice never really recovered.

'To add to that, we now have a record-low and precariously positioned perennial ice cover in the Arctic's hottest months.

'If this ice melts before September, then it's gone.'

Prof Stroeve found in a previous study that when the perennial ice is blown into the southern Beaufort Sea, much of it will melt the following summer.

Last month separate research claimed that Earth has lost enough ice every year since 1979 to fill North America's Lake Superior because of climate change.

The research said the planet had lost approximately 33,000 square miles of ice every year from 1979 until 2016.

The collective area of ice, which is known as the cryosphere and holds almost three-quarters of the planet's fresh water, is a good indicator that the surface area of Earth's ice is shrinking from warming temperatures.

A separate study published in July looked at the Wandel Sea north of Greenland, which is inside what's known as the 'Last Ice Area' of the Arctic Ocean. It found that this is rapidly melting due to climate change and will have devastating effects on polar bears if it disappears

Another study, published in July, found that the 'Last Ice Area' in the Arctic is rapidly melting due to climate change and it will have devastating effects on polar bears and walruses if it disappears.

The region located north of Greenland and the Canadian Arctic archipelago, which is a safe haven for animals, is usually covered in ice all year round.

It is beginning to crumble due to rising temperatures in the region caused by climate change, according to scientists from the University of Washington in Seattle.

Animals such as polar bears depend on permanent ice cover to hunt for seals and build dens where they raise their young, but rising global temperatures have meant permanently ice-covered patches in the Arctic are few and far between.

The Last Ice Area was one of the last places where animals could seek refuge, but experts say it is unlikely to continue to offer ice all year round.

The UCL findings have been published in the journal Nature Communications Earth and Environment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stunning images of nearby galaxies revealing the locations of young stars as the gas warms up around them have been captured by astronomers.

The new observations resemble colourful cosmic fireworks, and were obtained with the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope (VLT) in Chile.

Images show different components of the galaxies in distinct colours, allowing astronomers to pinpoint the locations of young stars and their surrounding gas.

Combining these observations with data from the ALMA telescope has allowed the team to shed new light on what triggers clouds of gas to go on to form stars.

Astronomers know that stars are born in clouds of gas, but what sets off star formation, and how galaxies as a whole play into it, remains a mystery.

They explored 30,000 nebulae of warm gas through 15 million spectra, and 100,000 cold-gas regions in 90 nearby galaxies to create a picture of star formation.

It is hoped this data will be able to be used by future teams of astronomers to learn more about how stars of all sizes are formed and use gas to grow.

This image combines observations of the nearby galaxies NGC 1300, NGC 1087, NGC 3627 (top, from left to right), NGC 4254 and NGC 4303 (bottom, from left to right) taken with the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) on ESO's Very Large Telescope (VLT)

Nearby galaxy NGC 1300, a spiral galaxy, with a bar of stars and gas at its centre, located approximately 61 million light-years from Earth in the constellation Eridanus is seen here

This image, taken by the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) on ESO's Very Large Telescope (VLT), shows the nearby galaxy NGC 4303. NGC 4303 is a spiral galaxy, with a bar of stars and gas at its centre, located approximately 55 million light-years from Earth in the constellation Virgo

HOW DO STARS FORM? Stars form from dense molecular clouds - of dust and gas - in regions of interstellar space known as stellar nurseries. A single molecular cloud, which primarily contains hydrogen atoms, can be thousands of times the mass of the sun. They undergo turbulent motion with the gas and dust moving over time, disturbing the atoms and molecules causing some regions to have more matter than other parts. If enough gas and dust come together in one area then it begins to collapse under the weight of its own gravity. As it begins to collapse it slowly gets hotter and expands outwards, taking in more of the surrounding gas and dust. At this point, when the region is about 900 billion miles across, it becomes a pre-stellar core and the starting process of becoming a star. Then, over the next 50,000 years this will contract 92 billion miles across to become the inner core of a star. The excess material is ejected out towards the poles of the star and a disc of gas and dust is formed around the star, forming a proto-star. This is matter is then either incorporated into the star or expelled out into a wider disc that will lead to the formation of planets, moons, comets and asteroids. Advertisement

To understand this process, a team of researchers from the University of Heidelberg in Germany, with other ESO members, scanned galaxies for 'stellar births'.

'For the first time we are resolving individual units of star formation over a wide range of locations and environments in a sample that well represents the different types of galaxies,' says Eric Emsellem, an astronomer at ESO in Germany.

Emsellem is the lead of the VLT-based observations conducted as part of the Physics at High Angular resolution in Nearby GalaxieS (PHANGS) project.

'We can directly observe the gas that gives birth to stars, we see the young stars themselves, and we witness their evolution through various phases,' he said.

They traced newborn stars and the warm gas around them, which is illuminated and heated up by the stars and acts as a smoking gun of ongoing star formation.

Working with the ALMA telescope has helped get the finer detail, as this telescope 'is especially well suited to mapping cold gas clouds,' the team said.

These cold clouds are the parts of galaxies that provide the raw material out of which stars form.

By combining observations using the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) instrument on ESO's VLT, with ALMA images astronomers can examine the galactic regions where star formation is happening.

'The resulting images are stunning, offering a spectacularly colourful insight into stellar nurseries in our neighbouring galaxies,' the authors wrote.

'There are many mysteries we want to unravel,' says Kathryn Kreckel from the University of Heidelberg in Germany and PHANGS team member.

Among these mysteries are whether stars are often born in specific regions of a galaxy, and if they are why. They also want to know after the stars are born, how the evolution influences the formation of a new generation of stars.

While those questions aren't answered here, it is hoped future astronomers can use the data gathered to find more about the power sources of our universe.

MUSE collects spectra, that is the 'bar codes' astronomers scan to unveil the properties and nature of cosmic objects.

It does this at every single location within its field of view, thus providing much richer information than traditional instruments.

Galaxy NGC 3627 is seen here in an image that was obtained by combining observations taken with the Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) on ESO's Very Large Telescope (VLT) and with the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), in which ESO is a partner

NGC 4303 is a spiral galaxy, with a bar of stars and gas at its centre, located approximately 55 million light-years from Earth in the constellation Virgo

‹ Slide me › These images show the galaxy NGC 4254. On the left the image was taken with a combination of VLT and ALMA observations, the right is the VLT image on its own

The MUSE instrument on the VLT observed 30,000 nebulae of warm gas and collected about 15 million spectra of different galactic regions.

The ALMA observations, on the other hand, allowed astronomers to map around 100,000 cold-gas regions across 90 nearby galaxies, producing an unprecedentedly sharp atlas of stellar nurseries in the close Universe.

In addition to ALMA and MUSE, the PHANGS project also features observations from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope.

The various observatories were selected to allow the team to scan our galactic neighbours at different wavelengths, including visible, near-infrared and radio, with each wavelength range unveiling distinct parts of the observed galaxies.

NGC 1087 is a spiral galaxy located approximately 80 million light-years from Earth in the constellation of Cetus. The image is a combination of observations conducted at different wavelengths of light to map stellar populations and warm gas

NGC 3627 is a spiral galaxy located approximately 31 million light-years from Earth in the constellation Leo

'Their combination allows us to probe the various stages of stellar birth - from the formation of the stellar nurseries to the onset of star formation itself and the final destruction of the nurseries by the newly born stars - in more detail than is possible with individual observations,' says Francesco Belfiore from INAF-Arcetri.

'PHANGS is the first time we have been able to assemble such a complete view, taking images sharp enough to see the individual clouds, stars, and nebulae that signify forming stars.'

The work carried out by the PHANGS project will be further honed by upcoming telescopes and instruments, such as NASA's James Webb Space Telescope.

The data obtained in this way will lay further groundwork for observations with ESO's future Extremely Large Telescope (ELT), which will start operating later this decade and will enable an even more detailed look at the structures of stellar nurseries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Researchers in Russia announced they have produced the country's first viable cloned cow - and are now editing her genes in the hope of producing hypoallergenic milk.

The unnamed calf weighed about 140 pounds when she was born in April 2020.

For her first year, she was kept in a separate enclosure with her mother. Now, 14 months, she's up to nearly a half-ton and appears healthy with a normal reproductive cycle.

'Since May, she has been on daily pasture with the other cows of the Institute,' said Galina Singina, a researcher at the Ernst Federal Science Center for Animal Husbandry and lead author of a new study published in the journal Doklady Biochemistry and Biophysics.

'It required some adaptation, but that happened quickly,' she said.

The experiment was a double win, according to the report from Moscow's Skoltech Institute of Science and Technology, because the researchers also successfully altered her genes to not produce the protein that causes lactose intolerance in humans.

Singina worked with colleagues at Skoltech Institute and Moscow State University to 'knock out' the genes responsible for beta-lactoglobulin, the protein that causes 'lactose malabsorption,' often called lactose intolerance, in humans.

The researchers used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to remove PAEP and LOC100848610, two genes representing beta-lactoglobulin in the bovine genome.

They managed to clone the calf using somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), with the nucleus from a regular cell of a donor transferred into an egg with its nucleus removed.

The resulting embryo was then implanted into the uterus of a cow and carried to term.

Scroll down for video

The cloned calf was born in April 2020 and appears healthy. The first cloned cow in Russia, the unnamed bovine has had her genes altered to not produce the protein that causes lactose malabsorption or intolerance

While genetically modified mice are a fairly common phenomenon, modifying other species is exponentially harder, due to higher costs and difficulties in breeding and husbandry, said co-author Petr Sergiev, a professor at Skoltech Institute.

'Thus, a methodology leading to cattle with hypoallergenic milk is not only a necessity for agriculture of the future, but also a cool project,' Sergiev added.

Nearly 70 percent of the world's population has some form of lactose malabsorption, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, making it difficult for them to digest milk and other dairy products derived from cattle.

Cloning a single cow is really just a test run, Sergiev explained. The next is impregnating a herd of several dozen cows with embryos with the edited genes.

The clone was created via somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), with the nucleus from a regular cell of a donor transferred into an egg with its nucleus removed

The ultimate goal is to develop a breed of cows that naturally produces hypoallergenic milk.

'Since it is not a 100% certain process, you have to roll the dice a lot, and it's quite expensive,' Sergiev says.

Elsewhere, researchers are cloning cows for their own health rather than human's: a team in New Zealand used CRISPR genome editing to create cows with gray patches instead of the traditional black, to decrease the amount of heat the animal absorbs while in pasture.

Researchers in New Zealand revealed last year they managed to clone Holstein calves (pictured) with silvery gray markings instead of black, to better cope with the heat

'Compared to a light coat color, black absorbs more solar radiation translating into radiative heat gain which is a contributing factor to heat stress in cattle, negatively impacting on their production levels, fertility and welfare,' according to their study, published on the preprint site biorxiv.

The researchers see the effort as helping cattle to adapt to climate change, 'with predictions for more frequent and prolonged hot temperature patterns, we aimed to lighten their coat color by genome editing.'

Heat stress among dairy cows is one of the leading causes of decreased fertility and milk production in the summer months.

The bovines thrive between 25 and 65 degrees Fahrenheit, but anything above 80 degrees and they start reducing their food intake— resulting in less milk.

Announced in October 2020, the gene-splicing was performed on fetal skin cells from a Holstein Friesian bull cultivated in a petri dish.

The researchers successfully eliminated the pre-melanosomal protein 17 gene, which causes the black coloring, and instead produced 'a strong color dilution effect' of a gray and white coat.

The team from New Zealand used a cloning method to create embryos set to be genetically modified and applied the gRNA/Cas9-mediation, the CRISPR tool, to mutate the pre-melanosomal (PMEL) gene, as first reported by New Scientist.

Once the two calves were born, the team confirmed the silvery gray markings, with the white areas remaining unaffected.

While the calves showed no signs of potential off-target mutations at birth, both were dead with several weeks—one had to be put down and the other died of an infection due to the cloning process.

Goetz Laible with the Ruakura Research Center in Hamilton, New Zealand, said the team will look at more traditional breeding practices to cultivate the mutation.

The study looked at dairy cows, but Laible believes the same method could be applied to beef breeds, such as Black Angus cattle.

'Projected onto a global scale, even modest improvements of eco-productivity from color-diluted cattle would translate into substantial environmental benefits,' according to the study.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Earth's atmosphere was primed for an 'explosion' in the diversity of life as early as 2.7 billion years ago, a study of ancient diamonds has revealed.

The atmospheric composition of volatile gases — such as hydrogen, nitrogen, neon, and carbon-bearing species — reflects that of those found in the Earth's mantle.

This is because volatiles in the atmosphere bubble up from inside the planet, reaching the Earth's surface by means of events like volcanic eruptions.

Acting like time capsules, diamonds can hold a record of the volatile composition of the mantle — and, by extension, the atmosphere — at the time that they formed.

In this way, researchers from the University of Lorraine, France, showed that the atmosphere during the 'Neoarchean' period had a similar volatile makeup as today.

This means that the Earth's atmosphere back then was also rich in those volatiles — like nitrogen and carbon — which are necessary to support life.

Earth's atmosphere was primed for an 'explosion' in the diversity of life as early as 2.7 billion years ago, a study of ancient diamonds — like the one pictured — has revealed

VOLATILES AND THE HUNT FOR ALIEN LIFE Life depends on certain volatiles — meaning such can inform the hunt for life on other worlds. In our solar system, for example, both Earth and Venus are volatile-rich (even if the latter is not exactly what we would consider to be habitable!) The moon and Mars, on the other hand, long ago lost most of their volatiles to space. When hunting for exoplanets — those in other solar systems — astrophysicists often look for volatiles to determine if newly-found worlds might be able to support life. Advertisement

'Studying the composition of the Earth's modern mantle is relatively simple,' said paper author and University of Lorraine geochemist Michael Broadly.

'On average the mantle layer begins around 30 kilometres [18.6 miles] below the Earth's surface, and so we can collect samples thrown up by volcanoes and study the fluids and gases trapped inside,' he explained.

'However, the constant churning of the Earth's crust via plate tectonics means that older samples have mostly been destroyed. Diamonds however, are comparatively indestructible, they're ideal time capsules.'

'We managed to study diamonds trapped in 2.7 billion year old highly preserved rock from Wawa, on Lake Superior in Canada.'

'This means that the diamonds are at least as old as the rocks they are found in — probably older. It's difficult to date diamonds, so this gave us a lucky opportunity to be sure of the minimum age.'

'These diamonds are incredibly rare, and are not like the beautiful gems we think of when we think of diamonds.'

'We heated them to over 2,000°C [3,632°F] to transform them into graphite, which then released tiny quantities of gas for measurement.'

Measuring the isotopes of argon, helium and neon in these gases, the team found they were present in similar proportions to those found in the upper mantle today — meaning Earth's volatile content has likely been stable since the diamonds formed.

'We have no evidence of a significant change since these diamonds were formed 2.7 billion years ago,' said Dr Broadley.

'This was a surprising result. It means the volatile-rich environment we see around us today is not a recent development, so providing the right conditions for life to develop,' he continued.

'Our work shows that these conditions were present at least 2.7 billion years ago, but the diamonds we use may be much older, so it's likely that these conditions were set well before our 2.7 billion year threshold.'

The atmospheric composition of volatile gases reflects that of those found in the Earth's mantle. This is because volatiles in the atmosphere bubble up from inside the planet, reaching the Earth's surface by means of events like volcanic eruptions. Acting like time capsules, diamonds can hold a record of the volatile composition of the mantle — and, by extension, the atmosphere — at the time that they formed

'Diamonds are unique samples, as they lock in compositions during their formation,' commented Suzette Timmerman, a geochemist from the University of Alberta, Canada, who was not involved in the present study.

'The Wawa fibrous diamonds specifically were a great selection to study — being more than 2.7 billion years old — and they provide important clues into the volatile composition in this period, the Neoarchean.'

'It is interesting that the upper mantle already appears degassed more than 2.7 billion years ago. This work is an important step towards understanding the mantle and atmosphere in the first half of Earth's history.'

The full findings of the study were presented at the 2021 Goldschmidt Conference, which is being held virtually this year from July 4–9.

'We managed to study diamonds trapped in 2.7 billion year old highly preserved rock from Wawa, on Lake Superior in Canada,' said University of Lorraine geochemist Michael Broadly
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sex with modern humans may have helped drive Neanderthals to extinction because it could have have led to a blood disorder in their babies, scientists have discovered.

The condition can cause potentially fatal anaemia and is often worse in second and subsequent pregnancies, meaning it would have lowered 'reproductive success' by limiting the number of offspring Neanderthals could have.

It would also have been 'quite common' because of the species' limited gene pool, researchers said, and is likely to be partly to blame for their demise.

Scroll down for video

Theory: Sex with modern humans may have helped drive Neanderthals to extinction because it could have have led to a blood disorder in their babies, scientists have discovered

WHAT IS THE BLOOD DISORDER HDFN AND WHY DID IT HELP KILL OFF NEANDERTHALS? 'Haemolytic disease of the foetus and newborn' (HDFN) is a blood disorder that occurs when the blood types of a mother and baby are incompatible. Everyone has a blood type and an Rh factor, which indicates whether they have a specific protein on the surface of their red blood cells. If a person has this protein, which is the case in most people, they are Rh-positive. However, if a woman who does not have the protein has a child with a man who does it can cause the foetus to have a different Rh factor from its mother. This can lead to the mother's immune system attacking a baby's red blood cells, causing potentially fatal anaemia. The condition is rare today and affects around three in every 100,000 pregnancies. However, Neanderthals were particularly susceptible to it because they carried a specific set of genetic variants. HDFN is often worse in second and subsequent pregnancies, meaning it would have lowered 'reproductive success' by limiting the number of offspring Neanderthals could have. It would also have been 'quite common' because of the species' limited gene pool, researchers said, and is likely to be partly to blame for their demise. Advertisement

Scientists analysed the blood types of three Neanderthals and found that they were particularly susceptible to 'haemolytic disease of the foetus and newborn' (HDFN) because they carried a specific set of genetic variants.

The condition is rare today and affects around three in every 100,000 pregnancies.

'The fact that these forms of genes were detected in individuals separated by 4,000km and 50,000 years suggest that this genetic peculiarity — and the risk of [an] anaemic foetus — would have been quite common amongst Neanderthals,' said Stephane Mazieres, a lead author on the paper from Aix-Marseille University.

Although HDFN could have arisen when Neanderthals had sex with each other, experts said the risk was 'more marked' in mating with our ancestors and also Denisovans, another extinct human species.

'These elements could have contributed to weakening the descendants to the point of leading to their demise, especially combined with the competition with Homo sapiens for the same ecological niche,' the researchers said.

Everyone has a blood type and an Rh factor, which indicates whether they have a specific protein on the surface of their red blood cells. If a person has this protein, which is the case in most people, they are Rh-positive.

However, if a woman who does not have the protein has a child with a man who does it can cause the foetus to have a different Rh factor from its mother.

This can lead to the mother's immune system attacking a baby's red blood cells, causing potentially fatal anaemia.

The discovery could offer further clues as to what drove Neanderthals to extinction about 40,000 years ago.

There are many theories as to what led to their downfall.

Experts have suggested that early humans may have carried tropical diseases with them from Africa that wiped out their ape-like cousins.

The predominant theory is that Homo sapiens killed off the species through competition for food and habitat.

A map showing the relative dates at which humans arrived in the different Continents, including Europe 45,000 years ago. Humans and Neanderthals co-existed for about 8,000 years before Neanderthals went extinct

Scientists know that Neanderthals and Homo Sapiens interbred because up to 2 per cent of the DNA found in modern Europeans and some Asian people comes from Neanderthals

Homo sapiens' superior brain power and hunting techniques meant the Neanderthals couldn't compete.

Based on scans of Neanderthal skulls, a new theory suggests the heavy-browed hominids lacked key human brain regions vital for memory, thinking and communication skills.

That would have affected their social and cognitive abilities – and could have killed them off as they were unable to adapt to climate change.

Scientists know that Neanderthals and Homo sapiens interbred because up to 2 per cent of the DNA found in modern Europeans and some Asian people comes from Neanderthals.

The latest research, entitled Blood Groups of Neanderthals and Denisova Decrypted, was published in the journal PLoS One.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Students who are assigned adjacent seats at school are significantly more likely to become friends — even if they seem superficially dissimilar, a study has found.

Previous studies have shown that people are more likely to grow close to people who seem similar to them — but are also encouraged to form friendships by proximity.

In an experiment, an international team of researchers explored the impact of set seating plans on the friendships among 2,966 students in 40 Hungarian schools.

They found that pupils who sit together are an average of 7 per cent more likely to become friends, regardless of ethnicity, gender or scholastic ability.

The findings suggest seating assignments may be effective at helping to forge diverse friendships, fostering social skills and lowering barriers between groups.

Students who are assigned adjacent seats at school are significantly more likely to become friends — even if they seem superficially dissimilar, a study has found (stock image)

'Friendships matter, for better or worse,' said paper author and sociologist Felix Elwert of the University of Wisconsin–Madison.

'Having friends improves happiness and health — but friendship networks also divide people, because humans mostly befriend others that are just like them.

'Importantly, we found that sitting next to each other increased friendship potential for all children, regardless of their gender, class, or ethnic background.

'This demonstrates that simple, "light-touch". interventions can effectively diversify friendship networks.'

In their study, Professor Elwert and colleagues created randomised seating classroom charts for a total of 2,966 grade 3–8 students — with ages from 8–14 — across 40 different schools in rural Hungary.

Seating allocations were maintained for a complete semester, at the end of which each student was surveyed about friendships.

The team's analysis found that students who sat next to each other had a 22 per cent likelihood of becoming mutual friends — seven per cent higher than if they did not.

Moreover, the increased tendency towards friendship transcended various demographic differences, including educational achievement, ethnicity and gender.

Despite this, however, the team noted that students were still more likely to form friendships with other people if they belonged to the same demographic groups — a fact that was especially true when considering gender and ethnicity.

This, the researchers believe, is because the baseline propensity towards friendship starts out higher among 'similar' students — meaning that proximity was more likely to push them over the threshold into an actual friendship.

'We found that sitting next to each other increased friendship potential for all children, regardless of their gender, class, or ethnic background,' said paper author and sociologist Felix Elwert of the University of Wisconsin–Madison in the US. 'This demonstrates that simple, "light-touch". interventions can effectively diversify friendship networks' (stock image)

'Although teachers have a full control over arranging the classroom seating chart, inducing friendship by seating chart arrangement is an overlooked policy lever,' said paper author Tamás Keller of the Centre for Social Science in Budapest.

'Our research has highlighted two specific boundaries: gender and ethnic differences. Students in early adolescence make friendships with the same sex peers—a feature that is difficult to change with light-touch seating chart interventions.

'Similarly, the goal to establish inter-ethnic friendship ties might require more intensive interventions,' he concluded.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal PLOS ONE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SpaceX announced last month that its Starlink satellite internet now has 90,000 users in 12 nations, but a new filing from the Elon Musk-owned company suggests it is looking beyond just beaming internet into homes.

According to an application with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), SpaceX aims to place its user terminals on vehicles, vessels and aboard aircraft, allowing customers to connect to the space internet while 'on the move.'

'Operation under the requested blanket license will provide the first option for some and promote competition for others in the market for in-motion broadband services, to the benefit of drivers, ship operators, and air travelers in the United States and abroad,' reads the filing submitted by SpaceX's director of Satellite Policy David Goldman.

'These services will enhance the security of mobile platforms and allow operators and passengers to access services that enable increased productivity.'

The new terminals, called Earth Stations in Motion (ESIMs), would be 'ruggedized' to withstand harsh environmental conditions and include a radiation detection to determine when levels exceed maximum exposure.

Scroll down for video

According to an application with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), SpaceX aims to place its user terminals on vehicles, vessels and aboard aircraft, allowing customers to connect to the space internet while 'on the move' (stock)

The proposed ESIMs 'will transmit in the 14.0-14.5 GHz band and receive in the 10.7-12.7 GHz band,' according to the filing.

However, it is no clear what the cost would be or hardware needed to connect a moving vehicle to Starlink.

The new terminals would make their way to US territories, 'throughout international waters worldwide, and as ESAAs on U.S.-registered aircraft operating worldwide and non-U.S.- registered aircraft operating in U.S. airspace.'

The terminals placed on moving vehicles will communicate with Starlink satellites that are visible on the horizon above a minimum elevation of 25 degrees.

The terminals placed on moving vehicles will communicate with Starlink satellites that are visible on the horizon above a minimum elevation of 25 degrees. Pictured is a concept image of the Starlink mega constellation

'As the terminal steers the transmitting beam, it automatically changes the power to maintain a constant level at the receiving antenna of its target satellite to the extent possible, compensating for variations in antenna gain and path loss associated with the steering angle,' the filing states.

The redesigned ESIMs would be designed to withstand both extremes of heat and cold, along with feature snow and ice melt capabilities.

However, it is no clear what the cost would be or hardware needed to connect a moving vehicle to Starlink. Pictured is the Starlink terminal kit sent to homes

'Over the last two years, SpaceX has deployed over 1,700 satellites, sufficient to support introduction of its high-capacity, low-latency broadband services in portions of the United States,' reads the filing.

'This system is now on the brink of delivering this service across the entire United States— including to the most remote corners and Polar Regions of the country that too often get left behind.

'The demand for more broadband is surging and the need for connections has never been more important.

'Granting this application would serve the public interest by authorizing a new class of ground-based component for SpaceX's satellite system that will expand the range of broadband capabilities available to moving vehicles throughout the United States and to moving vessels and aircraft worldwide—and most particularly, to those in challenging environments where ruggedization is appropriate.'

Recent speed tests of the Starlink internet shows its average download speed in the US is 97.23 Mbps, which is not far off from the average 115.22 Mbps.

This means SpaceX is just shy of providing users withy the ability to download a movie in just one minute - the internet needs a download speed of 100 Mbps.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A pottery fragment unearthed in Israel bears the name of the biblical judge 'Jerubbaal,' which was inked on the artifact 3,100 years ago.

Mentioned in the Hebrew bible, Jerubbaal was a military leader, judge and prophet whose story is recounted in chapters 6 to 8 of the Book of Judges.

The ceramic artifact was discovered in an archeological excavation at Horbat al-Ra'i, near Kiryat Gat in Israel, which experts say it was part of a small jug that carried precious liquids.

'The name written on the jug, Yarubaal, may allude to biblical Jerubbaal, also known as the judge Gideon ben (son of) Yoash, but we cannot be sure if he owned the inscribed vessel,' the Israel Antiquities Authority shared in a statement.

A pottery fragment unearthed in Israel bears the name of the biblical judge 'Jerubbaal,' which was inked on the artifact 3,100 years ago

Inscriptions from the Biblical period are extremely rare and only a handful have been discovered that only include several unrelated letters.

However, the fragment found at Horbat al-Ra'I has the complete name written out and it is the first time the name Jerubbaal has appeared in an archaeological context dated to the period of the Judges, around 1100 BC.

Yossef Garfinkel and Sa'ar Ganor, who directed the excavations on behalf of the Institute of Archeology of the Hebrew University Jerusalem, Israel Antiquities Authority, and Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia, explained in a statement: 'The name Jerubbaal is known from passages in the Book of Judges as an alternative name for Judge Gideon ben (son of) Yoash, who combated idolatry by breaking an altar dedicated to Baal and cutting down an Asherah pole.

'In biblical tradition, Gideon was remembered for triumph over the Midianites, who used to cross the Jordan River to plunder crops.

The fragment found at Horbat al-Ra'I has the complete name written out and it is the first time the name Jerubbaal has appeared in an archaeological context dated to the period of the Judges, around 1100 BC

Archaeologists believe the fragment was part of a small jug that held precious liquids such as essential oils

'According to the Bible, Gideon organized a small army of 300 soldiers and attacked the Midianites at night near the Harod Spring.

'Due to the considerable distance between the Judean Shephelah and the Jezreel Valley, this inscription may be related to another Jerubbaal and not biblical Gideon, although it is possible that the jug belonged to judge Gideon.

'In any event, Jerubbaal was evidently in the common name used during the time of the biblical judges.'

Archaeologists have been working at the site since 2015, but records show British researchers started digging there in the 19th century, The Jerusalem Post reports.

The current team began their work with the hopes of uncovering an ancient fortress, as pottery found at the site is similar to those unearthed in Khirbat Qeiyafa, an ancient fortified city from the time of King David – around 10th century BCE.

The team has unearthed a trove of pottery at the site, along with remains of what were once rooms

Based on the archaeological findings, including the architecture and the pottery, Khirbat er-Ra'i was mainly a Canaanite site, but with a strong Philistine influence

'We thought we might find another fortress, but instead we only found six rooms dating back to that period, so it looks like at that point it might have been just a small village,' the archaeologist said.

However, it turned out that that site appeared to have reached its height one or two centuries prior, that is, at the time of the Judges.

The team has unearthed a trove of pottery at the site, along with remains of what were once rooms.

Based on the archaeological findings, including the architecture and the pottery, Khirbat er-Ra'i was mainly a Canaanite site, but with a strong Philistine influence, according to Garfinkel.

'I believe that the site was mostly inhabited by Canaanite refugees, who came to live under Philistine hegemony' he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NASA has launched an investigation into Apollo-era administrator James E Webb's alleged involvement in a purge of LGBT employees prior to the 1969 Moon landing.

The agency has named its $10 billion (£7.3 billion) next generation space telescope after Webb, but there are calls from some scientists for a different name, saying the legacy of his leadership is 'complicated at best, and at worst, complicit with persecution.'

The James Webb telescope is being hailed as a successor to the Hubble space telescope, able to peer further into the history of our Universe than ever before.

NASA told MailOnline it was 'aware of concerns that have arisen about James E. Webb, and we are working with historians to examine his role in government.'

Webb served as NASA administrator from 1961 to 1968, leaving shortly before the launch of the first crewed Apollo mission. However, a group of scientists say he enacted a government policy to remove any LGBT employees during his reign.

A campaign to rename the telescope claims the history is already known and clear, and that NASA should get on with renaming it after someone who befits the honour, suggesting Harriet Tubman, who used celestial navigation to lead slaves to freedom.

NASA has so far ignored the calls to rename the telescope, insisting that Webb's work as administrator 'laid the groundwork for today's accomplishments'.

The telescope will launch for its orbit between Earth and the sun as early as October 31 on a European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 5 rocket from French Guiana.

An ESA spokesperson told MailOnline the agency was 'aware of the discussion' around the name and was keeping a close loop with NASA - 'as diversity is taken very seriously in both agencies.'

NASA has launched an investigation into the track record of its Apollo-era administrator James E Webb, over his alleged involvement in a 'purge' of LGBT employees

Webb served as administrator on the run up to the first crewed Apollo mission, and scientists say he enacted a government policy to remove any LGBT employees

WHO WAS JAMES E WEBB? James E Webb was the second administrator of NASA, joining the space agency from the State department in 1961. He oversaw the launch of the Mercury and Gemini missions, and left in 1968 before the first crewed Apollo flight. He was born in 1906 in North Carolina, studying law at George Washington University Law School, before starting his civil service career at the US House of Representatives. He was nominated by Harry Truman to serve as undersecretary of state in the State department, before joining NASA in 1961. He had a key role in creating the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston and led the drive for planetary exploration through Mariner and Pioneer. Advertisement

James E Webb was born in 1906 and was the second appointed administrator of NASA, serving as the head of the space agency for most of the 1960s.

He oversaw NASA from the start of the Kennedy administration, including the Mercury and Gemini missions, leaving just before the first crewed Apollo flight.

While working at NASA he was responsible for implementing a federal policy that purged LGBT people from the NASA workforce. This is a policy he would have been aware of while at the State department, before taking over at the space agency.

What isn't clear is whether he was actively homophobic himself, whether he was merely complicit, or whether he pushed back against the federal policy.

NASA says it has appointed a historian to investigate his legacy, including a deep study of all correspondents and documents from his time as administrator.

His push to put science first during his tenure at NASA made him popular with many scientists, with NASA saying this has created a lasting legacy.

This is why the agency confirmed in 2002 that the then titled Next Generation Space Telescope would be named after James E Webb.

The telescope has been in development since 1996 and its budget has risen from an initial $500 million to just under $10 billion today.

The telescope will launch for its orbit between Earth and the sun as early as October 31 on a European Ariane 5 rocket from French Guiana

'The agency made the naming decision in recognition of Webb’s role in retaining an active science program at NASA in the agency's early years,' a spokesperson said.

'Webb's work as administrator laid the groundwork for today's accomplishments, and science remains a critical part of NASA's work: to understand the universe, advance exploration, and inspire the next generation.'

However, some within the agency, and others that might be working with data from the telescope, say this nostalgia isn't enough to counter his role in the purging.

NASA recently unfolded the giant mirror of the James Webb Space Telescope 'like a piece of origami artwork' one last time ahead of its launch later this year

EXCERPT: LETTER TO NASA FROM THE RENAME JWST CAMPAIGNERS 'We demand that NASA immediately rename JWST, and bestow this honor on someone whose legacy befits a telescope whose data will be used in discoveries that will inspire future generations of astronomers, discoveries that we the undersigned will make. 'In choosing an appropriate namesake for this inspiring mission, NASA should seek to honor someone whose legacy is truly worthy: for example, Harriet Tubman was proposed as an alternative namesake in this recent op-ed, because she led so many people to freedom navigating by the light and coordinates of the stars. 'We, the future users of NASA’s next-generation space telescope and those who will inherit its legacy, demand that this telescope be given a name worthy of its remarkable discoveries, a name that stands for a future in which we are all free.' SOURCE: RENAME JWST Advertisement

They claim he was silent over the policy while at the State department, and then complicit in enforcing the purge at NASA.

Records uncovered by Columbia University astronomer, Adrian Lucy, suggest Webb actively handed over material on LGBT employees while in charge.

Astronomers Sarah Tuttle and Lucianne Walkowicz and physicist Chanda Prescod-Weinstein have been leading the charge for a new name, and writing an article for Scientific American, they said Webb was a poor choice to honour.

Speaking to astrophysicist Grant Tremblay, NASA director of Astrophysics, Paul Hertz said it was being reviewed at the highest levels.

There is a campaign called 'Rename the James Webb Space Telescope' that includes a petition the group aim to present to NASA that has run for a number of years.

In an open letter, the campaign team said: 'We are not only space science professionals and space enthusiasts, we are also future users of JWST.

'Together, we are part of the constituency that NASA purports to serve and inspire through its mission to “reveal the unknown for the benefit of all humankind.'

They say that examining the archive of Webb's leadership time 'isn't enough' to solve the problem as the historical record was already clear on the issue.

'Those who would excuse Webb’s failure of leadership cannot simultaneously award him credit for his management of Apollo,' the authors of the letter said.

'As we have noted previously, Webb’s legacy of leadership is complicated at best, and at worst, complicit with persecution.'

NASA's James Webb Space Telescope will launch 'no earlier than October 31,' a NASA spokesperson told DailyMail.com

Current telescopes aren't able to detect signs of life within an exoplanet atmosphere or whether it is truly habitable, but future observatories including the NASA James Webb space telescope will delve deeper into these distant worlds than ever before

They have 'demanded' NASA immediately rename the telescope, to bestow the honour on someone 'whose legacy befits a telescope whose data will be used in discoveries that will inspire future generations of astronomers'.

They haven't said who they think should be given the honour, but suggest one person could be Harriet Tubman, who led slaves to freedom by the light and coordinates of the stars.

Tubman was born into slavery and after escaping made 13 missions to rescue 70 enslaved people - including family and friends.

NASA says it is investigating Webb's history and Hertz told Tremblay the agency was aware of the petition and concerns from the community.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apes like chimps and bonobos often use special signals to begin and end social interactions — much like we might say hello and goodbye — a study has found.

This behaviour had never before been seen in another species outside of humans, explained the researchers, who were led from Durham University.

The team also found that, just like with humans, bonobos who were close friends were more likely to be more relaxed about the social niceties when interacting.

Scroll down for video

Apes like chimps and bonobos use special signals to begin and end social interactions — much like we might say hello and goodbye — a study has found. Pictured: chimpanzees Madingo (left) and Macourie (right) share a mutual gaze before Macourie grooms the younger male

ETIQUETTE FOR APES The researchers found that social interactions between apes often began and end with distinct signals. Interactions might follow a sequence like this, for example: Apes approach each other They share a mutual gaze They engage in special gestures like touching each other, butting heads or holding hands Interactions — play, grooming, or something else — begin Mutual gazes and gestures are then used to signal the end of the activity Signals may also be used to try to resume an activity that was interrupted, or if one of the pair does not want to end the social interaction. Advertisement

When humans and apes signal shared intentions, they enter into a mutual sense of obligation known as 'joint commitment' — a phenomena long argued to be unique to human beings, but that now appears to have emerged earlier in our shared lineage.

'We were able to launch rockets and land on the moon because we have the ability to share our intentions,' said paper author and ‪comparative cognition‬ expert Raphaela Heesen of Durham University.

This, she added, 'allows us to achieve things so much bigger than a single individual can achieve alone. [It] has been suggested to be at the heart of human nature.'

The researchers were inspired to investigate joint commitment in apes when they witnessed two bonobos — interrupted mid-grooming — appearing to use gestures to resume the activity they had previously been engaged.

Similar behaviours have been seen in studies of joint commitment among humans — with young children vocalising and offering toys to experimenters when the latter abruptly stopped playing with them in an effort to resume the abandoned game.

Dr Heesen and colleagues expanded on the existing theory by suggesting that joint commitment isn't just based on a shared feeling of obligation, but also included the actions of setting up an agreement and mutually accepting when such is fulfilled.

In the example of a human conversation, then, a joint commitment to a conversation might begin with eye contact and a greeting — and go on to end with a signal phrase like 'goodbye', 'okay, sounds good', or something similar.

In their study, Dr Heesen and colleagues analysed a total of 1,242 interactions within groups of bonobos and chimpanzees living in zoos.

The team found that the apes did indeed frequently gaze at each other and use gestures — such as touching each other, butting heads or holding hands — in order to communicate the beginning and end of social interactions.

In fact, the bonobos were seen to exchange both mutual gazes and so-called entry signals before playing together or grooming each other 90 per cent of the time, and chimpanzees 69 per cent of the time.

Signals at the end of interactions were even more common — bringing to a close 92 per cent of interactions between bonobos and 86 per cent between chimpanzees.

The team also looked at how the interactions were mediated by factors like apes having different levels of social power, or being socially bonded.

They found that the closer bonobos appeared to be to each other, the shorter the duration of the beginning and ending signal phases — and, sometimes, close pairs forewent such formalities completely.

This, Dr Heesen pointed out, is something we do too. She explained: 'When you’re interacting with a good friend, you’re less likely to put in a lot of effort in communicating politely.'

The same trend was not seen among chimpanzees, however — a fact which may reflect the less egalitarian and friendship-based nature of their groups.

Signals at the end of interactions were more common than at the start — bringing to a close 92 per cent of interactions between bonobos and 86 per cent between chimpanzees (as pictured)

More work will be needed, however, to properly understand the origin and evolution of joint commitment, the researchers explained.

'Behaviour doesn’t fossilize. You can’t dig up bones to look at how behaviour has evolved. But you can study our closest living relatives: great apes like chimpanzees and bonobos,' said Dr Heesen.

'Whether this type of communication is present in other species will also be interesting to study in the future.'

The full findings of the study were published in the journal iScience.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A soft robot that can change colour in real-time to match its background like a chameleon could pave the way to new forms of military camouflage.

The 'artificial chameleon skin' that covers the segmented back of the walking plastic-bodied robot was developed by a team led from the Seoul National University.

Built to resemble the animal, the little walking robot is 1 foot and 3 inches (38 cm) long, some six inches (15 cm) wide and weighs in at 2 lbs (0.9 kg).

Footage of the chameleon bot shows it walking across a background with stripes in different colours and textures, which it studies with its sensors.

As it crosses each stripe, the segments on the robots back gradually change hue to match, phasing from an orange–red to green and finally a rich blue.

Other applications for the tech might include the creation of flexible, wearable displays and to make cars or buildings that could change colour as the user desires.

Scroll down for video

A soft robot that can change colour in real-time to match its background, just like a chameleon, could pave the way to new forms of military camouflage. Pictured: in a demonstration, the robot changed its back to match the surface over which it was walking

Built to resemble the real-life chameleons (like pictured) that inspired it, the little walking robot is 1 foot and 3 inches long, some six inches wide and weighs in at 2 lbs

The 'artificial chameleon skin' that covers the segmented back of the walking plastic-bodied robot was developed by a team led from the Seoul National University. Pictured: the robot with its camouflage turned off (left) contrasted with the complex patterns it can reproduce (right)

HOW THE BOT WORKS The chameleon robot has sensors which analyse the hue and pattern of the surfaces over which it walks. Its skin, meanwhile, combines temperature driven colour change liquid crystal layers with vertically stacked, patterned silver nanowire heating networks. These heat the liquid crystals such that they gently change to match the colour of the background as detected by the sensor. Advertisement

'The ultimate form of this application will be an invisibility cloak — by blending into the background,' said paper author and mechanical engineer Seung Hwan Ko of the Seoul National University in South Korea.

He added: 'For the military, it would make a great covert intelligent scout robot — and impossible for the enemy to notice.

'It also opens the door to actively camouflage a soldier.

'Current military uniforms are "passive". They have a fixed colour and patterns that cannot reflect the change of surrounding.'

In contrast, active camouflage would be able to change their appearance to better blend in with the background.

Realising such abilities technologically, however, has long been a challenging feat, as artificial camouflage devices need to be able to display a wide range of possible colours that can be changed on demand and reflect fine background details.

In their study, Professor Ko and colleagues achieved this using a novel strategy that combines integrated thermochromic (temperature driven colour change) liquid crystal layers with vertically stacked, patterned silver nanowire heating networks.

Colour sensors and feedback systems built into the robot detect the local background colour, and then transitions the colour of its skin in order to match.

Stealth and camouflage applications are not the only uses that the team conceive for their artificial chameleon skin technology.

'You may imagine a cloth that changes its colour and patterns according to your taste or environment,' Professor Ko said.

'Other applications include active background adaptions for '"cosmetic" or "aesthetic" purpose, cars, clothes or buildings.

'In addition, this chameleon technology can be used for future flexible and wearable displays.'

The researchers created their artificial chameleon skin by combing integrated thermochromic (temperature driven colour change) liquid crystal layers (left and middle) with vertically stacked, patterned silver nanowire heating networks (left and top right)

Colour sensors and feedback systems built into the robot detect the local background colour — and then transitions the colour of its skin in order to match, as pictured

At present, the robot chameleon developed by the researcher is a little larger than the real thing.

However, with their initial study complete, the team are hoping to be able to scale down the design.

In addition, the team are looking to give the robot the ability to reflect the textures of background surfaces with greater resolution, a feat they say may be attainable with advances in signal processing and data-driven science.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Nature Communications.

'The ultimate form of this application will be an invisibility cloak — by blending into the background,' said paper author and mechanical engineer Seung Hwan Ko of the Seoul National University in South Korea. Pictured: the robot, which is black when powered off, changes its skin colour as it walks across a multicoloured surface
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sir David Attenborough is a British national treasure, an iconic naturalist and an Emmy winner two times over.

But now he's the recipient of a truly singular honor: A new species of frog-legged beetle has been named after the 95-year-old environmentalist.

Not just any beetle—one that lived nearly 49 million years ago in what is now Garfield County, Colorado.

Pulchritudo attenboroughi, or 'Attenborough's beauty,' was announced Friday in the journal Papers in Palaeontology, though a fossil of the prehistoric creature has been on display in the Denver Museum of Nature & Science since 1995.

In the exhibition display at 'Prehistoric Journey,' though, it's been labeled a longhorn beetle.

Scroll down for video

Pulchritudo attenboroughi, or 'Attenborough's beauty,' (pictured) has been on display in the Denver Museum of Nature & Science since 1995, mis-identified as a longhorn beetle

Frank Krell, the museum's senior entomology curator, had always been entranced by the beetle fossil, especially the beautiful patterns on its wing casings.

But Krell realized there were aspects of it that didn't line up with what was known about longhorns, so he tapped Francesco Vitali, a beetle expert at the National Museum of Natural History in Luxembourg, and the pair closely analyzed the preserved details for anomalies.

Using computer animation, researches were able to create a 3D model of the bug while it was alive and found that its hind tibiae, or back legs, were crooked.

That meant it wasn't a longhorn after all but a frog-legged leaf beetle—and an entirely new species and genus, at that.

A newly identified beetle that lived some 49 million years ago has been named after beloved naturalist and documentary narrator Sir David Attenborough

Entomologists Frank Krell and Francesco Vitali got a better look at their specimen by creating a 3D virtual model of the beetle as it would have appeared 49 million years ago

'I was delighted to have the opportunity to work on such a magnificent and unique fossil,' Vitali said in a statement from the museum.

In selecting its genus name, the pair chose 'Pulchritudo,' Latin for 'beauty.'

The fossil 'is most definitely deserving of its name,' he said in the statement.

'This is one of the most magnificent beetle fossils ever found, The patterning is preserved in unsurpassed clarity and contrast, making this one of the best-preserved beetle fossils.'

Species are often named after fellow zoologists, botanists and other experts who have made profound contributions to the field.

Krell said as an announcer and a naturalist, Attenborough 'inspired him, his family and millions of others through his documentaries on the natural world.'

'Nobody imparts the grandeur and beauty of nature more impressively than Sir David,' he said. 'This fossil, unique in its preservation and beauty, is an apt specimen to honor such a great man.'

Beetles rarely make good fossils, but this specimen in a lagerstätten, a deposit of fine-grained sediment with exceptionally preserved fossils in it, located at the Eocene Green River Formation in northwest Colorado

That the specimen is so well preserved is incredible, the researchers agreed: Though they have a hard shell in life, beetles typically fall apart when they sink into the sediment of whatever body of water they died floating on.

'Usually, only single wing cases are found in the fossil record,' the university reported.

But once in a while, paleontologists undercover the mother lode: A lagerstätten, a deposit of fine-grained sediment with exceptionally preserved fossils in it—sometimes ones that still have soft tissue.

The Eocene Green River Formation in northwest Colorado and Utah, where the Attenborough's beauty was discovered, is such a lagerstätten, providing the researchers with 'very well preserved, often almost complete fossils.'

So far, researchers have uncovered rock containing 120,000 specimen of leaves, spiders, reptiles, feathers, flowers and more there.

The Smithsonian Museum of Natural History is home to some 35,000 fossiliferous rocks collected from within the Green River Formation.

Attenborough has been the name sake of at least 20 species and genera of plants, butterflies, spiders, weevils, shrimp, snails and more.

He is also the namesake of the RSS Sir David Attenborough, a research vessel operated by the British Antarctic Survey.

In July, dozens of new species of trapdoor spiders were named after popular artists like Neil Gaiman, Peter Gabriel and Brandi Carlile.

'Anything we can do to increase people's interest in the diversity around them is worthwhile,' said entomologist Rebecca Godwin, co-author of a paper in the scholarly journal ZooKeys describing the 33 new species '

And giving species names that people recognize but that still have relevant meaning is one way to do that.'

.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Blue Origin posted an infographic on its website, seen Wednesday, that calls SpaceX's lunar Starship an 'immensely complex and high risk' approach for sending the first woman and next man to the moon in 2024.

The criticism comes just days after the Jeff Bezo-owned company's protest against NASA's decision to award SpaceX a contract to build the lunar was denied, and suggests Blue Origin isn't taking the loss lightly.

The infographic states that the Elon Musk-owned firm would need more than 10 Starship launches to land once on the moon and needs to be refueled in orbit, 'a process that has also never been done before.'

It also cites the massive size of the Starship, compared to the Blue Origin lander, along with the fact that SpaceX has yet to launch an orbital mission from its Boca Chica, Texas launch site.

Scroll down for video

Blue Origin posted an infographic on its website , seen Wednesday, that calls SpaceX's lunar Starship an 'immensely complex and high risk' approach for sending the first woman and next man to the moon in 2024. The criticism comes just days after the Jeff Bezo-owned company's protest against NASA's decision to award SpaceX a contract to build the lunar was denied, and suggests Blue Origin isn't taking the loss lightly

NASA made the initially announcement about the lunar lander contracts in April 2020.

It awarded the Blue Origin team with $579 million, the Dynetics team with $253 million and SpaceX with $135 million.

The firms were given until 2021 to create a lander and then NASA would choose one or more winners to turn the design into a working spacecraft.

On April 16, 2021, NASA announced SpaceX was going to be the only company to construct a lunar lander.

The infographic states that the Elon Musk-owned firm would need more than 10 Starship launches to land once on the moon and needs to be refueled in orbit, 'a process that has also never been done before'

Blue Origin highlights it would only need three National Team launches with proven systems. Starship's exit is 126 feet off the ground, which would likely use elevators to ferry astronauts down to the lunar surface, while the Blue Origin lander is 32 feet off the ground and would use a simple down a long ladder

SpaceX received a $2.9 billion contract, which was reportedly much lower than what competitors bid.

Blue Origin, however, refused to accept the decision and filed a protest with US Government Accountability Office (GAO).

The 'congressional watchdog' released its conclusion Friday, which found 'NASA did not violate procurement law or regulation when it decided to make only one award,' which was Blue Origin's entire defense on the matter.

But the infographic suggests Blue Origin may still be licking it wombs.

'There are an unprecedented number of technologies, developments, and operations that have never been done before for Starship to land on the Moon,' Blue Origin wrote in the infographic.

The infographic is designed as a comparison between the two company's lunar landers.

While it states SpaceX would need more than 10 Starship launches, Blue Origin highlights it would only need three National Team launches with proven systems.

The criticism continues with Blue Origin calling out SpaceX for not sending any craft into orbit from its own launch site.

However, Musk's company has sent more than 100 Falcon 9 rockets into orbit and Bezos' firm has only sent a crewed capsule 351,000 feet into the air and back.

Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin did have high hopes of winning its protest against NASA's decision and told DailyMail.com that 'there were fundamental issues with NASA’s decision.' Elon Musk also responded to last week's decision by posting 'GAO' with the strong arm emoji on Twitter, which is the typical gesture of someone who won a fight

SpaceX is also reading its first Starship that will soar into orbit, which could happen as early as May.

The infographic also shows a comparison of the lunar landers, with Blue Origin's mirroring those of the past and Starships massive cylinder-like shape.

Starship's exit is 126 feet off the ground, which would likely use elevators to ferry astronauts down to the lunar surface, while the Blue Origin lander is 32 feet off the ground and would use a simple down a long ladder.

What the image fails to include is the cost to construct the lunar lander and get it off the ground, which was a major part of NASA's final decision - SpaceX bid $2.9 billion, while Blue Origin was roughly double at $5.99 billion.

Blue Origin did have high hopes of winning its protest against NASA's decision and told DailyMail.com that 'there were fundamental issues with NASA’s decision.'

'We’ll continue to advocate for two immediate providers as we believe it is the right solution,' the Blue Origin spokesperson continued.

'The Human Landing System [HLS] program needs to have competition now instead of later – that's the best solution for NASA and the best solution for our country.'

Musk also responded to last week's decision by posting 'GAO' with the strong arm emoji on Twitter, which is the typical gesture of someone who won a fight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists have discovered a horde of copper coins from the sixth century in Phanagoria, an ancient Greek city in what is now modern-day southwestern Russia.

According to a translated statement from the Institute of Archeology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 80 copper staters were found in the remains of a 6th century fire.

Archaeologists found 6th century copper coins in Phanagoria, an ancient Greek city in southwestern Russia

80 copper staters were found in the remains of a fire that may have destroyed part of the city. The fire may have stemmed from the attacks orchestrated by the Huns or Turks

Experts believe the fire may have destroyed a 'significant part of the city' and may have stemmed from the attacks that were orchestrated by the Huns or the Turks.

'Treasures [like this] are not often found,' said Vladimir Kuznetsov, head of the Phanagoria archaeological expedition of the Institute of Archeology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, in the statement.

'As a rule, they are evidence of catastrophic events in people's lives, as a result of which the one who hid money or valuable items was unable to return and use their savings.'

A copper stater was an ancient coin used in different parts of Greece, the earliest which date to the 8th century B.C.

The ruins of Phanagoria are located in what is now modern-day Krasnodar Krai in the Taman Peninsula, off the coast of the Black Sea.

The ruins of Phanagoria are located in what is now modern-day Krasnodar Krai in the Taman Peninsula, off the coast of the Black Sea

Krasnodar Krai in the Taman Peninsula is just off the coast of the Black Sea, near Crimea

Kuznetsov explained that this discovery is 'associated with a dramatic and mysterious page in the history of medieval Phanagoria - the capital of one of the earliest Christian dioceses in Russia.'

The researcher added that the discovery 'speaks of the extraordinary circumstances under which [the objects] were hidden, as a result of the potential attack of the person's enemies.

'In a hurry, a resident of Phanagoria hid a bundle with 80 coins in the throat of an old broken amphora that had turned up under his arm and covered the hole with earth.'

It's likely that the coins were minted in the late third or early fourth centuries, Kuznetsov and his team determined.

They likely emanated from the Bosporan kingdom, with the last coin coming from this empire in 341 AD

They likely emanated from the Bosporan kingdom, with the last coin coming from this empire in 341 AD.

However, a mass of staters made of copper-lead alloy continued to circulate in the Bosporous for several centuries, with Byzantine gold playing the role of 'expensive' money, Kuznetsov added.

In 2019, Kuznetsov and other researchers found a gold coin nearby, minted during the reign of Byzantine emperor Justinian I.

It's likely that both discoveries are associated with 'turbulent historical event's of the time, with a revolt against Hunnic leader Gord in 528 or 534, according to Artnet.

The second discovery of the gold coin stems from the later part of the century, but the reason for its burial is still unknown.

'The gold coin of Justinian I found two years ago in Phanagoria serves as proof that the new treasure is associated with the second, late fire of the 6th century,' noted Kuznetsov.

'But who exactly - the Avars or the Turks - destroyed the capital of the Phanagorian diocese, remains unknown. The new treasure from Phanagoria is an invaluable evidence of historical events and the economy of the early Middle Ages.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Swiss fragrance company is counting on artificial intelligence to help it perfect the plant-based burger.

Firmenich, one of the world's leading flavor manufacturers, says recreating the sensation of beef relies not only on flavor, texture and color, but also on how it responds to cooking and the way it feels in the mouth.

'Finding a protein that resembles meat from a vegetable protein is highly complex,' Emmanuel Butstraen, head of Firmenich's flavors unit, told AFP.

One of the toughest challenges is avoiding an unpleasant aftertaste—pea proteins tend to release bitterness, which the taste buds are quick to pick up, Butstraen noted.

Vegetable proteins can give off hints of green apples or pears, an aftertaste of beans, bitterness or sourness, or even a feeling of dryness, said Jerome Barra, the company's innovation director.

To mask these flavors or compensate for them with other tastes, the aromatics experts call on a vast library of ingredients.

Barra likened the company's computer-logged database to 'a piano with 5,000 keys,' from which the flavors can be composed.

'Artificial intelligence can generate millions of possibilities,' Barra said.

Scroll down for video

Swiss flavor manufacturer Firmenich says its artificial intelligence technology allows it to choose from millions of combinations to re-create the juiciness of real beef in plant-based burgers. Algorithms filter that myriad down, factoring in consumer preferences and industry regulations, to a workable number road-tested in the kitchen with a chef

He said the algorithms can generate not only a wide range of flavor combinations but also factor in shifting consumer preferences, along with technical or regulatory constraints.

They filter down the myriad combination of ingredients from which the experts can create flavors, he said.

Only then are they road-tested in the kitchen with a chef.

The algorithms can propose multiple combinations that the human aroma experts might not have conceived.

Firmenich says AI has enabled it to develop an aroma that replicates barbecued meat, with the algorithms helping to nail down similar flavors in the plant world

AI has enabled Firmenich to develop an aroma that replicates the specific flavor of barbecued meat, for example, with the algorithms helping to pin down similar flavors in the plant world.

'Plant-based food is a very important shift in consumption,' said Firmenich chief executive Gilbert Ghostine.

'I see this trend growing stronger and stronger in future,' he said, pointing to meat and dairy alternatives among the nutrition trends with the highest growth potential.

Founded in Geneva in 1895, Firmenich is one of the world's largest privately-owned fragrance and taste companies with profits last year reaching approximately $4.26 billion.

According to Credit Suisse , the market for meat and dairy alternatives is worth around $14 billion globally today and will reach $143 billion by 2030. Beyond Meat (pictured) has partnered with fast food giants like McDonald's, Dunkin, and Yum! Brands, whose subsidiaries include KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell

In May, Firmenich launched Dynarome SR, a proprietary 'culinary paste' designed to mimic the release of animal fat in plant-based products to re-create the juicy taste and succulence you get from real meat.

'Taking the example of a grilled burger patty, beef notes that generate while cooking and then mingle with the cooked fat melting in your mouth are key to an authentic burger experience,' said Mark Rubin, principal flavorist at Firmenich, said in a statement.

'We wanted to re-create that same effect with a natural product that looks, cooks and smells like beef – but is vegan,' Rubin added. 'The Dynarome SR flavor solution we invented does just that by mimicking animal fat and delivering the right cooking aroma and juicy taste.'

According to Credit Suisse, the market for meat and dairy alternatives is worth around $14 billion globally today and will reach $143 billion by 2030 and $1.4 trillion by 2050.

After rising 11.4 percent in 2019, global growth in meat alternative sales slowed to 1.3 percent in 2020, thanks to the COVID-19 pandemic.

However, it should climb 5.1 percent in 2021, according to researchers Euromonitor International, and another 6.3 percent in 2022.

By comparison, meat products—more affected by the coronavirus crisis—saw only 0.3 percent growth in 2020, with a more modest recovery of 2.9 percent expected in 2021 and 4.6 percent in 2022.

With rising concerns about beef's health risks and carbon footprint, the market for vegetarian alternatives is booming: Impossible Foods provides the 'meat' for Burger King's Impossible Whopper, while Beyond Meat has partnered with McDonald's, Dunkin and Yum! Brands, whose subsidiaries include KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell.

But 'plant-based' doesn't automatically translate to healthy, experts caution.

'Steaks, cutlets and other vegetable burgers are highly processed foods whose value depends on their ingredients, which vary from one product to another,' Muriel Jaquet, dietician for the Swiss Nutrition Society, told AFP.

For vegetarian steaks, Jaquet advises consumers to monitor the salt, sugar and fat content.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Although electric vehicles are garnering significant attention, critics question whether they're much better for the environment than gas guzzlers—especially if they're charged from a 'dirty' grid that relies on coal or other non-renewable sources.

However, a new report from the International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT) indicates that EVs release fewer greenhouse gases over their lifetime, regardless of the grid they plug into.

'Even for India and China, which are still heavily reliant on coal power, the life-cycle benefits of BEVs are present today,' Peter Mock, ICCT's managing director for Europe, said in a statement.

The study looked at greenhouse gases (GHG) in Europe, the US, China, and India, which are responsible for about 70 percent of all new car sales combined.

According to the statement from ICCT, unlike other assessments, it considered both present and projected emissions 'attributable to every stage in the life cycles of both vehicles and fuels—from extracting and processing raw materials through refining and manufacture to operation and eventual recycling or disposal.'

It dug into a variety of power sources, including plug-in hybrids, biofuels, hydrogen and electricity.

Building an EV is still more carbon-intensive than constructing an internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicle, but EV drivers recoup their carbon footprint after a year or so, ICCT researcher Georg Bieker told The Verge.

Over the lifetime of average medium-size electric vehicles registered today, emissions are already lower than comparable gasoline cars by 66-69 percent in Europe, 60–68 percent in the US, 37-45 percent in China, and 19–34 percent in India.

That gap will only grow as the electricity mix continues to decarbonize, the authors said.

While Musk said all of the company's 25,000 Superchargers would eventually be available to non-Tesla drivers, its not clear if the service will be available in Europe first or rolled out simultaneously worldwide

'Only battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and fuel-cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) powered by renewable electricity can achieve the kind of deep reductions in GHG emissions from transportation that comport with the Paris Agreement's goal of keeping global warming well below 2 °C,' the report indicates.

'There is no realistic pathway to that goal that relies on combustion-engine vehicles, including hybrids of any sort.'

The new report counters a November 2020 study produced by a group of carmakers indicating that manufacturing electric vehicles generates 63 percent more carbon dioxide than making gas or diesel-powered models.

That report—commissioned by Honda , Aston Martin, Bosch and McLaren—found that some so-called zero-emission vehicles have to be driven for almost 50,000 miles before they were as 'green' as autos powered by fossil fuels.

Even in India, which uses an energy grid still greatly reliant on coal power, electric vehicles released 19–34 percent fewer greenhouse gases than fossil-fuel-powered cars

It determined that producing Volvo's all-electric Polestar 2 generates 24 tons of carbon dioxide, compared with 14 tons for a gas-powered Volvo XC40.

'You would have to drive 48,700 miles in a Polestar 2 before its carbon footprint becomes smaller than a Volvo XC40,' the researchers said. 'Similar results have been shown by studies conducted by Volkswagen comparing the e-Golf against the diesel Golf.'

The report was issued in response to British Prime Minister Boris Johnson's plan to ban sales of new gas and diesel vehicles starting in 2030.

A comparison of life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions from a variety of passenger-car options indicates that, in the end, electric vehicles have the lowest carbon footprint

The carmakers claimed electric vehicles were 'no silver bullet' in helping the UK achieve net zero emissions by 2050, but ICCT says they're not looking at the whole life of the car.

'We have a lot of lobby work from parts of the automotive industry saying that electric vehicles are not that much better if you take into account the electricity production and the battery production,' Bieker told The Verge. 'We wanted to look into this and see whether these arguments are true.'

Approximately 231,000 all-electric vehicles were sold in the US in 2020, down 3.2 percent from the prior year, according to Pew Research.

All-EVs (excluding plug-in hybrids and fuel cell vehicles) account for roughly 2 percent of US annual sales.

There are approximately 10.2 million electric vehicles around the world, but the US only has 17 percent of them—far behind China, which has more than 4.5 million, or 44 percent of the world's total stock.

High upfront costs and a lack of chargers on residential roads have been blamed for stagnating demand, with zero-emission cars still considered a luxury by many households.

But incentives, like federal and state EV tax credits, can bring the price down to on par with a typical combustion-engine car.

Federal and state tax credits can bring the price of an electric vehicle down to on par with a typical combustion-engine car. In addition, the average EV driver will save between $700 and $1,600 a year in fuel costs, and nearly 50 percent in maintenance costs, 'due to a cleaner, more streamlined system under the hood'

And, according to the Sierra Club, the average EV driver will save between $700 and $1,600 a year in fuel costs, and nearly 50 percent in maintenance costs 'due to a cleaner, more streamlined system under the hood.'

'Electric vehicles are cleaner than vehicles powered by burning dirty fossil fuels, full stop,' the group added. 'A fully electric vehicle uses electricity to power a battery - this means no gasoline, no dirty oil changes, and no internal combustion engine.'

In regions like the West Coast of the US, which rely more on wind and hydro power, emissions are already significantly lower for electric vehicles.

'As we retire more coal plants and bring cleaner sources of power online, the emissions from electric vehicle charging drop even further,' the Sierra Club said in a statement. 'Additionally, in some areas, night-time charging will increase the opportunity to take advantage of wind power — another way to further reduce emissions.'

Earlier this week, Elon Musk confirmed Tesla would soon make its more than 17,000 Supercharger stations available to other brands of EVs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Apple is pushing back against criticism over its plan to scan photos on users iPhones and in iCloud storage in search of child sexual abuse images.

In a Frequently Asked Questions document focusing on its 'Expanded Protections for Children,' Apple insisted its system couldn't be exploited to seek out images related to anything other than child sexual abuse material (CSAM).

The system will not scan photo albums, Apple says, but rather looks for matches based on a database of 'hashes' - a type of digital fingerprint - of known CSAM images provided by child safety organizations.

While privacy advocacies worry about 'false positives, Apple boasted that 'the likelihood that the system would incorrectly flag any given account is less than one in one trillion per year.'

Apple also claims it would 'refuse any such demands' from government agencies, in the US or abroad.

The Cupertino-based corporation announced the new system last Thursday that uses algorithms and artificial intelligence to scan images for matches to known abuse material provided by the National Center For Missing & Exploited Children, a leading clearinghouse for the prevention of and recovery from child victimization.

Child advocacy groups praised the move, but privacy advocates like Greg Nojeim of the Center for Democracy and Technology say Apple 'is replacing its industry-standard end-to-end encrypted messaging system with an infrastructure for surveillance and censorship.'

Apple will use 'hashes,' or digital fingerprints from a CSAM database, to scan photos on a user's iPhone using a machine-learning algorithm. Any match is sent to Apple for human review and then sent to America's National Center for Missing and Exploited Children

Other tech companies, including Microsoft, Google and Facebook, have shared what 'hash lists' of known images of child sexual abuse.

'CSAM detection for iCloud Photos is built so that the system only works with CSAM image hashes provided by NCMEC and other child safety organizations, reads the new FAQs.

'This set of image hashes is based on images acquired and validated to be CSAM by child safety organizations.'

Apple says a human review process will act as a backstop against government abuse, and that it will not automatically pass reports from its photo-checking system to law enforcement if the review finds no objectionable photos.

A new tool coming with iOS 15 will allow Apple to scan images loaded to the cloud for pictures previously flagged as presenting child sexual abuse. Critics warn the system opens a giant 'back door' to spying on users

Apple distributed this internal memo this morning, dismissing their critics as "the screeching voices of the minority."



I will never stop screeching about the importance of privacy, security, or civil liberties. And neither should you. pic.twitter.com/lLDfxEUIXL — Eva (@evacide) August 6, 2021

'We have faced demands to build and deploy government-mandated changes that degrade the privacy of users before, and have steadfastly refused those demands,' the company wrote. 'We will continue to refuse them in the future.'

Apple has previously altered its practices to suit various nations before: In China, one of its biggest markets, it abandoned the encryption technology it uses elsewhere after China prohibited it, according to The New York Times.

While the measures are initially only being rolled out in the US, Apple plans for the technology to soon be available worldwide.

The technology will allow Apple to:

Flag images to the authorities after being manually checked by staff if they match child sexual abuse images compiled by the US National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC)

Apple will scan images that are sent and received in the Messages app. If nudity is detected, the photo will be automatically blurred and the child will be warned that the photo might contain private body parts

Siri will 'intervene' when users try to search topics related to child sexual abuse;

If a child under the age of 13 sends or receives a suspicious image 'parents will get a notification' if the child's device is linked to Family Sharing

On Friday Eva Galperin, cybersecurity director for the digital civil-rights group Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), tweeted a screenshot of an email to Apple staffers from Marita Rodriguez, NCMEC executive director for strategic partnerships, thanking them 'for finding a path forward for child protection while preserving privacy.'

What are 'hashes' used by Apple, Facebook, Google and Twitter to locate child abusers? The technology works by creating a unique fingerprint, called a 'hash', for each image reported to the foundation. These fingerprints are then passed on to internet companies to be automatically removed from the net. Once an image has been targeted, an employee will look at the content of the file and analyze the message to determine if it should be handed over to the right authorities. The system that uses the same technology as Facebook, Twitter and Google employ to locate child abusers. Advertisement

'It's been invigorating for our entire team to see (and play a small role) in what you unveiled today,' Martinez reportedly wrote. 'We know that the days to come will be filled with the screeching voices of the minority. Our voices will be louder.'

But EFF's India McKinney and Eric Portnoy caution such optimism is naïve.

In a statement, the pair said it would only take a tweak of the machine-learning system's parameters to look for different kinds of content.

'The abuse cases are easy to imagine: governments that outlaw homosexuality might require the classifier to be trained to restrict apparent LGBTQ+ content, or an authoritarian regime might demand the classifier be able to spot popular satirical images or protest flyers,' they warned.

EFF acknowledged child exploitation was a serious problem, but said 'at the end of the day, even a thoroughly documented, carefully thought-out, and narrowly-scoped backdoor is still a backdoor.'

WhatsApp CEO Will Cathcart joined the chorus of critics in a string of tweets Friday confirming the Facebook-owned messaging app would not follow Apple's strategy.

'I think this is the wrong approach and a setback for people's privacy all over the world,' Cathcart tweeted.'

Apple's system 'can scan all the private photos on your phone -- even photos you haven't shared with anyone. That's not privacy.’

CEO Will Cathcart said WhatsApp will not adopt Apple's strategy to address the sharing of child sexual abuse material (CSAM)

Calling child sexual abuse material and those who traffic in it ‘repugnant,’ Cathcart added that ‘'People have asked if we'll adopt this system for WhatsApp. The answer is no.'

'We've had personal computers for decades and there has never been a mandate to scan the private content of all desktops, laptops or phones globally for unlawful content. It's not how technology built in free countries works,' he said.

'This is an Apple built and operated surveillance system that could very easily be used to scan private content for anything they or a government decides it wants to control.’

The updates will be a part of iOS 15, iPadOS 15, watchOS 8 and macOS Monterey later this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Modern technology has been used to uncover secrets of one of the earliest limbed animals that walked the Earth 340 million years ago.

A team of scientists from the University of Bristol and University College London digitally reconstructed the skull of a Whatcheeria deltae, discovered in Iowa in 1995, to better understand the look and behavior of these ancient creatures and how they compare to modern animals.

After assembling a 3D model of the skull, the team found that Whatcheeria possessed a tall and narrow skull, quite unlike other early tetrapods, which suggested it was feeding differently than its decedents.

Its skull was designed to resist stresses induced by biting large prey with its enlarged anterior fangs.

The team also theorizes that this ancient tetrapod did most of its hunting in the water - similar to modern-day crocodiles - whereas today's tetrapods feed more efficiently on land.

A team of British scientists digitally reconstructed the skull of a Whatcheeria deltae, discovered in the Early Carboniferous of Iowa in 1995, to better understand the look and behavior of these ancient creatures and how they compare to modern animals

Tetrapods are vertebrates that have four limbs or leg-like appendages.

This class includes amphibians, reptiles, mammals and birds, all of which are believed to have evolved from the lobe-finned fishes in the middle Devonian Period, which began 419 million year ago.

The Whatcheeria specimen is one of the earliest-branching limbed tetrapod ever found, which refers to when a single lineage evolved into a completely new one.

The skull was found to have post-mortem crushing and lateral compression, which inhibited scientists' ability to fully understand what it looked like when the animal was alive, according to the study.

It skull was designed to resist stresses induced by biting large prey with its enlarged anterior fangs. The team also theorizes that these ancient tetrapod was doing most of its hunting in the water, like a modern crocodile, unlike those we see today that feed more efficiently on land

The researchers were able to use computational methods to restore the bones to their original arrangement.

The fossils were put through a CT scanner to create exact digital copies, and software was used to separate each bone from the surrounding rock.

These digital bones were then repaired and reassembled to produce a 3D model of the skull.

Lead author James Rawson said in a statement: 'Most early tetrapods had very flat heads which might hint that Whatcheeria was feeding in a slightly different way to its relatives, so we decided to look at the way the skull bones were connected to investigate further.'

By tracing the connecting edges of the skull bones, known as sutures, the study's authors were able to figure out how this animal tackled its prey.

Professor Emily Rayfield, of the University of Bristol's School of Earth Sciences, who also worked on the study, said: 'We found that the skull of Whatcheeria would have made it well-adapted to delivering powerful bites using its large fangs.'

Co-author Dr Laura Porro said: 'There are a few types of sutures that connect skull bones together and they all respond differently to various types of force.

'Some are better at dealing with compression, some can handle more tension, twisting and so on. By mapping these suture types across the skull, we can predict what forces were acting on it and what type of feeding may have caused those forces.'

The authors found that the snout had lots of overlapping sutures to resist twisting forces from struggling prey, while the back of the skull was more solidly connected to resist compression during biting.

The research has been published in the Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Palaeontologists have unearthed two new giant dinosaur species, both twice the size of a bus, that lived in northwest China some 130 million years ago.

Unearthed near the city of Hami in eastern Xinjiang, the massive sauropods — dubbed 'Hamititan' and 'Silutitan' — are among the first vertebrates from the region.

While their remains are limited — far from complete skeletons — the team have estimated that Silutitan was more than 66 feet long and Hamititan some 56 feet.

Given their sizes, the long-necked, long-tailed and thick-legged dinosaurs likely weighed somewhere in the order of 40 and 35 tonnes, respectively.

The Hami site is known for its abundance of fossils of the pterosaur Hamipterus tianshanensis, among which are perfectly preserved eggs and embryos.

Palaeontologists have unearthed two new giant dinosaur species, both as almost long as a cricket pitch, that lived in northwest China some 130 million years ago. Pictured: an artist's impression of Silutitan sinensis (left) and Hamititan xinjiangensis (right), surrounded by pterosaurs of the species Hamipterus tianshanensis and smaller, bird-like theropod dinosaurs

While their remains are limited — far from complete skeletons — the team have estimated that Silutitan was more than 66 feet long and Hamititan some 56 feet. Pictured: the tail vertebrae of Hamititan xinjiangensis (top right), with the green close up sections shown inset

SAUROPOD BASICS Sauropods were the first successful group of herbivorous dinosaurs, dominating most terrestrial ecosystems for more than 140 million years, from the Late Triassic to Late Cretaceous. They had long necks and tails and relatively small skulls and brains. They reached to 130 feet long and weighed up to 80 tonnes — 14 times the weight of an African elephant. They had nostrils high up on their skulls, rather than being located at the end of the snout like those of so many other terrestrial vertebrates. Some fossils shows that these nostril openings were so far up the skull that there were very close to the eye openings. Sauropods such as the Diplodocus began to diversify in the Middle Jurassic about 180 million years ago. Source: University of California Museum of Paleontology Advertisement

The description of the new species was undertaken by palaeontologist Xiaolin Wang of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, and his colleagues.

'The discovery of Silutitan sinensis and Hamititan xinjiangensis increased the sauropod diversity of Asia, particularly from an area where these vertebrates are not common,' the researchers explained in their paper.

'Hamititan xinjiangensis is one of the few titanosaurian sauropod recovered from Asia, which shows an unusual combination of sauropod features.'

Together, they added, the two discoveries provide 'further support for a widespread diversification of these sauropods during the Early Cretaceous of Asia.'

In their study, the team analysed a number of fossil fragments from the Hami site — including vertebrae and rib cage parts — from three individual dinosaurs, including one Hamititan, one Silutitan and the other an unidentified 'somphospondylan' sauropod.

(The somphospondylans were a group of dinosaurs who lived from 160.3–66 million years ago and were characterised by features including the precense of at least 15 neck vertebrae and bevelled radial bones.)

They identified distinctive features on all of the fossilised remains and compared them with other sauropod dinosaurs from elsewhere in China and beyond in order to show that the first two sets of bones belonged to previously unknown species.

'The discovery of Silutitan sinensis and Hamititan xinjiangensis increased the sauropod diversity of Asia, particularly from an area where these vertebrates are not common,' the researchers explained in their paper. Pictured: neck vertebrae from Silutitan sinensis (middle), with the green close up sections shown inset on the top and bottom rows

In their study, the team analysed fossil fragments — including vertebrae and rib cage parts — from three individual dinosaurs, including one Hamititan (yellow in this outline of a generic titanosaur), one Silutitan (red) and an unidentified 'somphospondylan' sauropod (green)

According to the researchers, the two discoveries provide 'further support for a widespread diversification of these sauropods during the Early Cretaceous of Asia'. Pictured: an artist's impression of Hamititan (left) and Silutitan (right), walking over a Hamipterus nesting area

According to the researchers, the nature of the neck vertebrae of Silutitan suggests that it belonged to a family of sauropods known as the Euhelopodidae — which to date have only been unearthed from sites in East Asia.

Based on comparison to a related genus, Euhelopus, the team came to the conclusion that Silutitan likely grew to reach more than 66 feet (20 m) in length.

Hamititan, meanwhile — was was identified from seven tail vertebrae — is thought to have reached around 66 feet long, based on comparisons with members of the related genera rapetosaurus and opisthocoelicaudia.

The full findings of the study were published in the journal Scientific Reports.

Unearthed near the city of Hami in Eastern Xinjiang, the massive sauropods — dubbed 'Hamititan' and 'Silutitan' — are among the first vertebrates from the region

The Hami site is known for its abundance of fossils of the pterosaur Hamipterus tianshanensis, among which are perfectly preserved eggs and embryos. Pictured: the locality where the fossil remains were found (left) with the dinosaur fossils shown in situ (right)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twitter's automated photo-cropping algorithm does favour young, feminine and light-skinned faces, research has confirmed.

The San Francisco-based company offered a cash reward to users who could help it weed out bias in its algorithm and has now revealed the results.

It comes five months after the tool was disabled amid fears of racial bias.

Twitter said it had tested for racial and gender bias during the algorithm's development, but users discovered it favoured white individuals over black people, and women over men.

The social network then announced 'bounties' as high as $3,500 as part of the DEF CON hacker convention in Las Vegas earlier this month.

It launched the competition in an attempt to better analyse the problem with its algorithm, with the results confirming that the tool does indeed prefer white faces over black ones.

Twitter offered a cash reward to users who could help it weed out bias in its algorithm. Bogdan Kulynych, a graduate student in Switzerland, was the winner. He varied faces by skin colour, slimness, age and feminine features as opposed to masculine, and put them into the algorithm. The algorithm favoured images with lighter skin, smoother textured skin and with no glasses

The algorithm also preferred images when Kulynych made people's faces slimmer, their skin lighter and added accessories (shown above from left, least 'salient', to right, most 'salient')

In this example he made the person's face younger, lighter and slimmer, increasing saliency

AI EXPERT WARNS AGAINST 'RACIST AND MISOGYNIST ALGORITHMS' A leading expert in artificial intelligence has issued a stark warning against the use of race- and gender-biased algorithms for making critical decisions. Across the globe, algorithms are beginning to oversee various processes from job applications and immigration requests to bail terms and welfare applications. Military researchers are even exploring whether facial-recognition technology could enable autonomous drones to identify targets. University of Sheffield computer expert Noel Sharkey told The Guardian, however, that such algorithms are 'infected with biases' and cannot be trusted. 'There are so many biases happening now, from job interviews to welfare to determining who should get bail and who should go to jail. It is quite clear that we really have to stop using decision algorithms, and I am someone who has always been very light on regulation and always believed that it stifles innovation,' Sharkey told the paper in 2019. 'But then I realized eventually that some innovations are well worth stifling, or at least holding back a bit. So I have come down on the side of strict regulation of all decision algorithms, which should stop immediately.' Calling for a halt on all AI with the potential to change people's lives, Sharkey advocated for vigorous testing before they are used in public. 'There should be a moratorium on all algorithms that impact on people's lives. Why? Because they are not working and have been shown to be biased across the board.' Advertisement

The first-placed entry found that it favours faces that are 'slim, young, of light or warm skin colour and smooth skin texture, and with stereotypically feminine facial traits.'

The second-placed entry suggested there was age discrimination because the tool was biased against people with white or grey hair, while the third-placed submission found that it favoured English over Arabic script in pictures.

The winner of Twitter's competition was Bogdan Kulynych, a graduate student at the EPFL research university in Switzerland.

He used an AI program called StyleGAN2 to generate a large number of realistic faces which he varied by skin colour, slimness, age and feminine features as opposed to masculine.

Kulynch then put these variations into Twitter's photo-cropping algorithm to see which it preferred.

He said the tool placed more 'saliency', or importance, on the depictions of people that 'appear slim, young, of light or warm skin colour and smooth skin texture, and with stereotypically feminine facial traits'.

In his summary, Kulynch added: 'These internal biases inherently translate into harms of under-representation when the algorithm is applied in the wild, cropping out those who do not meet the algorithm's preferences of body weight, age, skin colour.'

In a tweet announcing the winners, Twitter said Kulynch's findings 'show how algorithmic models amplify real-world biases and societal expectations of beauty'.

The company revealed that @HALT_AI was chosen in second place after discovering that 'images of the elderly and disabled were further marginalised by cropping them out of photos and reinforcing spatial gaze biases'.

Roya Pakzad, the founder of tech advocacy organisation Taraaz, was awarded third place.

He discovered that it wasn't just the images where there was bias, but written features, too.

When comparing memes using English and Arabic script Pakzad found that the algorithm cropped the image to highlight the English text.

Finally, Vincenzo di Cicco found that the tool even favoured emoji with lighter skin tones over those with darker skin tones.

Rumman Chowdhury, director of Twitter's Machine learning Ethics, Transparency, and Accountability (META) team, presented the results at the DEF CON conference.

She said: 'When we think about biases in our models, it's not just about the academic or the experimental [...] but how that also works with the way we think in society.

'I use the phrase "life imitating art imitating life." We create these filters because we think that's what beautiful is, and that ends up training our models and driving these unrealistic notions of what it means to be attractive.'

The automated photo-cropping algorithm also favoured faces with more feminine features (far right)

Age discrimination also appeared to be a problem, with the tool found to be biased against people with white or grey hair

The challenge was inspired by how researchers and hackers often point out security vulnerabilities to companies, Chowdhury said.

In a May post, she said Twitter's internal testing found a four per cent preference for white individuals over black people, and an eight per cent preference for women over men.

The social network first began investigating reports its algorithm favoured people with lighter skin in September 2020.

Tests of the tool by its users showed several examples of a preference for white faces.

@HALT_AI, chosen in second place, found that the algorithm was biased against someone in a wheelchair. It did not block out the disabled person but @HALT_AI said that in other images this spatial bias towards multiple standing people might disadvantage someone sitting lower in the photo in a wheelchair

@HALT_AI also discovered that the algorithm was biased against individuals with white hair

One individual posted two stretched out images, both with head shots of Sen. Mitch McConnell and ex-President Barack Obama, in the same tweet.

In the first image, McConnell, a white man, was at the top of the photo, and in the second, Obama, who is black, was at the top.

For both photos, however, the preview image algorithm selected McConnell.

Other users then delved into more comprehensive tests to tackle variables and further solidify the case against the algorithm.

The algorithm was 'trained on human eye-tracking data', Twitter explained, but the cause of the apparent issues may be down to several complicated factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@