CONTRIBUTORS STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

1.1 The definitions and rules of interpretation in this Clause apply in these Terms and Conditions.

“ANL” means Associated Newspapers Limited, registered address, Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London W8 5TT and registered company number 84121;

“Affiliates” means in relation to a person, any direct or indirect parent undertaking or subsidiary undertaking from time to time of such person, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings from time to time of any parent undertaking of such person. An undertaking is a “subsidiary undertaking” of another undertaking (its “parent undertaking”) if that other undertaking, directly or indirectly, through one or more subsidiary undertakings:

(a) holds 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(b) it is a member of the undertaking and has the right to appoint or remove 50% or more of its board of directors or equivalent managing body; or

(c) it is a member of the undertaking and controls alone, or pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders or members, 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(d) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over it, for example by having the right to give directions with respect to its operating and financial policies, with which directions its directors are obliged to comply.

“Content” means any and all text, Images, Videos, Lineage, audio or video material, recordings of moving images with or without sound, all stills, images, content, materials, information, data, software and executable code, in whatever medium or form supplied or made available by or on behalf of the Supplier in connection with these Terms and Conditions;

“Fees” means the fees that we have agreed to pay the Supplier respect of the licence of the Content as set out in the self-generated Invoice;

“Images” means any photos, print graphics, interactive or digital graphics or other still images;

“Intellectual Property Rights” means all intellectual property rights wherever in the world arising, whether registered or unregistered (and including any application), including copyright, know-how, confidential information, trade secrets, business names and domain names, Marks, patents, petty patents, utility models, design rights, semi-conductor topography rights, database rights and all rights in the nature of unfair competition rights or rights to sue for passing off;

“Lineage” means written content or text material accompanying the content supplied by Supplier;

“Licensed Media” means:

(a) any and all digital or electronic publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website, and which in each case is owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time including those which operates under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, ‘Metro’ or ‘This is Money’ brands, or any derivative of such brands, including, but not limited to the publications owned or operated by ANL and which are located at www.metro.co.uk, www.mailonline.co.uk, Mailonline.co.uk/au, www.dailymail.co.uk, www.dailymail.com and www.thisismoney.co.uk and any subsequent or additional URLs which may replace them from time to time;

(b) any and all print publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed which ANL operates including those under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, or ‘Metro’ brands, or any derivative of such brands;

(c) any of the above publications’ pages or articles (including its mobile versions) on any social media accounts or news aggregator websites from time to time (including, but not limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, MSN, Apple i news and Yahoo; and

(d) any media player owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time (with or without embedding functionality and whether incorporated in the publications set out above or in any third party sites, services, apps or publications).

“Marks” means any and all trade marks, trade names, service marks, trade dress, logos, URLs, identifying slogans or other distinctive brand features of a party to these Terms and Conditions, whether or not registered;

“Supplier” means the entity set out in the self-generated Invoice; and

“Video” means a recording of moving images with or without sound supplied by Supplier.

2. GRANT OF LICENCE

2.1 Subject to these Terms and Conditions, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL and each of its Affiliates a non-exclusive (unless otherwise agreed), royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence to use, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform, display, edit and transmit the Content in connection with and through the Licensed Media and to make the same available to end users of the Licensed Media.

2.2 The Supplier, by granting the licence detailed in Clause 2.1, also grants ANL the express right to ANL and each of its Affiliates to grant a sub-licence to end users and readers of Licensed Media to the extent necessary for end users and readers to view

and use the Content in accordance with the Licensed Media’s terms of use from time to time.

2.3 The Supplier agrees that ANL shall be entitled to change, modify and edit the Content for technical or editorial purposes (including, without limitation, cropping or framing the Content).

2.4 ANL shall be entitled to reproduce the whole or any part of any Content in any secondary reproductions of Licensed Media (e.g. compilations, screen shots, stills, thumbnails) in order to promote or market the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including any and all print, digital and electronic publications.

2.5 If the Content includes Videos, ANL shall be entitled to embed, and enable, facilitate and support the embedding and organic sharing of Content by any end user of, all or any part of the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including without limitation, on any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website. ANL shall be entitled to manage, control and change the embedding functionality and settings of any of its media players from time to time as ANL shall determine in its sole discretion.

2.6 ANL agrees that it shall include the credit marked on the Images and Videos or notified by the Supplier on any use or reproduction of the Images and Videos.

2.7 Any inadvertent failure by ANL to accord the credit shall not constitute a breach of these Terms and Conditions by ANL provided that ANL uses its reasonable endeavours to remedy such failure that the Supplier makes ANL aware of, as soon as reasonably practicable and on a prospective basis only. For the avoidance of doubt, ANL will not be required to recall any print or other material already printed nor incur legal costs or expenses.

2.8 The Supplier hereby waives all moral rights in the Content to which the Supplier may be entitled under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) or the Copyright Act 1968 (Australia) as amended from time to time (and under all similar legislation from time to time in force anywhere in the world) to the extent necessary for ANL to exploit the Content in the Licensed Media.

2.9 The Supplier hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Content may be copied or reproduced under separate licences or arrangements with NLA Media Access and all other such database aggregators and services. As such, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL all such licences and rights as are required in order to enable others to access, copy and reproduce all or part of the Licensed Media (whether via press cuttings or similar services) pursuant to those licences or arrangements, including the non-exclusive right to syndicate (including electronic syndication or syndication for use in electronic databases) or distribute the Licensed Media (containing the Content) to NLA Media Access and all other owners of such databases, databanks and services for storage, copying, republication and redistribution to third parties for further storage, copying, publication and distribution in any medium.

2.10 ANL will have the non-exclusive right to store the Content (whether or not the Content has been published by ANL) in any of its electronic databases and to allow access to the databases for research purposes.

3. MARKS

3.1 The Supplier acknowledges and agrees that ANL owns all right, title and interest in and to the Licensed Media and ANL’s Marks. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall confer in the Supplier any right of ownership in the Licensed Media or ANL’s Marks.

3.2 Supplier hereby grants to ANL a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty free licence to use, reproduce, display and transmit the Supplier’s Marks solely for the purposes of performing its obligations under these Terms and Conditions, including in connection with the presentation of the Content within the Licensed Media.

4. FEES AND PAYMENT

4.1 In consideration of the provision of the Content by the Supplier, ANL shall pay the Fees which shall be all inclusive for the rights granted above (including syndication).

4.2 ANL will send Supplier a self-generated invoice (“Invoice”) reflecting the uses along with the payment of the Fee, no more than forty-five (45) days after the use. If the Supplier believes ANL has used Content that is not reflected in an Invoice, or for which payment was not made within forty-five (45) days after the use, the Supplier will promptly notify ANL:

(a) via mailonlinecontributionqueries@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s online digital publication and provide links to the URL(s) or scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment; or

(b) via accountspayable@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s print publications and provide scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment,

Each of (a) and (b) a (“Notification”). If ANL accepts that Content has been used without timely payment of the Fee, it will pay the Fee within fifteen (15) business days of ANL’s receipt of the Notification.

4.3 Payment shall be made direct to the bank account nominated in writing by the Supplier.

4.4 If a party fails to make any payment due to the other under these Terms and Conditions by the due date for payment (due date), then, without limiting the other party's remedies under these Terms and Conditions, the defaulting party may be required to pay interest on the overdue amount at the rate of 2% per annum above the Bank of England base rate from time to time. Such interest shall accrue on a daily basis from the due date until the date of actual payment of the overdue amount, whether before or after judgment. The defaulting party shall pay the interest together

with the overdue amount. This Clause shall not apply to payments that the non-paying party disputes in good faith.

4.5 If ANL disputes any invoice or other statement of monies due, ANL shall immediately notify the Supplier in writing.

4.6 ANL may, without limiting any other rights or remedies it may have, set off any amounts owed to it by the Supplier against any amounts payable by it to the Supplier.

4.7 All Fees are exclusive of VAT or GST, as applicable.

5. WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES

5.1 Each party to these Terms and Conditions represents and warrants to the other party that:

(a) it has the full corporate right, power and authority to enter into these Terms and Conditions and to perform its obligations hereunder;

(b) the execution of these Terms and Conditions by such party, and the performance by such party of its obligations and duties hereunder, do not and will not violate any agreement to which such party is a party or by which it is otherwise bound;

(c) it shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to the performance by it of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions including but not limited to all applicable laws and regulations concerning bribery and corruption; and

(d) when executed and delivered by such party, these Terms and Conditions will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of such party, enforceable against such party in accordance with its terms.

5.2 The Supplier represents and warrants to ANL that:

(a) it has sufficient rights in the Content to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(b) it has secured all third party permissions and releases necessary to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(c) it will take all reasonable precautions in accordance with generally recognised industry standards not to provide Content that contains any matter which is defamatory, libellous, unlawfully threatening or unlawfully harassing, causes injury, invades privacy rights, or is otherwise actionable in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed;

(d) the Content:

(i) does not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights;

(ii) is created, compiled and published using reasonable care and skill and do not violate any law, statute, ordinance, rule, court order, code of practice or regulation (whether on a regulatory or statutory basis) or generally recognised industry standards, in each case in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed, including but not limited to the Editors’ Code of Practice issued by the Editors’ Code of Practice Committee in the UK, and where relevant the Statement of General Principles issued by the Australian Press Council from time to time; and

(iii) does not contain any viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time bombs, cancel bots or other computer programming routines that are intended to damage, detrimentally interfere with, surreptitiously intercept or expropriate any system, data or personal information;

(e) the only costs to be borne by ANL in respect of the use of the Content in the manner envisaged by these Terms and Conditions are the Fees and (with the exception of the Fees) it shall be responsible for all payments, fees, royalties, charges or otherwise due to all and any third parties arising out of the same; and

(f) the Supplier’s Marks do not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights or other rights of any third party.

5.3 The Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless and keep ANL (and each of its employees, directors and agents) fully and effectively indemnified from and against any and all losses, demands, claims, damages, costs, expenses (including consequential losses and loss of profit, legal costs and expenses and VAT or GST thereon) and liabilities suffered or incurred, directly or indirectly by ANL as a result of any breach by the Supplier of the warranties set out in Clauses 5.1 and 5.2.

5.4 Should any legal proceedings against ANL follow from the publication of any Content, then ANL or any other Affiliate shall be entitled, in its absolute discretion (but shall be under no obligation), to take such action as it shall deem fit, including without limitation, settling or defending such claim. The Supplier shall make itself available to assist ANL in every reasonable way possible and hereby acknowledges and agrees that it shall have no claim against ANL in any way relating to ANL's conduct of any such claim where ANL has used the Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

6. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES AND LIABILITY

6.1 Nothing in this Clause 6 shall limit a party’s liability for death or personal injury.

6.2 The liability of the Supplier shall not be limited in respect of a claim by ANL under Clause 5.3.

6.3 Subject to Clauses 6.1 and 6.2, the liability of ANL to Supplier in contract, tort, negligence, pre-contract or other representations or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or the performance or observance of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions shall be limited in aggregate to the aggregate Fees paid by ANL to the Supplier in the six months immediately preceding the incurring of such loss or damage.

6.4 ANL shall not be liable in contract, tort (including negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent misrepresentations) or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions for:

(a) any economic losses (including, without limitation, loss of revenues, profits, contracts, business or anticipated savings); and

(b) any loss of goodwill or reputation; or

(c) any special, indirect or consequential losses, in any case, whether or not such losses were within the contemplation of the Supplier at the date of these Terms and Conditions, or were suffered or incurred by that party arising out of or in connection with the provisions of these Terms and Conditions or any matter arising under these Terms and Conditions.

The following clause 6.5 does not apply to, and shall have no effect in, Australia:

6.5 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereof, whether imposed by statute or by operation of law or otherwise, that are not expressly stated herein, including without limitation, the implied warranties of satisfactory quality and fitness for a particular purpose.

The following clause 6.6 applies to, and has effect in, Australia only:

6.6 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions and to the extent permitted by law, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereto. To the extent that ANL’s liability for breach of an implied warranty or condition cannot be excluded by law, ANL’s liability will be limited, at ANL’s election, to the resupply of the services or the payment of the costs of the resupply of the services.

6.7 Each provision of this Clause 6 excluding or limiting liability shall be construed separately, applying and surviving even if for any reason one or other of these provisions is held inapplicable or unenforceable in any circumstances and shall remain in force notwithstanding the expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions.

6.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in these Terms and Conditions, if ANL believes that any Content may create liability for ANL, ANL may remove such Content from the Licensed Media as ANL believes, in its sole discretion, is prudent or necessary to minimise or eliminate ANL’s potential liability.

7. POST- TERMINATION RETENTION OF CONTENT

7.1 ANL’s right to use the Content as contemplated hereunder is perpetual and shall survive the termination of these Terms and Conditions.

7.2 On expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions for any reason, all provisions of these Terms and Conditions shall cease to have effect, except that any provision which can reasonably be inferred as continuing, including, but not limited to,

the perpetual rights and licences granted under Clause 2.1, shall continue in full force and effect.

7.3 For the avoidance of doubt, neither the termination (for any reason) nor expiration of these Terms and Conditions shall require ANL to delete or destroy copies of, or remove from transmission or display, all or part of any Licensed Media containing Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

8. GENERAL

8.1 Any notice required to be given under these Terms and Conditions shall be in writing and shall only be deemed to have been duly served if hand delivered or sent by first class recorded delivery within the United Kingdom and outside the United Kingdom by registered airmail and to the party’s registered address and in the case of ANL to Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London, W8 5TT with a copy to contracts@assocnews.co.uk

8.2 Any notice pursuant to Clause 8.1 shall be deemed to have been served:

(a) if hand delivered, at the time of delivery;

(b) if sent by post, two days after posting; and

(c) if sent by airmail, seven days after posting.

8.3 Supplier shall not be entitled to assign the benefit and/or burden of these Terms and Conditions in whole or in part without the ANL’s prior written consent.

8.4 Unless a signed and dated agreement exists between the parties, these Terms and Conditions contain the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter covered and supersede any previous agreements, arrangements, written or oral, between the parties in relation to such matters.

8.5 The parties acknowledge that no standard terms and conditions sent to the Supplier by A&N Media Finance Services Limited (A&N) shall apply to these Terms and Conditions. Similarly, no terms or conditions endorsed upon, delivered with or contained in the Supplier's quotation, acknowledgement or acceptance of order, specification, invoice or similar document shall take effect in relation to the licence of Content under these Terms and Conditions and the Supplier waives any right which it otherwise might have to rely on such terms and conditions.

8.6 The parties acknowledge that ANL enters into these Terms and Conditions for the benefit of itself and each of its Affiliates. Any Affiliate from time to time may for its own benefit enforce in its own right any term of these Terms and Conditions subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the terms of these Terms and Conditions may be varied, amended or modified or these Terms and Conditions may be suspended, cancelled or terminated by agreement in writing between the parties or may be rescinded, in each case without the consent of any such Affiliate. Except as provided in this Clause 8.6, a person who is not a party to these Terms and Conditions has no right under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any terms of

these Terms and Conditions but this Clause 8.6 does not affect a right or remedy of a third party which exists or is available apart from that Act.

8.7 If any provision (or part of a provision) of these Terms and Conditions is found by any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain in force.

8.8 If any invalid, unenforceable or illegal provision would be valid, enforceable or legal if some part of it were deleted, the provision shall apply with whatever modification is necessary to give effect to the commercial intention of the parties.

8.9 Each party shall do, sign, execute and deliver all deeds, documents, instruments and acts reasonably required of it by notice from the other party to carry out and give full effect to these Terms and Conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties under it.

8.10 Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture of any kind between the parties or as constituting either party as the agent of the other party for any purpose whatsoever and neither party shall have the authority or power to bind the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the other party in any way or for any purpose.

8.11 These Terms and Conditions and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) are governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England.

8.12 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

The following clause 8.13 shall have apply to, and have effect, in, Australia only:

8.13 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have non-exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

APPENDIX 1

Invoice format:

The invoice for content licensed under this agreement must at a minimum include or be supplemented with the following information:

· Type of content claimed (video, words, pictures)

· Article IDs or links

· Video IDs for video invoices

· Title of caption

· Fee claimed if exclusively negotiated/applicable

Please note that standard rates apply where exclusive rates have not been agreed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The summer transfer window is alive and kicking as clubs throughout Europe look to cement their squads ahead of next season.

The future of England captain Harry Kane is set to be major talking point throughout the window, though the Tottenham forward has now returned to the club.

Meanwhile, the bombshell that Lionel Messi has left Barcelona for PSG will certainly have a drastic impact on the transfer market.

It's the Manchester clubs who have made the biggest splash so far, with United signing Jadon Sancho for £73m and City's £100m acquisition of Jack Grealish shattering the British transfer record.

Sportsmail will keep you up-to-date with the latest negotiations, rumours and done deals below.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Inter Miami's mini-revival was given new life in the final seconds against Nashville as Indiana Vassilev's 95th-minute header lifts them off the foot of Major League Soccer table.

Pressure had been mounting on Phil Neville with the David Beckham-owned franchise rooted to last place following a dismal start.

But after hitting rock bottom in a 5-0 defeat to New England Revolution, in which players and manager were booed off, Inter Miami have looked galvanised - and they showed all their spirit to take a last-gasp win on Sunday.

Indiana Vassilev scored a 95th-minute winner for Inter Miami against Nashville on Sunday

Boss Phil Neville has been under immense pressure and it served as a huge boost for his side

Co-owner David Beckham watched on from the stands with interest in Fort Lauderdale

'When a team scores late on, I think it is a great sign for everybody,' said Inter Miami boss Neville.

'It's a great sign for everybody inside the club that we are headed in the right direction.

'We knew that the substitutions were going to win the game for us today, and that's how it played out.'

It looked set to be another frustrating night when C. J. Sapong put Nashville ahead three minutes into the second half.

Ex-Juventus and Chelsea ace Gonzalo Higuain made it 1-1 with a fizzing strike into the corner

Gonzalo Higuain then turned on his class after being played through by Blaise Matuidi to make it 1-1.

And then, just when the game looked set to be petering out for a draw, Vassilev found a yard of space in the box to meet a pin-point cross from the right, sparking wild celebrations in Fort Lauderdale.

'Obviously really, really exciting from a personal standpoint but I think today it was about our team,' Vassilev said.

'Our team deserved this win because we were the better team. Hopefully we can keep this all going.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The king is dead, long live the king. The crown might slip down over his forehead but at a club the size of Barcelona there always has to be somebody sat on the throne and Pedri – not 19 until November – is the best fit to lead the club into the post-Lionel Messi era. Just make sure he gets a rest first.

The teenage midfielder who lit up the Euros for Spain and then went to Japan to represent his country at the Olympics played an astonishing 73 games last season – that's more than Neymar has managed in his two last seasons at Paris Saint-Germain.

Pedri needs a break; the big question is when it will come? The player himself is already back in training despite being given the option of an extra few days holiday. He wants to keep playing through.

Pedri, who is just 18 years old, is the best fit to lead the club into the post-Lionel Messi era

Barcelona hope that the rest comes in the first week of September when LaLiga takes a break for international football. But if Spain call him up for their three World Cup qualifiers against Sweden, Georgia and Kosovo then he will want to play.

Barca could just delay his start to the season but with the club in turmoil because of Messi's departure they cannot afford a bad start and Ronald Koeman is short on midfield options.

Miralem Pjanic looks to be on his way out of the club. Ilaix Moriba is sidelined because of a contract dispute that now means Barcelona see him as a saleable asset as opposed to a first-team player. Koeman has only Frenkie de Jong, Sergio Roberto, Sergi Busquets and Riqui Puig as midfield alternatives to Pedri.

Messi has parted ways with Barcelona after 21 years at the club and has since joined PSG

As a result, Pedri (right) could become the most important player for Barcelona next season

The 18-year-old is now one of the first names on Koeman's team sheet if he's picking his best XI and that's only one of the reasons why Messi's departure pushes him further into the limelight.

He has that same impish spark that Messi had when he first played for Barcelona. Terry Venables once described Messi as Oliver Twist picking everyone's pocket; Pedri also looks like part of Fagin's gang.

He's a fearless street footballer just like Messi and as his desire to play on despite the volume of games shows, he just wants the ball at his feet. It's a wholesome love of the game, and the skill to go with it that make him Barca's best bet to be the club's new poster-boy.

'Look at him, he's a millionaire and he doesn't even know it yet,' were the words of Pepe Mel, the coach of Spanish second division side Las Palmas while watching a 16-year-old Pedri at the club's pre-season training camp in Marbella two summers ago.

The 18-year-old is now one of the first names on Koeman's team-sheet if he's picking his best XI

Perdi also played an astonishing 73 games last season – that's more than Neymar (above) has managed in his two last seasons at Paris Saint-Germain

He still hadn't played a single first-team game but Mel had seen enough in a couple of sessions to know what lay ahead. Fast forward to this summer and it was Gary Lineker tweeting: 'What a talent' remind me how old he is.'

Ronald Koeman had a similar reaction when he first laid eyes on him. 'Who is the kid in midfield?' he asked Barcelona coaches in pre-season before immediately cancelling the club's plans to loan Pedri out at the start of last season.

There's another similarity with Messi – this is a player that Real Madrid missed out on.

When Las Palmas marked their 70th anniversary they invited various football dignities to the celebrations and Real Madrid sent Emilio Butragueno. Las Palmas coach Mel – a former Real Madrid youth team player – took the chance to tell the Madrid director about Pedri but they never took the gamble.

It's a shame for Barcelona their partnership didn't last. Now Pedri has to be the standard bearer

Pedri was approaching his second birthday when Messi was making his debut but the two were on the same wavelength last season playing in the same team.

It's a shame for Barcelona that it didn't last. Now he has to be the standard bearer.

No one expects him to reach Messi's heights. He plays in a different position and that will stop all comparisons. That can only help him as he learns to cope with the new pressures.

He has already been likened to Andres Iniesta. And when Mel said this summer that it was unfair to liken the youngster to arguably the most important player in Spain's history he added in the next breath: 'At the moment he reminds me more of Xavi, the way he protects the ball so well in possession.'

It's hard not to get excited about Pedri. And what Barcelona as a football club need right now is someone to get excited about; someone to build a new team around.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tammy Abraham touched down on Italian soil on Sunday morning ahead of completing his big money move to Serie A titans Roma.

The Englishman became the No.1 target in the Eternal City after Roma sanctioned the sale of Edin Dzeko to Inter Milan.

Abraham is just one element of a transfer merry-go-round, after Inter secured the signing of Dzeko to replace Romelu Lukaku - who has sealed a return to Chelsea in a £98million club transfer fee record and pushed Abraham down the pecking order as a result.

Tammy Abraham touched down in Rome on Sunday ahead of his imminent £34m transfer

The Englishman was mobbed by excited fans and stopped to pose for a few photographs

The 23-year-old was greeted at the airports by swathes of eager fans, desperate to get a first glimpse at their soon-to-be marquee signing who will cost the club £34m.

Abraham, wearing a protective face mask following his flight from London, stopped and waved at fans before briefly posing for a few photographs outside Rome’s Ciampino airport.

Abraham was on the bench on Saturday for Chelsea and waved his goodbyes to Blues supporters following the club's 3-0 win against Crystal Palace as he left the stadium with a suitcase in tow.

Abraham will now test himself in Italian football after falling down the Chelsea pecking order

Jose Mourinho convinced Abraham to join him in Italy after losing Edin Dzeko to Inter Milan

The deal with Roma is understood to include a buy back clause of around £68m.

Abraham, who had been waiting for Arsenal to firm up interest, had also spoken to Jose Mourinho who was keen to convince the 23-year old how big a role the England forward would have at Roma.

Mourinho is expected to deploy Abraham as his main striker for the coming season, as Roma battle to regain Champions League football.

The Chelsea striker had interest from Arsenal but has opted to move to Serie A with Roma

Last season Abraham found his game-time limited under Thomas Tuchel at Chelsea, with the German later admitting that he had not placed enough trust in the England man, which contributed to his struggles.

Under former boss Frank Lampard, Abraham was promoted to the first team, during a spell when Chelsea found themselves unable to add to the squad due to an overhanging transfer ban.

During the 2019-20 season under Lampard, Abraham made 47 appearances in all competitions and found the back of the net on 18 occasions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Conor McGregor will return to the ring next month in a wheelchair boxing match, it has been confirmed.

The UFC superstar is currently recovering from a broken leg he sustained during his first-round defeat to Dustin Poirier at UFC 264.

McGregor though is keen for a return to the ring and he has agreed to take part in a bout on September 11 in an unusual match-up.

Conor McGregor is recovering from the broken leg he suffered against Dustin Poirier

He will fight impressionist Al Foran in a charity wheelchair boxing match next month

The 33-year-old will take on Irish impressionist Al Foran in the co-main slot at the Clayton Hotel in Galway.

Foran has done many impressions of McGregor over several years which has picked up the attention of the former featherweight and lightweight champion.

McGregor tweeted back in May: 'I'll fight this imposter in the co-main! Terrible impression's of me he is doing years.'

In a Twitter post, Stevo Timothy who has organised the event, confirmed that the pair will square off.

The fight is part of a charity event in which funds raised will be donated to the Irish Wheelchair Association.

McGregor's coach John Kavanagh previously spoke of the UFC star's intentions to fight Foran and believes the time is now right with the Irishman 'off his feet for a while' due to his injury.

I’ll fight this imposter in the co-main! Terrible impression’s of me he is doing years. https://t.co/70rqFoxeVz — Conor McGregor (@TheNotoriousMMA) May 31, 2021

Drum roll ladies and gentlemen 👌👌



The co-main event: @TheNotoriousMMA v @ImpressionistAL aka The Notorious v The Notorious Impressionist all in aid of the @IrishWheelchair



Please donate here if you can: https://t.co/lDMJxs1MvE



📸 @madebyGoodie pic.twitter.com/kqFIXApdzu — Sir Stevo Timothy (@SirStevoTimothy) July 30, 2021

Kavanagh said on the W2W Warrior Training Program's Instagram: 'Conor had volunteered to be the co-main event where he was gonna box, there's a guy called Al Foran who is an impressionist.

'You might have seen him do some of Conor's impressions. So Conor's gonna fight Conor in the co-main event, which I thought was quite funny, he was accepting his first-ever co-main slot.

'He's been main event for a couple of years now. But anyway in the heat of all this he just turned and went, "You know, I'm gonna do the wheelchair boxing fight now," because he's off his feet for a while. He made a joke about that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David de Gea has insisted that he has 'a lot of years ahead' at Manchester United as the Spanish stopper laid down the gauntlet to Dean Henderson in the pair's battle for No 1 status at Old Trafford.

De Gea has long been United's top goalkeeper, with the former Atletico Madrid man emerging as one of the world's top stoppers during his 10-year stay with the Red Devils.

However, inconsistent performances in recent seasons has seen the Spaniard's stock fall, leading to calls for boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer to ponder changing his man between the sticks.

David de Gea insists that his long-term future remains at Old Trafford amid an uncertain spell

And the Norwegian responded to those calls last campaign, with Henderson enjoying a run in the team onset by De Gea's return to Spain for the birth of his child.

Henderson's positive displays for United have seen De Gea's future at Old Trafford scrutinised, with reports emerging that the club's hierarchy now regretting handing the goalkeeper a bumper £375,000 a week deal in 2019.

Yet De Gea - who returned to pre-season training early to set his stall out for a big campaign - maintains that his future remains at United.

'It's been a lot of years at the club and a great source of pride for me to have been able to play for a club like Manchester United for so many seasons now,' De Gea told the club's official website on his 10-year milestone.

The Spaniard has been locked in a battle for the No 1 position with keeper Dean Henderson

However, De Gea views 'many years ahead' for himself with the Premier League club

'But you have to live in the present, I think I still have a lot of years ahead of me at the club, I’m excited about that, feeling strong and I’m very keen to do well.

'I feel great in myself, high in confidence and I think it should be - and has to be - an important season for all of us.'

United have enjoyed a strong summer, with the club finally landing long-term target Jadon Sancho in a £73million deal, while Raphael Varane is on the verge of concluding his £42m switch from Real Madrid.

De Gea is expected to start United's opening game of the season against Leeds United, with Henderson still not fully fit having contracted coronavirus.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He started the day as Jason Kenny’s room-mate and finished it as Olympic champion. Welcome to the most extraordinary few hours of Matt Walls’ life.

Prior to winning gold in the omnium here with crushing dominance, the fortunes of this undemonstrative 23-year-old from Oldham had never troubled the presses of a national newspaper. Indeed, some of his family wouldn’t have recognised him in an identity parade.

Meeting him for the first time in the immediate afterglow of triumph, one didn’t believe he much cared for the limelight or soundbites in the least bit. He was happy and very down to earth. Asked if his brush with stardom would be welcome, he said: ‘I don’t know yet. We’ll see when I get back. It’s pretty cool. But I’ll just keep riding my bike, having fun, racing.’

My goodness, he can do what he does brilliantly and perhaps we should have been more aware of his impending victory than we were. He is, after all, the reigning European champion — in an event lightly attended because of Covid, admittedly — and took bronze at the World Championships in Berlin last year.

Here, he secured the British team’s first gold in the velodrome, lighting a spark just at a time when it seemed the old guard and wider hopes for our cyclists might be in danger of being stubbed out.

Matt Walls is an Olympic champion after securing the gold medal in the men's omnium

The 23-year-old delivered Great Britain's first title in the velodrome of these Games

Walls (right) got off to a superb start and kept defending champion Elia Viviani (left) at bay

Matt Walls: Olympic champion! 💥



That's the first gold for #TeamGB on the track at these Games.



And he brings GB's medal tally up to a fantastic 50! 🥇🥈🥉



Follow➡ https://t.co/gFNgMpsPNb #bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/2yRR9sL38b — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 5, 2021

For the man sleeping in the adjacent bed, Kenny, winner of six gold medals and two silvers across three Games, endured a dispiriting day on which the defence of his sprint title evaporated.

The half-full arena, all Covid restrictions permitted, also witnessed a horrific crash involving Britain’s Katy Marchant. The tangle ended with Holland’s Laurine van Riessen taken by stretcher to hospital.

We shall return to those dramas but only after recording the nature of Walls’ achievement, five months after he went down with Covid while racing for pro team Bora-Hansgrohe. He spent two weeks in a hotel in Belgium and three weeks off a bike.

Yet you would never have guessed it from his blistering start in the first of the four-discipline omnium, the scratch race.

He won that before finishing second in the tempo race behind Dutchman Jan-Willem van Schip. In passing, the tempo race is so complex that you need a post-doctoral degree in track cycling to begin to understand it and the IOC, keen to reach a new and wider audience, might well consider whether it has a place in a 21st century Games.

Anyway, on to the elimination race, so crystal clear and brutal in its simplicity. Every member of the field drops out until only the winner is still going, in this case the defending champion Elia Viviani of Italy, with Walls second.

Walls dominated from start to finish and never looked threatened over the 100-lap race

Going into the points race, the final act of the competition, Walls led Van Schip by four points and France’s Benjamin Thomas by eight.

The 100-lap race sees riders sprint every 10 laps, with the first five across the line awarded points, while anyone who laps the rest is awarded 20 bonus points.

Walls seized his opportunity, grabbing a lap early on, and then notching five more points for winning a sprint. He was then able to defend his lead, reacting to his rivals and bagging the odd point as and when he could. He withstood the challenge from Viviani and won by 24 points. New Zealander Campbell Stewart claimed silver and Viviani got bronze, five points further behind.

Walls said: ‘I had the worry of long-term Covid effects and I got it checked out when I got home. And then I slowly got back to training. Luckily, I was OK. I didn’t know whether I would come here in good shape or not.’

It was triathlon that launched him, as he explained: ‘When I was really young I did a bit of mountain biking with my dad, just for fun. At primary school I tried a lot of sports. I did a triathlon and was pretty good at the cycling bit and somebody mentioned, “Why not go to the velodrome?”

‘I live in Manchester and it’s pretty close. I went there and loved it. I just did more and more as I grew up. I got into racing. I did a bit of everything — some cross, mountain, track and road — and then it narrowed down to track and road.’

Walls (right) went into the deciding points race with a narrow advantage of just six points but gained a lap on the field early on to take control, and could then control the race to secure gold

A shout-out to Oldham from Olympic Champion Matt Walls 🤩



Today was a masterclass in cycling from the 23-year-old, dominating from the start 👏



Follow➡ https://t.co/gFNgMpsPNb #bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/fvSTKCIFlU — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 5, 2021

Returning to Marchant and the smash. Dutch rider Van Riessen caught the wheel of a bike in front and, sent wobbling, scythed right through the side of the British medal hopeful, taking her clean out.

A shocking accident, it brought out the medics immediately. Marchant said: ‘I was in the wrong place at the wrong time. That’s bike racing. I’m not really sure what happened. I was so focused on moving forward.

‘There’s a bit of blood but I think I’m all right.’

But Van Riessen was badly hurt and rushed away. Last night a spokesman for the Dutch team said: ‘She is well but can’t remember the fall. However, she was able to make it clear that the pain mainly concerns her shoulder.’

As for Kenny, he carried an air of resigned despondency.

But right on cue Jack Carlin, his anointed successor, went through to the semi-final today, where he will face Kenny’s conqueror, Harrie Lavreysen of Holland. There is another medal chance in the women’s madison with Katie Archibald and Laura Kenny in contention. The cycling medal factory fights another day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

After the ‘what’ came the ‘who’ and after the ‘who’ came the ‘how’. If these Olympics are considered a concession to madness, it is appropriate that a middling long jumper leaped from left field to the top of the men’s 100metres podium.

It was always said that the retirement of Usain Bolt would bring the unexpected back into running short distances. No one said anything about an Italian named Marcell Jacobs.

It was baffling. And astonishing. And absurd. And the sort of thing that tends to incite innuendo in a sport like athletics.

Italy's Lamont Marcell Jacobs took a shock gold medal in the men's 100m final - the country's first ever in the event

The Italian took gold in front of USA's Fred Kerley and Andre De Grasse of Canada with all three setting personal best times

To sum up the basics, he made it from gun to tape in 9.80sec, a quicker time than Bolt ran in the same race at Rio 2016, and in his wake were Fred Kerley of the US and Canada’s Andre De Grasse. A fraction behind them were all manner of questions.

As Kerley put it: ‘I really didn’t know anything about him.’ He was not alone. To put this sudden ascension into some context, consider that the 26-year-old was jumping into sand pits until 2018.

He was no better than good at that gig — an 8.07m man at his best — in truth, he was never more than a decent sprinter. The meaningful climb did not start until May, when he first went under 10sec.

Chew over that for a moment — a line of succession that goes back through Bolt, Justin Gatlin, Maurice Greene, Carl Lewis and Jesse Owens has just been extended by a runner whose first sub-10 came 10 weeks ago.

He was a different man on this track. He drew a little attention by running 9.94sec in an otherwise slow set of heats, and then a lot with a European record of 9.84sec in finishing third in his semi-final.

There was a bubbling excitement about a final contested by unfamiliar names but the smart money was on 2016 bronze medallist De Grasse or Ronnie Baker of the US.

Team GB's Zharnel Hughes looks on after he is disqualified for a false start in the 100m final dashing his medal hopes

The Brit set off before the start of the race, later blaming cramp having set and that he could do very little to prevent it

Hughes is led away following his disqualification as the rest of the finalists get back into their marks in Tokyo

Such money would have been lost in the insanity of it all. When it was done, he leaped into the arms of the Italian high jumper Gianmarco Tamberi, who a moment earlier had agreed to share a gold medal with Mutaz Barshim.

For all of a few minutes, that split gold between flying men was the day’s most surreal moment and then came Jacobs (above), screaming as he crossed the line.

‘It’s a dream, it’s fantastic. It’s a gold medal, it’s for ever,’ said Jacobs. ‘My scream expressed all the pain from the past. Now it is a scream of joy. I have lost a lot of times but I have always returned and now I have achieved a gold medal.’

His background was soon unpacked. He was born in the US to an Italian mother and American father and moved to Rome aged one. He has not met his father and they only resumed speaking last year.

‘We had grown apart,’ Jacobs said. ‘My mental coach said the first thing I needed to do was establish again with my father. That gave me the energy and the will to be everything today.’

Jacobs (second right) made only a reasonable start but dominated the last 50 meters of the race to take a shock gold

Jacobs just pipped USA's Fred Kerley across the line in an extremely tight finish to take the gold medal for Italy

The three medallists stand proudly with their national flags having set personal bests in the 100m final

Elements of this rise invite scepticism. Athletics has surrendered the right to blind acceptance. But for now, the Olympics can reflect on an almighty shock in the first 100m not won by Bolt since 2004.

While Jacobs was having his moment, Britain were lamenting the latest indignity of a track and field programme that falls to new lows by the hour. In this final, Zharnel Hughes false-started to wreck all the promise shown by his 9.98sec run in the semi-final.

‘My calf cramped on “set”, and with the cramp I moved, which is heart-breaking,’ said Hughes.

Reece Prescod, Hughes’s team-mate, also false-started in the semi-finals, the stage at which the heavy US favourite Trayvon Bromell was knocked out.

That latter departure seemed like madness at the time. Madness was redefined soon enough.

COVERAGE OF THE 100m FINAL AS IT HAPPENED

Team GB will be chasing their first 100m gold medal since the Barcelona Games of 1992 when Zharnel Hughes lines up in lane four ahead of the final.

Hughes reached the final after impressively winning his semi-final, defeating this year's fastest man in Trayvon Bromell in the process.

With the field missing Bromell, the retired Olympic champion in Usain Bolt and the world champion in Christian Coleman, it is set to be the most open men's 100m final in a generation.

Follow Sportsmail's DAN RIPLEY for live coverage of the men's 100m final at the Tokyo Olympics, including build-up, the race itself and reaction.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal have been drawn to face relegated West Brom in the second round of the Carabao Cup.

The full draw for the northern and southern section of the next stage of the tournament was announced after the first round came to an end on Wednesday evening.

All Premier League sides that are not competing in Europe this season were thrown into the hat for the second round.

Arsenal were drawn against West Brom in the second round of the Carabao Cup

Arsenal enter at the second round stage having not qualified for Europe this season

The Gunners will visit West Brom on the week commencing August 23 with the date of the game still to be confirmed.

There are two all Premier League games to be contested in the second round, with Burnley travelling to Newcastle and Watford hosting Crystal Palace.

The second round will provide some teams the chance to rest their top names against lower league opposition.

Marcelo Bielsa's (left) Leeds face Crewe while Dean Smith's (right) Aston Villa travel to Barrow

Everton face Huddersfield while there are two all Premier League contests in the round

Barrow, who only returned to the Football League after a 48-year exile last year, have a big-name opposition in the form of Aston Villa.

Leeds United host League One side Crewe, Everton travel to Championship side Huddersfield while newly promoted Brentford face Forest Green.

One of the most intriguing games of the draw will see Wolves travel to play Championship side Nottingham Forest while newly-promoted Norwich will face one of the teams hotly contested for promotion from the Championship this season in Bournemouth.

The teams contesting in Europe this season will enter in the third round, with Manchester City looking to win the competition for the fifth season running.

Pep Guardiola's side won the cup last season following a 1-0 victory over Tottenham in April.

Wolves face Championship side Nottingham Forest in one of the tougher games of the round
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nasib Nizami Oglu Piriyev of PAI Capital turns out to be a West Ham fan. Of course he does. It was the only thing missing from the takeover package, the punter on the board. No doubt Muhammad bin Salman bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud often walks the streets of Jeddah shouting ‘Toon Army’.

Funny, mind, that such a loyal Hammer did not realise the Ferdinand brothers, Rio and Anton, were not the most populist figures to recruit to his cause.

You would think as a ‘passionate supporter of West Ham since 1986’, Piriyev would know who the heroes were out east. Maybe he’ll give Paul Ince a call next.

Nasib Nizami Oglu Piriyev of PAI Capital claims to be a lifelong supporter of West Ham. Pictured, Hammers fans cheering on their side during a friendly at Brentford in July

Having Philip Beard, who helped steer Queens Park Rangers into the Championship, as frontman does not seem a natural move for a keen follower of West Ham’s fortunes, either.

Certainly not when Beard’s first statement hyped up the Olympic legacy, because we all know how much the London Stadium’s regulars care for that.

Maybe Piriyev just likes Dmitri Payet, given that reports in France suggested he tried and failed to buy Marseille last year.

It was claimed the PNN Group, chaired by his father Nizami Nasib Oglu Piriyev, had involved a Chinese bank in the proposed takeover.

‘I do not deny the willingness of some investors to acquire Olympique De Marseille,’ said its owner Frank McCourt. ‘I deny that an Azeri banker forwarded an offer earlier this week.’

So far, so familiar.

Actually, it’s bizarre that PAI Capital think it helps having a fan on the board. David Sullivan and David Gold are undoubtedly West Ham men and a sizable element in the ground hate them. At least they are present, though.

The Ferdinand brothers, Anton (left) and Rio (right), have been recruited to help PAI's cause

If Piriyev is the central figure in any consortium, this is an Azerbaijani venture capitalist takeover — through an investor whose primary business interests are centred in that country, plus Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Afghanistan and Russia.

Meaning if they don’t like the mood in the stadium, they barely have to be on the same continent. Sullivan’s main residence is 13 miles from the London Stadium. Baroness Brady is about eight miles away.

PAI Capital’s interest has been rebuffed, so this is another takeover destined to play out in the public domain, with the supporters artfully manipulated as muscle.

To this end, PAI acquiesced to an interview with Hammers News last week. Not directly, of course, because in a conversation there might be follow-up questions, requests for greater clarity, specifics, a debate around actual numbers and intentions and whether the club was merely being developed for resale.

PAI Capital said they were too busy to answer queries in person. They would, however, respond to email. Here’s an example of the level of detail revealed.

Hammers News: Under Sullivan and Gold, fans have been frustrated by the lack of consistent ambition in the transfer market. Philip Beard stated the manager of the club would have more money to spend under PAI.

Can you give an insight into the scope of that ambition? Would PAI invest significantly more in the squad than Sullivan and Gold, to enable the club to become a more consistent challenger in the top six?

PAI Capital: PAI Capital’s plan is to develop the club within a viable business model that guarantees long term to compete at the top level of English football. In case our takeover is successful, there will be a budget allocated to strengthen the squad.

The scale of the follow-up investment directly depends on the price we pay for the purchase of the club.

Hammers current co-owners David Gold (left) and David Sullivan (right) are being urged to sell

Well, that’s clear then. They have a budget to create a viable business model. One imagines Gold and Sullivan would say the same. So would Norwich. So would the bloke who ran Bury into the ground. It’s just words.

All that is of interest is the attempt to get the fans to make it difficult for the current owners, thereby forcing the price down.

But why would West Ham be better off under management who appear to be at their limit just making the purchase? Oh, that’s right. They’re fans.

Premier League is world's best

Brentford play Arsenal on Friday night to open the Premier League season. Who is your money on?

Conflicted? That’s the reason the Premier League is the best in the world. Brentford are in their first season in the modern top division; Arsenal had recent pretensions to form a Super League with Real Madrid and Barcelona.

But care to call the game? Many would fancy Brentford. A strong philosophy, an innovative coach, good technical players. Arsenal remain a work in progress under Mikel Arteta.

Arsenal remain a work in progress under Mikel Arteta ahead of the new campaign

They have bought expensively but not convincingly. The promised clear-out to finance a wider restructuring has not materialised. Few want the players who could not get Arsenal into Europe.

So this is a tight game in a way Real Madrid versus newly promoted Rayo Vallecano probably wouldn’t be; or at least if Vallecano won it would be a shock.

If Brentford take three points, few will be greatly surprised.

Now that’s a competition.

If Spurs hang on to Kane now, he could be theirs for life

There is curious gossip swirling around Harry Kane. It suggests Tottenham have less than three weeks to hold out — and then he will be theirs for life.

It would appear it is now or never. Kane makes his big move this summer or not at all. This moment, he is the only cab on the rank. If Manchester City do not buy him, it is hard to imagine where else they can go. That is not true a year from now. Erling Haaland is likely to be available. Kylian Mbappe could be a free transfer.

Kane might be the third best option, given his age. Will Barcelona’s financial position have improved? Will the budget issues have eased at Real Madrid? It is unlikely. Chelsea have done their business now. Manchester United and Manchester City may pursue younger options.

It would appear it is now or never for Harry Kane as Man City prepare to make a bid for him

Kane will be 29 going into next season. His transfer fee will still be a write-off, even if Tottenham relent on their demand for £150million.

That is why he is so anxious to force a move here and now. He knows it is the best time, perhaps the only time it will be feasible. And if not? Here’s the interesting part.

There are rumours that Kane will sign a new contract; a final contract; the one that makes him a Tottenham player for life. It sounds implausible after all the speculation this summer. Then again, who had Lionel Messi starting this season in France?

Let women's rugby walk before it can run

Plans are being made for a women’s equivalent of the British and Irish Lions tour. Maggie Alphonsi went as far as greeting the news with a potential starting XV. There was something of the shoehorn about it. Women’s rugby is at a very different development stage to men’s. Many contenders are not professional.

In 2021, Scotland played a three-team group with England and Italy and ended with a points differential of -63. Wales shipped 98 points to France and Ireland, and scored nil. A women’s Lions team could show a dispiriting bent towards one, at best two, countries.

Alphonsi’s team included Ireland’s Amee-Leigh Murphy Crowe, a sevens player with two Test appearances. She preferred Christine Belisle of Scotland to England’s 60-cap Vickii Cornborough at prop. Alphonsi worked very hard to make her Lions inclusive, but a coach would only be motivated by winning. It would be hard to avoid a team top-heavy with English pros.

This could be a mighty turn-off, certainly if the hope is to harness travelling support.

Would it not be sensible to allow the women’s game to walk before trying to make it run?

Is Sky still the home of cricket?

With respect to the excellent football team, the best of Sky Sports has always been the cricket; in particular Test cricket.

The panel’s knowledge, the blend of insight and humour, is pitch perfect. The coverage has evolved, too, new names with old yet sitting like best friends. David Lloyd is as comfortable beside Ebony Rainford-Brent as he is with Michael Holding.

Yet if Sky miss out on the Ashes tour to BT Sport again, what does that say about their priorities? Nasser Hussain, one of the sharpest analysts, missed the first Test against India because Sky placed him with the Hundred.

If Sky miss out on the Ashes tour to BT Sport again, what does that say about their priorities?

Cricket is desperate to make the new format work, but what form of the game requires the greater insight, what has the complexity and layers?

‘The Hundred and Sky take cricket to a new dimension with augmented reality avatars,’ announced the ECB breathlessly on Thursday. No, me neither. But it does seem that any broadcaster claiming to be the Home of Cricket has the Ashes.

Crawley's potential costs him

Zak Crawley’s potential appears to have cost him, as much as his run of low scores. It is precisely because he looked such a fine Test batsman during one outstanding knock against Pakistan that he can be taken out of the team and ordered to go away and gather his game to come again.

Little about Dom Sibley is Test standard. If he is dropped, there does not seem to be a pathway back. Crawley cannot complain given the numbers, but it still seems a strange way to do business.

Some golds weigh more than others

At Heathrow, the clamour for a piece of the returning Tom Daley will have served as a salutary lesson to his Team GB colleagues. All gold medallists are equal — but some are more equal than others.

Daley, with his knitting and heroic, emotional, backstory is superstar material; so are husband and wife phenomena Jason and Laura Kenny. They are the ones the chatshows, the publishers, the FTSE 100 companies want.

When success arrives in such a golden downpour it is easier to forget those on the undercard. Name both gold medallists in the modern pentathlon? The men’s 49er class sailors? The omnium cyclist? For most of Britain’s Olympians, even the very best, it will be back to a life of denial, graft and obscurity, even with a gold medal around their necks.

Tom Daley, with his knitting and heroic, emotional, backstory is superstar material

Why netball may miss out on Brisbane 2032

Netball is pushing to be included in the Olympics, with Brisbane in 2032 the target. Australia is a strong netball nation and the sport has been recognised by the International Olympic Committee since 1995.

Yet there are problems, perhaps insurmountable. Only 76 countries play netball. The International Netball Federation boasts just 11 full members in Europe: England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Isle of Man, Republic of Ireland, Gibraltar, Israel, Malta, Switzerland and United Arab Emirates.

It seems a motley crew, not least because, for Olympic purposes, five would compete as one country, Great Britain. Then there is the fact netball is played almost exclusively by women. A sport that excludes half the planet would hardly fit the Olympics mantra of inclusivity.

This is a pity. Netball is a significant participation sport, but does not have the range of basketball or volleyball. If it is part of the programme in Brisbane it may be a one-off event, like karate in Tokyo.

Anyway, nothing should be in ahead of squash, which has been wilfully excluded for too long.

Paying customers given the short straw with VAR again

The slightest contact in the penalty area will no longer be penalised, and benefit of the doubt in marginal offside calls will go to the attacking player in reforms to VAR guidelines.

Yet why have the Premier League shied away from live audio broadcasts of the discussions between officials, as happens in rugby, cricket and other sports. Why are the paying customers still the least informed?

They are the ones who will have to endure the inconveniences of football’s post-pandemic reality; they are the ones whose goodwill is tested time and again. They don’t have the benefit of replays or a refereeing expert to pick through the process. Why should they be the last to know what is going on — again?

New VAR rules have been briefed to Premier League stars, with offsides set for a revamp

Worrying times for Scottish football

It is not just Rangers’ 4-2 aggregate defeat by Malmo in the Champions League that should raise alarms about the strength of Scottish football.

Midtjylland, the Danish team who eliminated Celtic in the second qualifying round, went on to play PSV Eindhoven. Aggregate score, a 4-0 defeat, beaten home and away. The form lines, not just the results, disturb.

FIFA president Gianni Infantino met Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince on Tuesday. Almost certainly that means the idea of a World Cup every two years has not gone away, despite the havoc it would wreak with the global calendar and player welfare. They never stop, these guys.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku has a point to prove following his sensational return to Chelsea, 10 years after he first signed for the Premier League giants.

The 28-year-old Belgian never established himself as a young player at Stamford Bridge and the club were happy to let him leave for Everton back in 2017. Now he returns ready to show the club and its fans exactly what they missed the first time round, and why he's now a £98million world-class striker.

But there's another old - and rather odd - obstacle to overcome too. Having worn the No 18 during his first spell, Lukaku is now set to take the No 9 shirt at Chelsea once Tammy Abraham's move to Roma is finalised - the young England forward touched down on Italian soil on Sunday morning to complete his £34m transfer and join Jose Mourinho's revolution.

But, as Abraham found out, that fabled striker's squad number seems to have something of a hex on it. So many revered centre forwards have flopped while wearing Chelsea's No 9 in recent years that some fans have even called it 'cursed'.

Romelu Lukaku completed a £98million return to Chelsea last week, with a point to prove

Tammy Abraham has landed in Italy to join Roma and will vacate Chelsea's No 9 shirt

At most clubs, being given the No 9 is a source of great pride and responsibility... but at Chelsea, who have kicked off their season with a Super Cup victory over Villarreal and a Premier League win against Crystal Palace, it just seems to be a bit of a burden.

Having scored 42 goals in 74 Serie A appearances for Inter Milan after arriving from Manchester United in 2019, Lukaku will have no doubt he can complete his unfinished business at Chelsea, and banish any talk of a jinxed shirt.

There have been 15 different occupants of the 'cursed' No 9 since the start of the Premier League era, from the prolific Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink to the far less so Steve Sidwell. Here, Sportsmail takes a look back at every one...

Having worn the No 18 shirt during his first spell at Chelsea, Lukaku will now take the No 9

Lukaku returns 10 years after he first signed for the club, having fired Inter Milan to glory

Tony Cascarino (1992-1994)

Signed in January 1992, Cascarino occupied the No 9 shirt for the first Premier League season... but he less than impressed the Stamford Bridge faithful. He only played nine games all season, scoring twice (against Tottenham and Coventry).

He kept the shirt for the following season, and played far more games, but still only managed four goals. Chelsea finished 11th, Cascarino was shipped off to Marseille and never played again for an English club!

Tony Cascarino failed to impress wearing Chelsea's No 9 and scored six times in two seasons

Mark Stein (1994-1996)

Taking the reins the following season was Mark Stein, who signed for £1.5m from Celtic, despite interest from Liverpool, Tottenham and Manchester City. Understandably, there were high expectations and he certainly fulfilled them.

He scored in seven consecutive matches from December 1993 to February 1994, a Premier League record which stood until Ruud van Nistelrooy (and since Jamie Vardy) broke it. In total, he netted 25 goals in 63 games for Chelsea, before the arrival of Mark Hughes, Gianluca Vialli and Gianfranco Zola limited his playing time.

Following his retirement, he became a physiotherapist at Barnet, before moving onto Crawley Town. Currently, he can be found fixing injuries at Championship strugglers Rotherham United.

Mark Stein earned a Premier League record, scoring in seven consecutive games for Chelsea

Gianluca Vialli (1996-1999)

The Italian joined as part of Ruud Gullit's revolution at the Bridge, arriving as the former Juventus captain with a Champions League winners' medal around his neck.

He scored 11 goals in his first season, 19 in the second and 10 in the third... and he became the club's manager in February 1998. He retired from playing at the end of the 1998-99 season to concentrate on his job as boss, but has gone down in history as a legend at Stamford Bridge.

While at the club as a player, he won the FA Cup, League Cup, UEFA Super Cup and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup, before adding another FA Cup and a Charity Shield as manager.

A player and manager at Chelsea, Vialli will always be remembered as a hero by the supporters

Chris Sutton (1999-2000)

There is no doubting Sutton's ability as a player - at Norwich, Blackburn and Celtic he was prolific - but it just didn't happen at the Bridge. He had big shoes to fill in Vialli's, but could not live up to his £10m price tag and scored just one league goal.

His other two goals for the club came against Skonto Riga in a Champions League qualifier, and Hull City in the FA Cup. The side got to the final of the same competition that season, but he didn't make the squad. In the summer, he was sold to Celtic for £6m... and it didn't take long to re-find his shooting boots.

Chris Sutton had prolific spells in his playing career, but never hit those heights at Chelsea

Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink (2000-2004)

Perhaps the most iconic No 9 in Chelsea's Premier League history. A £15m club-record purchase from Atletico Madrid, Hasselbaink scored on his debut and never looked back. He netted 26 goals in his debut season, and went on to score 29 the season after, easily cementing himself as a fans' favourite.

In the second half of his time at the club, the team was focused around Gianfranco Zola, which somewhat limited Hasselbaink's playing time under Claudio Ranieri. Still, though, he only scored one goal less than Zola's 16, and he was top scorer again for the next two seasons after that. In July 2004, he turned down approaches from Fulham, Celtic and Rangers and instead joined Middlesbrough on a two-year deal.

Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink is a Chelsea legend, and has 88 goals in all competitions for the club

Mateja Kezman (2004-2005)

The 2004-2005 season is fondly remembered by Chelsea fans as their first Premier League title-winning campaign... but in terms of players, the likes of Frank Lampard, Eidur Gudjohnsen and Petr Cech are spoken about way before Kezman.

After tearing up the Dutch league with PSV Eindhoven, Kezman only scored four goals in 25 league games and headed to Atletico Madrid at the end of the season. Not the best time then, you may think. According to the player himself, though, he loved it: 'Chelsea was the best thing in my career. That was the climax of my career, for sure. Living and playing in London was something I will never forget.'

Mateja Kezman won the Premier League title with Chelsea, and loved his time at the club

Hernan Crespo (2005-2006)

Returning from a loan spell at AC Milan for the 2005-06 season, Hernan Crespo took the vacant No 9 shirt and wowed supporters with some scintillating displays and eye-catching goals as he scored 13 goals to help Chelsea win another league title.

His family, though, never settled and Chelsea fans will always feel as though they didn't see the best of the Argentine in England. After his impressive displays in 05-06, he went back on loan to Italy - this time with Inter - to see out his contract with the Blues.

Hernan Crespo's family never settled in England, but on the pitch Chelsea fans loved him

Khalid Boulahrouz (2006-2007)

You can forgive the casual football fan for forgetting Khalid Boulahrouz's time as Chelsea's No 9. In fact, it would be more than reasonable to forget that he was No 9, given that he was a central defender.

He arrived from Hamburg for £8.5m in the summer of 2006, and was given the shirt as it was one of the few available following Crespo's exit. He made a promising start, playing well against Liverpool and Barcelona in particular, but gradually fell out of favour, in part due to performance, but injuries didn't help either.

Chelsea fans may have been surprised to see centre back Khalid Boulahrouz take the No 9 shirt

Steve Sidwell (2007-2008)

At this point it was becoming commonplace for Chelsea's No 9s to only last a season, so Steve Sidwell didn't really stand a chance. He joined from Reading, and the No 9 shirt got a little closer to a striker but eventually stopped just short in central midfield with Sidwell.

He never really established himself in Jose Mourinho's starting XI, making his debut as an 83rd-minute substitute against Birmingham. He played 25 times in all competitions that season, but many were off the bench and he headed to Aston Villa at the end of the campaign.

Steve Sidwell was another surprise No 9, and he only lasted a season at Stamford Bridge

Franco Di Santo (2008-2009)

It would be harsh to dismiss Franco Di Santo's time at Chelsea as a failure, given his lack of age and experience upon joining the west London club. He was just 19 when he made his debut, and his entire season as No 9 was made up of substitute appearances.

He played 16 times - eight in the league, eight in various cup competitions - but did not manage to score a goal. He was shipped out on loan to Blackburn the following season, before joining Wigan on a permanent deal.

Franco Di Santo didn't score as Chelsea's No 9, before leaving on loan to Blackburn in 2009

Fernando Torres (2011-2014)

The much-maligned Fernando Torres turns up next. Clearly, there were huge expectations placed upon his shoulders when he arrived. A £50m price tag made him the sixth most expensive footballer of all time, and he had been prolific at Liverpool.

In truth, though, when people discuss the curse of Chelsea's No 9, Torres' name is often the first port of call. He scored his first goal in April, ending a run of 903 minutes without scoring for his new club... and it didn't get any better from there.

In the 2011-12 season, he went on a 24-game barren run, eventually ending the season with six league goals. He got eight the year after, and five the year after that. Indeed, the damage was done, and he moved onto AC Milan on a two-year loan, with his career in steep decline.

Fernando Torres arrived for a huge fee, but was a huge flop during his time in west London

Radamel Falcao (2015-2016)

After a season without a No 9, Falcao arrived on loan from Monaco with the potential to make the deal permanent at the end of the season. In Ligue 1, he had scored for fun but a temporary loan spell at Manchester United saw the goals dry up.

It was now Chelsea's turn to try and turn his fortunes around, but the then 29-year-old once again failed to recreate his scoring form in the French leagues. He netted once in the Premier League, only playing 10 games in the competition overall, before being sent back to Monaco in the summer of 2016.

Radamel Falcao was prolific in Ligue 1 but failed to find form with Chelsea in English football

Alvaro Morata (2017-2018)

Thirteen is unlucky for some, as the old saying goes, and that appears to be the case for Morata. Chelsea's 13th No 9 in Premier League history failed to hit the heights expected of him in west London and was shipped out on loan. In fact, he even wore No 29, such was his desire to get rid of the 'cursed' No 9 shirt.

During his first season, Morata netted just 15 goals across all competitions. While his second season at the club score him score just nine times before returning to Madrid after 12 years, joining the club on an 18-month loan deal.

Having struggled to prove his worth at Chelsea, Morata signed permanently for Atletico in July 2020 - leaving the cursed No 9 shirt vacant for its next victim.

Alvaro Morata moved to Atletico Madrid, bringing his Chelsea nightmare to an end

Gonzalo Higuain (2019)

With Chelsea desperate for a focal point in 2018-19, Maurizio Sarri reverted back to what he knew. Gonzalo Higuain had been prolific in his vibrant Napoli side and the pair were reunited when the Argentine joined on loan from AC Milan in January 2019.

Fears over the 31-year-old's fitness and suitability to the pace of the Premier League proved well-founded. His return of five goals in 18 games paints a better picture than his six-month spell at Stamford Bridge actually was, despite an encouraging brace against Huddersfield in just his third game.

Gonzalo Higuain took the shirt in January 2019 but struggled in his loan spell from AC Milan

Tammy Abraham (2019-present)

Lukaku's arrival has pushed Abraham out the Chelsea door - with Roma his destination for the 2021-2022 season.

The 23-year-old had been prolific in two seasons on loan in the Championship with Bristol City in 2016-17 and with Aston Villa, scoring 52 in total in both campaigns.

However, a loan season at Swansea in between ended in relegation and a return of just five Premier League goals. His Chelsea career stagnated following the arrival of Thomas Tuchel.

Abraham - who ended last season as Chelsea's joint-top scorer with 12 goals - made just seven appearances after Tuchel replaced Frank Lampard - who was a fan of Abraham - as head coach.

The England forward is not in Tuchel's plans - he was an unused substitute in the Super Cup penalty shootout win - and suggested he was not his go-to No 9 when speaking about Lukaku.

'Romelu is one of the guys like [Erling] Haaland at Dortmund, [Robert] Lewandowski at Bayern Munich, Harry Kane at Tottenham, who is a real No 9 who loves to score and who has a presence in the box. That is not a secret. The sentence is easy to repeat for any coach in the world,' he said.

Lukaku's arrival has pushed Tammy Abraham (above) out the Chelsea door
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was some months after the crushing disappointment of England losing the World Cup quarter-final to West Germany in Mexico 1970.

On a crisp evening that autumn, we sat sipping our lagers in Bobby Moore's garden and still the conversation harked back to a hot midsummer day in Leon when the Germans came back from two down to win a convulsive match 3-2.

We exhausted the conspiracy rumour of Gordon Banks being poisoned the night before and the un-readiness of Peter Bonetti to take over in goal. Unproven.

Legendary German footballer Gerd Muller (above) passed away on Sunday at the age of 75

The master marksman also had an astonishing goalscoring rate at international level

He scored the winner to knock England out of the 1970 World Cup quarter-finals in Mexico

MULLER'S REMARKABLE GOALSCORING RECORDS Muller scored 51 in just 31 games for local club 1861 Nordlingen

He was bought by Bayern Munich for just £2,500 - but today might have been worth £250million

Across 15 seasons at Bayern he scored 506 times in 607 matches

He won four league titles, three German cups, three European Cups, one Cup Winner's Cup and an Intercontinental Cup with Bayern

Muller scored the winner in the 1974 World Cup final against Holland and netted twice in the 1972 European Championship final win against the Soviet Union - achieving the Golden Boot in both tournaments

His international record reads: 68 goals in 62 games for Germany

Only of late have his records of 40 goals in one Bundesliga season and 85 in a single calendar year been overtaken, by Robert Lewandowski and Lionel Messi respectively. Advertisement

We tackled the question of whether Alf Ramsey snatched defeat from the jaws of victory by substituting Bobby Charlton and inviting Franz Beckenbauer to seize control of the game. Guilty, M'lud.

Finally we turned our attention to the genius who scored the winner in extra time. There came the hiss of another can being opened as Bobby mused: 'Hmm. Maybe just as well Gerd Muller didn't play against us in 1966.'

Perhaps a little merciful, also, that the Luftwaffe were not quite as accurate from the war-time skies over Britain as the striker known as Der Bomber.

Muller's nickname may not have been acceptable in today's politically correct climate but back then it fitted perfectly the short, squat, weapon of destruction who has now joined Moore in the boot-room above.

Muller played only one friendly for his country before being omitted from the Wembley final in which England won the World Cup. He had arrived on the scene too late to replace the balding Uwe Seeler in that team.

But it was not long before he set about succeeding and surpassing that goal-scoring legend and Moore knew he would be a pocket handful in Mexico.

He said: 'This little chap doesn't look fast but he's lightning off the mark. He's not big but he's a menace in the air. He's strong as a bulldog. His turning circle is tighter than a London taxi's and he's deadly in the box.'

Our Bobby contained Gerd for 108 minutes in that fateful quarter-final but could not deny him forever. No defender could.

Muller scored 51 goals in only 31 games for local club Nordlingen before being bought by Bayern Munich for £2,500. What would he be worth today? Try £250million.

In 15 seasons as Bayern's major strike force he scored 506 times in 607 matches, spearheading their drive for four league titles, three German cups, three European Cups, one Cup Winner's Cup and an Intercontinental Cup.

The short, powerful striker known as 'Der Bomber' scored an acrobatic goal to make it 3-2

Muller had an extraordinary scoring record at club level, most notably with Bayern Munich

He won four league titles, three German cups, three European Cups, one Cup Winner's Cup and an Intercontinental Cup with Bayern Munich

He scored the winning goal in the epic 1974 World Cup final victory over Holland and netted twice in the 1972 European Championship final win over the Soviet Union. In both tournaments, he won the Golden Boot.

In terms of goals-per-game ratio, Muller's record in international football defies belief: 68 in 62 appearances for Germany. Only of late have his records of 40 goals in one Bundesliga season and 85 in a single calendar year been overtaken, by Robert Lewandowski and Lionel Messi respectively.

Those exploits were the foundation of Bayern's rise to prominence and when he died yesterday, just 75, president Herbert Hainer said: 'Without Gerd Muller, Bayern would not be the club we love today. He was the greatest striker there has ever been.'

The goal he scored against England bore his trademark of an astonishing strength and agility seen more often in Olympic gymnasts or the most powerful of circus tumblers.

That he should pass away after wasting away in hospital for months with dementia will fuel further the game's concerns about the perils of heading the ball, a skill at which he was exceptional for his stature.

But for the moment football the world over pauses to pay its respects to Herr Muller, with Gary Lineker leading the UK tributes: 'Very sorry to hear that Gerd Müller has passed away. Loved watching him as a child and learnt so much from doing so. The greatest penalty box goalscorer I've ever seen.'

Current Bayern star Robert Lewandowski only recently broke Muller's Bundesliga record

He netted 68 goals in 62 games, including in the 1974 World Cup final against the Netherlands
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andy Murray admits he will not be making any long-term goals until after the US Open.

The former world No 1 is preparing for a return to action at the Cincinnati Masters, but is unseeded for the ATP 1000 event and has been given a wildcard for the tournament.

The event comes after Murray withdrew from the men's singles at the Tokyo Olympics with a thigh strain, but played in the doubles alongside Joe Salisbury.

Andy Murray admits he will not be making any long-term goals until after the US Open

'I think I need to set short-term goals, it is what's really important just now because it's been very difficult to plan medium and longer-term targets because of various different issues that I've had this year,' Murray said in his first press conference since the Olympics.

'I just try to focus on the short term. Look at this week as a great opportunity for me to play on hard courts in conditions that I like against top players again.

'So short-term goals is to be on the practice court with these guys as much as I can, hopefully get the chance to play matches, like I said in these conditions and give all my energy and efforts to the US Open and assess where my game and my body is at the end of that.

Murray (right) played in the doubles alongside Joe Salisbury (left) at the Tokyo Olympics

'But I can't really look too far ahead right now, I think my team planning my physical conditioning and my scheduling and everything - that could be their job to plan those things out but for me I just need to take things each week at a time just now and give all my energy to each match and each event that I play and see where I'm at at the end of the US Open.'

The 34-year-old made it to Wimbledon after two hip surgeries in 2018 and 2019, when it was unclear whether the Briton would be able to play tennis again.

Wimbledon was Murray's first Grand Slam of this year, after he contracted Covid before the Australian Open and missed Roland Garros, and he reached the third round before losing to Denis Shapovalov in straight sets.

'Obviously the Olympics was a great experience but it was tough because I obviously felt like I had built up some sort of momentum during Wimbledon - I was obviously very disappointed with how it ended, but then if I reflect on the build up to Queens and Wimbledon, I couldn't really have expected much more than that,' Murray said.

The 34-year-old made it to Wimbledon after two hip surgeries in 2018 and 2019

Wimbledon was Murray's first Grand Slam of this year but was dumped out in the third round

'Then I got back on the practice courts after a few days, started preparing and got another good 10, 12 days of practice in before the Olympics and then I'd been having a little bit of pain in my quad during that period and decided when we were over in Tokyo to get it looked at because it had been persisting for a little while.

'And then I had a tear in my quad and I've never had any muscle injuries in my career so I didn't really know what they felt like, so it was a difficult one and then there was the responsibility to Joe as well so it was hard and frustrating again to have to miss the opportunity to play in another big event.

'Again, here I feel good again but as I said earlier in the year I can't say with any great certainty that I'm going to be feeling good for three or four months in a row.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tommy Fury insists Jake Paul is running scared of facing him in a potential bout as he prepares to make his United States debut against Anthony Taylor.

Tyson Fury's half-brother is set to take on the MMA fighter, who has been sparring with Paul, on August 29.

Their bout will be on the undercard of the main event which consists of Paul taking on Tyron Woodley as the rivalry between the YouTube star and Fury heats up.

Tommy Fury will be making his debut in the United States when he faces Anthony Taylor

Ahead of a highly anticipated potential bout between the pair, Fury insists Paul is running scared of facing him when quizzed on if the 24-year-old was fearing a potential fight.

'A million percent,' he told Boxing Social. 'The difference is I am a Fury and a fighting man and been doing this since I was a baby and he's been running about with a camera in his hand since he was a baby. There is a big difference there. I've been raised in gyms getting smashed about the head. What's he been doing?

'When Jake Paul gets hit proper and his jaw is killing him and he can't chew or his ribs are broken, he's going to know what its like to be a fighter. Fighting Ben Askren and all these other fools he has fought, he has never took a shot so lets see Jake Paul when he takes a shot.

MMA fighter Taylor (left) has been sparring with Fury's rival YouTube star Jake Paul (right)

'The gamers they go around, they want to be famous on Instagram. They want to do this and that. That's what it is about for them. You've seen just yesterday they released stupid videos running about jumping in the air. I'm not about that.

'If I go in there and blast this guy out he's going to go "oh, I don't want a bit of that. I'm making money as I am let's leave him alone." We have seen this happen before when big fights don't happen so let's hope that he is a man of his word and let's get it on.'

Fury has reportedly signed a two-fight deal with Showtime Boxing in the USA. He has won all six of his professional fights so far, most recently securing a points victory over Jordan Grant in June.

It is anticipated that YouTube star Paul could eventually take on Fury in America

The 22-year-old though he is out to prove a point in the United States and that by defeating Taylor he would already have a psychological edge over Paul if the pair do eventually face off against each other.

'[I want to make] a statement, that's the goal every time you know' he added. 'Every time I get in the ring I want to show a new leaf to my game and over there in America that's what I want to show even more now and more so that it is Jake Paul's sparring partner. You know it just add a bit more flavour to it doesn't it?

'So I'm going to go over there and show what I am about and it's the same every time. When you get up close and personal everything changes because I'm not here to mess about. All these guys are pretenders.

'It can go both ways. Don't forget this man I'm fighting is sparring with Jake Paul on the regular so obviously Jake Paul isn't blasting him out there or else he wouldn't' be sparing.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With a trail of golden hair and smoke, Elaine Thompson-Herah repeated history and then made a little extra. It wasn't enough that she defended her 100m Olympic title, for on Saturday night she also took down one of the oldest records in her sport as well.

Thirty-three years. That's how long Florence Griffith-Joyner's Olympic mark of 10.62sec had stood, with all the nods and winks that have accompanied it since. It was a fence that surely couldn't be scaled.

But then we had Thompson-Herah and the race to end all races. Male or female, there has never been one like this. Not where six women go under 11 seconds, three of them clock 10.76sec or lower, and one - the one - went to 10.61sec.

Jamaica's Elaine Thompson-Herah stormed to gold in the women's 100m final in Tokyo

Reigning Olympic champion Thompson-Herah beat her fellow Jamaican Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce to take the gold medal in Tokyo

Even before she finished she was pointing at the numbers on the track-side screen. Maybe that cost her a digit starting with five after the decimal; maybe she could have got closer to that more baffling world record of 10.49sec, set by the same woman with the foggy legacy.

But Thompson-Herah didn't need to pick up loose change. She had daylight between herself and her two fellow Jamaicans, Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, the champion of 2008 and 2012, and Shericka Jackson. They ran like the wind and they were blown away by the second fastest 100m time ever run by a woman.

It was magnificent to the first-time buyer. It was also about the new line of spikes and a fast track and the warm air; to a few others it will also be about what don't know and hotter air. That, quite rightly, is the price of sprinting's past.

In the present, we can reflect on a race that will surely not be beaten in the athletics portion of these Games. The men's 100m on Sunday will have a great deal of uncertainty, but we can already tell from the heats that it will have nothing of the quality, and almost certainly nothing approaching the same depth of rivalry between protagonists.

Thompson-Herah marks her new Olympic record of 10.61, the second fastest time in history

To observe the frostiness between Fraser-Pryce and Thompson-Herah in the aftermath was to take a guilty pleasure in spiky narratives. Most dishes benefit from spice and this one between former training partners had clumps of it.

Afterwards, Thompson-Herah, who also won the 200m at Rio 2016, was buzzing, not least in consideration of the fact she recently felt she might miss the Olympics through a lingering achilles injury.

'This is really special,' said Thompson-Herah, 29. 'It's super special. I knew I could have run this from like 2016 and I knew one day it would come.

'Two months ago I didn't think I would be here today. I held my composure, I believed in myself, I believe in God, and the team around me is very strong, I get that support. I didn't expect to run this fast, even though I felt great during the rounds.

'Behind this 10.61 there was a lot of nerves. I said, 'You can do this, you've been here before, just execute'.

It was a Jamaican clean sweep as Elaine Thompson-Herah (centre) took gold, Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce (left) in second and Shericka Jackson (right) in third

'But I think I celebrated early too much.'

Possibly, yes, and that extended to a screech that echoed around this empty stadium. While she danced, Fraser-Pryce, a mother of one and a winner of 12 world titles at the age of 34, carried something of a frown.

Her and Thompson-Herah used to be close, and they both worked under the coach Stephen Francis together for years, but at some point competitive tensions tend to take over.

There are suggestions that Thompson-Herah did not show sufficient deference to the seniors of the group back in the day, but irrespective, she has put herself in a position now where she can swagger.

Fraser-Pryce was asked about their relationship long after their race and the length silence that followed possibly said more than an eventual answer that pointed to a respect for all opponents.

Fraser-Pryce and Jackson couldn't hide their disappointment after missing out on the gold

With the top six breaking the 11-second mark, this final ranked as one of the quickest in history

As for the defeat, on the back of having run 10.63sec in June, Fraser-Pryce said: 'Have you ever lost anything? You're definitely going to feel disappointed.

'I didn't run the race I wanted to run. You're disappointed but it happened, you move on and you're grateful for the opportunity.'

This one started with a stumble from the elder athlete out of the blocks, but she still led until 70m. That was when Thompson-Herah ignited the rocket and stormed through.

'I wasn't looking at any record or any time, but eventually those times will erase,' Thompson-Herah said. 'Even if it takes five years, they will erase. A lot of women are coming up and rising, so to run this Olympic record sends out a warning that anything is possible.'

Heart-breaking for Dina 😭



Following a hamstring injury leading into the Games, and narrowly missing out on the 100m final, Dina Asher-Smith is pulling out of the 200m



❤️ But, there's plenty more championships for her to come and kill ❤️#bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/OXTcYM2bHE — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) July 31, 2021

Dina Asher-Smith was in tears as she spoke about how a hamstring injury wrecked her Olympics dreams, confirming she was withdrawing from the 200 metres

Two Swiss athletes, Ajla del Ponte and Mujinga Kambundji, drew attention by making the top six, while Britain's Daryll Neita was eighth, her place in the final a sign of her immense progress at the age of 24.

It was also glaring for the reason she was the sole representative of Team GB in the wake of Dina Asher-Smith's crushing exit at the semi-final stage.

From a parochial point of view, that was the story. It was the tale of her bad luck and iffy hamstrings at precisely the wrong time, made more poignant by her tears and belief that she could have won.

Of course, there is no denying she suffered rotten luck. Equally, it is just about impossible to believe anyone would have caught Thompson-Herah in that kind of form.

After finishing third in her semi-final, Asher-Smith was left waiting to see if she had qualified

Was this faster than Flo-Jo?

Olympic 100m champion Thompson-Herah said you could have run faster if she hadn't celebrated by pointing at the clock - but might she already be the fastest woman of all time?

Griffith Joyner's world record of 10.49secs, run in 1988, has long been debated due to a suspected faulty wind gauge.

Any race with more than 2m/secs wind speed is deemed ineligible for records. The wind gauge recorded 0.0m/secs for Griffith Joyner's world-record race, despite it being a blustery day and recording times well over 2m/secs for other races.

Thompson-Herah, who won in 10.61secs, will have to make do with breaking Flo-Jo's Olympic record of 10.62secs for now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The scar on David Luiz’s right hamstring reminds him of the good times in England. The mention of certain pundits, the not so good.

Talking to Sportsmail from his parents’ home in the Brazilian region of Minas Gerais, the 34-year-old — a free agent after leaving Arsenal — has just finished a morning workout with a friend. He will soon be heading back out to his sun-scorched training pitch.

He looks in tremendous shape, evidenced by one muscle-bound picture from the earlier session.

David Luiz is biding his time as he weighs up his options over his next move this summer

But, for now, this break is a chance to reflect on his time in the Premier League, not that he thinks those days are definitely over just yet.

It was confirmed in May he would not be signing a new contract at Arsenal. Why?

‘Both of us decided to split,’ he says. ‘I came for two years and the aim was to win something, which I did (the FA Cup and Community Shield).

‘Now, I think the club has a different project for the long term. They have different ideas. My idea is to win, win, win as soon as possible.’

The inference is clear — Arsenal have accepted they need to rebuild.

It is no surprise, given his association with Chelsea, but Luiz wants to win trophies today, not tomorrow.

The Brazilian parted ways with Arsenal this summer after a two-year stay in north London

The 34-year-old revealed that Arsenal's current rebuild led to him agreeing to leave the club

Luiz is in tremendous shape as he prepares for the new season in Brazil this summer

That is the reason he has rejected several lucrative offers this summer, from the Middle East to South America and even the Premier League. Luiz reminds us that he has the medals at his home in London from every club he has played for — titles in Portugal, France and England — and mention of such leads us on to criticism of him in this country.

Jamie Carragher was particularly vocal during his time at Arsenal, referencing ‘brain freezes’ and labelling the defender a ‘liability’. Luiz laughs.

‘It is funny, some people talk about how to win the Premier League, but they have never won it,’ he begins. ‘Jamie Carragher never won the Premier League.

‘They talk and say, “This player is not right for this league”. Yet I won the league. These people have forgotten the past.

‘You cannot say, “David is a player who never won, you won’t win anything with David”. That is not true! You have to base your opinion on something real, not something fake.

Luiz has been the target of intense criticism from English pundits throughout his career

However, Luiz points to Jamie Carragher's lack of Premier League titles in response to criticism

‘I use the word perception. That is all it is. I am not going to fight to change the perception of these people, who decide to have this view of me because they want to.

‘They have not analysed me properly. I am not going to waste my time on that.

‘But I will always say — every single time I trained or played, I did my best. I played with my heart. I never tried to run away from anything. I always showed my face.

‘I arrived in England, at 23, and I was a defender who played from the back — no one did that, I was different. Some did not like it. Now, 11 years later, everyone does it… “Ah, isn’t he a great defender, he can play from the back!”’

Luiz signed for Chelsea from Benfica in 2011. The following year he was lining up in the Champions League final against Bayern Munich, in Munich.

It is at this point he reaches for his right hamstring and traces the wound from the subsequent surgery to repair a nine-inch tear.

The Brazilian believes that he played a huge part in changing the role of defending in England

‘This is the scar that I really love on my body!’ he booms, it serving as a memory of Chelsea’s first Champions League title.

Luiz played 120 minutes of the 1-1 draw and, in the shootout, placed his penalty into the top corner. Gary Neville called it ‘perfect’ on commentary.

‘I perhaps should not have played,’ he says. ‘But some special people encouraged me to take that step, to play even though I was not fit. They told me not to be scared. There was big pressure after that.

‘Roman Abramovich spoke to me on the day of the game and asked, “How is your leg?” I told him, “It does not matter, I play with my head and my heart”.

‘He said, “Go away, I don’t want to see your face, I am so nervous!” I said to him, “Don’t worry, we will win”.

He proudly shows off his scar and fondly remembers what he gave for the Champions League

Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich could not look at Luiz before the game as he was nervous

‘But it could have gone badly wrong. Imagine if I’d been forced off after 10 minutes, or I made a mistake for a goal because I could not run? It was a big, big decision.’

Did his hamstring hurt during his 10-yard run-up to his penalty kick? ‘Was it hurting during the penalties? It was hurting during the warm-up!

‘But I was the only Brazilian in this game, that meant a lot. I had many things in my head trying to block out the pain — the dream, the love, the adrenalin.

‘After the game, with the trophy, no one cared about my leg, not even me. It was only in the middle of the night when the adrenalin wore off that the pain returned.’

Luiz left Chelsea in 2014 for Paris Saint-Germain, where he won one domestic treble and one double, before returning to Stamford Bridge in 2016 and immediately helping them to the title.

Luiz is excited to see Romelu Lukaku return to Chelsea a 'man' after his first spell at the club

As we chat, two transfers involving his former clubs are dominating the sports headlines — Lionel Messi to PSG and his former team-mate Romelu Lukaku returning to Chelsea.

‘Romelu deserves this move,’ he says. ‘I remember the day he missed the deciding penalty against Bayern Munich in the Super Cup (in 2013) and he was so sad, just a young boy. But he is not a kid now, he is a real man. I think he will prove to be amazing for Chelsea.’

And Messi? Luiz turned down a recent offer from Ligue 1. ‘Messi is a nightmare, it is better not to play against him!’

As for what's next, Luiz wants a challenge where titles are on offer and every game matters

So what next for Luiz?

‘It will be the same as before — a club with ambition. The offers so far, they did not touch my heart. I want to stay at a high level. Maybe that will be in the Premier League.

‘I am working every single day. I want pressure, to be fighting for titles.

‘I want that feeling of having to win every single week. That is why I have always played football, and why I still play. I want to feel alive.’

Luiz welcomed daughter Mallie into the world in November, and he recognises she is entering a different one to that of his upbringing in Sao Paulo state.

It is not widely known, but Luiz and his parents run a small charity in Brazil. And that, he says, will be used to shape his own children.

‘I learnt my principles from my parents. We did not own a house when I was young but they always taught me to give and to share. When my life started to change financially, I wanted to keep those principles.

‘So we have a charity in my city with my mum and dad. It is just me and my family.

Luiz is currently in Brazil where he runs a charity with his family to help people of his country

‘What we want to see is people smiling, having food, clothes, a decent life. We are in 2021 and people are still hungry, or don’t have a toilet or bed or clothes for school. It is so sad to see.

‘If everyone, one day a month, took 20 minutes to take something from their cupboards to give to others, the world would be a better place.

‘I will teach my daughter to go the same way.’

For now, Luiz has to find his own way, for his footballing journey is far from over.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tammy Abraham is reportedly still 'not convinced' over a move to Roma following a meeting with their director Tiago Pinto.

Roma manager Jose Mourinho is determined to sign Abraham during the summer transfer window, after the British star fell out-of-favour under Thomas Tuchel last season.

According to Corriere dello Sport, Abraham held discussions with Pinto and agent Federico Pastorello in London over a potential £34m move.

Tammy Abraham is still unsure over a potential move to Serie A side Roma this summer

Jose Mourinho's side would reportedly give him the No 9 jersey, playing time and a £4m salary

Reports in Italy have suggested the club offered him the No 9 jersey, regular playing time and a £4m salary.

However, Abraham is still not certain over a move and has asked for more time to consider his options.

The 23-year-old is holding out on a move for Arsenal, with his family supporting the Gunners and Abraham unsure about leaving London.

Chelsea have reportedly accepted Roma's offer of £34million for striker Tammy Abraham - but have included a buy-back clause as part of the deal.

This leaves the decision in Abraham's hands, with the transfer window shutting at the end of the month.

Meanwhile, Sportitalia as per Football Italia have reported that Jose Mourinho would consider Arsenal striker Alexandre Lacazette as an alternative option.

It's said that the Gunners would propose the Frenchman as an alternative which would open the door for them to sign Abraham from their local rivals.

Alexandre Lacazette could be a potential alternative for Jose Mourinho's side this summer

Mourinho is in need of a new striker with Edin Dzeko set to compete a move to Serie A rivals Inter Milan.

Dzeko will replace Romelu Lukaku who completed a £98m move to Chelsea - a signing that pushes Abraham further down the pecking order at Stamford Bridge.

Abraham showed promise in his first full season in the Chelsea first-team, scoring 15 times in the Premier League in the 2019-20 campaign and was joint-top scorer last campaign despite his lack of minutes.

Capped by England on six occasions, he is eager to play regularly as he looks to get back into Gareth Southgate's squad.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea have completed a £98million deal to bring Romelu Lukaku back to the Premier League.

Talks with Inter Milan reached a conclusion on Saturday after days of negotiations over the fee and structure of the transfer.

The 28-year-old landed at Biggin Hill airport on Wednesday evening ahead of his move back to Stamford Bridge, having passed the main part of his medical in Milan on Monday.

Romelu Lukaku has completed his £98million move back to Chelsea from Inter Milan as he stands pictured with Blues director Marina Granovskaia following the announcement

Lukaku was all smiles as he holds up a Chelsea shirt after completing his move on Thursday

He then flew to Nice for meetings with his agent Federico Pastorello in Monaco on Tuesday and has now put pen to paper on an emotional return to west London.

After completing his return, Lukaku told Chelsea's website: ‘I’m happy and blessed to be back at this wonderful club.

'It’s been a long journey for me: I came here as a kid who had a lot to learn, now I’m coming back with a lot of experience and more mature.

‘The relationship I have with this club means so much to me, as you know. I have supported Chelsea as a kid and now to be back and try to help them win more titles is an amazing feeling.

‘The way the club is going fits my ambitions perfectly at 28 and just coming off winning Serie A. I think this opportunity comes at the right time and hopefully we can have a lot of success together.

Lukaku is returning to play for Chelsea for the first time in seven years after a tough first spell

Thomas Tuchel (left) has finally landed a new main striker in sealing Lukaku's return

Chelsea boss Tuchel is looking to build on Champions League success this season

‘Since I left Chelsea, it’s been a long journey with a lot of ups and downs, but these experiences made me strong and the challenge is to try to help the team win some more trophies. I can’t wait to get started and to help the club achieve more success.’

Thomas Tuchel had been desperate to bolster his attacking options on the eve of the new season as the German coach eyes a shot at the Premier League title in 2021-22.

Olivier Giroud departed for AC Milan earlier this summer, Tammy Abraham has been made available for a move away and Timo Werner struggled in his first season following a £52m switch from RB Leipzig.

Lukaku agreed to a Chelsea return at the end of last week after it became clear Inter were willing to sell to alleviate their growing financial concerns.

Chelsea have secured the return of Romelu Lukaku after striking a £98m deal with Inter Milan

It is understood that Lukaku has agreed terms on a contract worth around £10m a year after tax.

The deal to bring him back to west London also sees Manchester United - where Lukaku played for two years before heading to Serie A to join Inter - receive £3.8m as a sell-on clause.

The Blues kick their season off with a clash against London rivals Crystal Palace on Saturday, and they'll hope to have Lukaku available for his second debut.

Chelsea had been keen on Borussia Dortmund sensation Erling Haaland - only to find that path blocked on more than one occasion by the German club.

The Belgian striker has developed into one of the most potent strikers in Europe in recent years

Lukaku has scored an incredible 64 goals in 95 appearances across all competitions for Inter

Dortmund sold Jadon Sancho to Manchester United earlier in the transfer window and so they were only prepared to accept a 'crazy offer' for the Norwegian striker, something Chelsea were not prepared to give.

Lukaku, 28, returns with a point to prove at Chelsea having failed to fulfil his potential in his first go-round having joined as an exciting 18-year-old from Anderlecht.

He spent three seasons at Stamford Bridge at the start of his career but only made 15 appearances before heading to Everton.

Lukaku has since established himself as one of the best strikers in Europe, playing a key role in Inter Milan winning their first league title in more than a decade.

The striker netted 87 goals in 166 matches for Everton, 42 goals in 96 games for Manchester United and 64 goals in 95 appearances for Inter.

Lukaku (right) had to leave Chelsea to get his breakthrough but now he's returning in his prime

Lukaku moved to Everton where he continued his development as a clinical goalscorer

The Belgian wanted to return to Chelsea in 2017 but no offer came and he joined Man United

Chelsea originally floated the idea of a player-plus-cash deal with Marcos Alonso and Davide Zappacosta both on the Blues' trading block.

But cash-strapped Inter wanted the entire fee paid out, rather than get a player as a subsidy, in their bid to arrest their financial crisis.

The coronavirus pandemic has plunged the club into economic downfall, with a £250m investment from Oaktree Capital at the end of May helping to keep the club afloat.

Inter saw boss Antonio Conte resign back in May while star right back Achraf Hakimi was sold to Paris Saint-Germain for £60m.

Tottenham are looking to prey on Inter's financial vulnerability, too, having agreed a £60m fee for striker Lautaro Martinez last week.

But the deal to send Lukaku to Chelsea could yet throw a spanner in the works for Spurs with Inter aware they cannot strip all of their high value assets in one summer.

Inter Milan have now lost their star striker as well as boss Antonio Conte (right) this summer
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Francis Benali looks over the Solent from the sixth floor of the swish Harbour Hotel, his book in his hands as he scans the coast from the cruise liners to the Itchen Bridge obscuring St Mary’s Stadium.

In 48 hours, he has a date with the Princess Royal to receive an MBE and still has to collect his tailcoat suit but is rewinding his mind back 30 years to his playing days and the curious case of the kidnapped Christmas tree.

‘An element of the Southampton supporters weren’t happy with me at the time,’ recalls Benali. ‘They wanted me out of the team or sold. It did take me a while to win them over.

Southampton legend Francis Benali decided to retire at 34 rather than play for another club

‘Anyway, one day, somebody burst into the reception area at the Dell, picked up the tree and ran off. A day later, so the story goes, a letter arrived at the club. It was like a ransom note saying, “Drop Franny or you’ll never see the tree again”.’

It is a classic Benali tale: self-deprecating and understated, delivered without fuss in his soft Hampshire burr, and he points out that he is not sure if it is true because he never saw the note.

Not that this matters because it is ensconced in Saints folklore and Benali became not only a club legend but a darling of the city in which he was born, adopted at birth and raised in a broken home.

His difficult upbringing goes some way to explaining the ferocious competitive spirit, loyalty and dedication that defined his football career. There were 11 red cards in Southampton colours and plenty more scrapes, including some among team-mates in training.

Benali is sad to see Harry Kane agitating a way out of Spurs and Jack Grealish joining Man City

Gordon Strachan said that until he became Southampton boss he used to think there was ‘something wrong’ with him. ‘He never smiled, he just stared at you,’ said Strachan, who arrived at Saints in 2001 and addressed the first team with a speech detailing a Benali clash which bruised him from the base of his spine to his shoulder blades.

Benali sinks deeper into his seat, aware of the tackle in question. ‘I didn’t go in for pleasantries,’ he admits. ‘It all fitted the style of football I played in an era when you could play like that.

‘I was ultra-competitive because I was always fighting in some sense. If I wasn’t fighting against an opponent I was fighting to remain in the team or get back in the team, or to impress the manager or the supporters. I was fighting for the right reasons, to win and do well for my family.’

He still admires defenders who play on the edge and he admits to a pang of admiration for the cynical way Giorgio Chiellini yanked back Bukayo Saka by his collar at the expense of a yellow card in the Euro 2020 final. ‘There’s a time and a place, and that was probably it,’ says Benali. ‘You do what’s required.

‘An element of controlled aggression belongs in sport. I played that way and supporters want contact to be part of the game. A non-contact culture has crept in with VAR and referees need to up their game because we saw in the Euros how it can work really well.’

The former Southampton defender with Sportsmail's Matt Barlow at the Harbour Hotel

He laughed it off when the Southern Daily Echo printed posters for readers to stick in their windows, featuring Benali’s face with the warning, ‘Beware, I live here’ but he did not fully embrace his hard-man image. Partly because it is so at odds with his personality. As a teetotal family man and devoted husband to Karen, he would apologise to his children Luke and Kenzie if he had been sent off. ‘The last thing I wanted was for people to feel ashamed by my actions on the pitch,’ says Benali. ‘That wasn’t the real me. I did care what people thought of me.’

His friend and Southampton team-mate Matt Le Tissier likened his on-off field persona to the Incredible Hulk, and it went some way towards making him a cult hero among Saints fans.

Like Le Tissier, he stayed loyal to the club, making almost 400 appearances before retiring aged 34 after the 2003 FA Cup final defeat by Arsenal because he did not want to play for another club.

‘As a boy born in the city, I felt I was representing myself and my family and every supporter of the club and person from the city,’ says Benali. ‘It was a duty to do all I could to try to bring success. I wasn’t everyone’s cup of tea —we had players like Le Tissier in the team — but I wanted to make them proud and I had to do that through effort.

Francis Benali (left) and his friend Matt Le Tissier (right) stayed loyal to Southampton

It saddens Benali to see Harry Kane agitating a way out of Spurs and Jack Grealish moving to Manchester City. ‘I understand the financial appeal. But with salaries at that level footballers can end their careers with a huge bank balance. Why not be a one-club legend? I’ve experienced it and I’ve seen it with Matt. You cannot put a price on the love and respect he has been repaid.’

Benali banished any lingering misconceptions about his character when he set out on his ultra-endurance challenges in 2014, driving his mind and body through extremes as he raised £1million for Cancer Research UK.

He ran to all 20 Premier League stadiums, nearly 40 miles a day for three weeks. He ran and cycled to all 44 clubs in the top two tiers of English football, covering more than 1,400 miles in a fortnight. And in 2019, he tried to complete seven Iron Man triathlons in seven days. He missed two because he was in hospital with doctors fearing he was causing himself lasting damage. His MBE was awarded for services to cancer patients.

‘I am immensely proud of representing Southampton for all those years,’ says Benali, 52. ‘But I feel a bigger sense of achievement about the challenges. From a personal perspective, they pushed me beyond what I had to overcome in football and I wish I’d started them sooner... that’s not to say I’m drawing a line under it.’

FRANCIS BENALI: THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY by Francis Benali with Matt Barlow, published by Bloomsbury on August 19 at £20. To order for £17.80 go to: mailshop.co.uk/books or call 020 3308 9193.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katy Marchant's hopes in the women's keirin were ended in cruel fashion as she was caught in a crash through no fault of her own in the quarter-finals.

Marchant, who looked strong in Wednesday's opening races despite suffering one relegation, was taken out when Dutch rider Laurine van Riessen appeared to clip a wheel in front and swung up the bank to take the Team GB star out of the race.

The Dutch rider was knocked unconscious as a result of the crash, leaving her to received immediate treatment at the track side before being taken away on a stretcher.

Katy Marchant is taken out of the women's keirin by Dutch rider Laurine van Riessen

Van Riessen appeared to clip a wheel in front and swung up to take Marchant out of the race

Van Riessen (left) lays injured on the floor while Marchant manages to get back to her feet

Absolutely gutted for Katy Marchant, as Laurine van Riessen clips her wheel in the keirin quarter-final and both riders go down.



Fortunately Marchant doesn't seem to be injured, as she gets back on to finish that final lap.



Follow➡ https://t.co/H0RLQn4MCH #bbcolympics pic.twitter.com/TtkfBQDKLN — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 5, 2021

Marchant got back on her bike to finish the race but already knew she could not advance, with only the top four going through and no second chances at this stage of the competition.

'My legs felt good, I felt I was coming at the right time,' said Marchant. 'But I was in the wrong place at the wrong time I guess. That's bike racing.

'I'm not really sure what happened. I was so focused on moving forward. I'm not sure if she clipped somebody's wheel at the side or she fell but her wheels took out mine.'

The 28-year-old must now refocus ahead of the individual sprint, in which she took bronze in Rio five years ago, with the competition due to start on Friday.

'I think I'm alright,' she said when asked if there was any lasting damage.

The Dutch rider was knocked out and needed lengthy treatment at the side of the track

Van Riessen is taken away on a stretcher following her high-impact crash on Thursday

The 33-year-old was knocked unconscious after violently veering into Marchant's path

'There's a bit of blood but I think I'm alright.'

After three laps of racing in formation, Marchant was still in the hunt of securing qualification to the semi-finals but had plenty of work to do.

As the riders bunched up and the sprint at full speed on the final lap, Van Riessen was surrounded before the incident occured, leaving both her and Marchant on the deck.

The violent collision knocked Van Riessen out, which saw the 33-year-old require urgent treatment from medical staff inside the velodrome.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the shocking moment a huge brawl broke out in Manchester city centre ahead of Manchester United's clash against Leeds at Old Trafford on Saturday.

Six arrests were made after scuffles broke out ahead of Manchester United's opening match of the Premier League season against visitors Leeds United, police said.

Greater Manchester Police said that despite 'isolated incidents of disorder' before kick-off, the event at Old Trafford on Saturday passed 'largely without police incident'.

In chaotic scenes filmed from inside a cafe, groups of men can be seen running around a corner while throwing chairs and throwing punches.

The 21-second clip, uploaded to Twitter, shows one man brandishing a bin as a weapon as he repeatedly smashes it against another fan who has fallen to the ground.

A police officer can then be seen among the crowds as the men disperse in different directions.

Chaotic scenes filmed in Manchester city centre show a bin being brandished as a weapon during a massive street brawl

The footage of the brawl was recorded from inside a cafe in Manchester on Saturday

A group of men exchange blows during brawl ahead of Man Utd and Leeds clash Saturday

A man can be seen in footage online hitting a football fan repeatedly with a bin

The groups of men eventually disperse as a police officers arrives to the scene

Police said that six arrests had been made over the course of the day - five in relation to public order offences and one on suspicion of drug offences.

The force said that work was also under way in conjunction with football investigating officers from both Manchester United and Leeds United to identify people involved in other incidents of disorder.

Chief Superintendent Stuart Ellison said: 'Despite isolated incidents of disorder in the city centre prior to kick-off, today's events at Old Trafford largely passed without police incident and I would like to thank the majority of the public for their cooperation throughout the day.

'Six arrests were made over the course of the day; five in relation to public order offences and one on suspicion of drug offences.

'These suspects remain in custody in cells in Greater Manchester for questioning this evening.

'Today was an important day for a lot of people with the return of capacity crowds at venues that have remained absent for such a long time, and I would like to thank the public, our officers and our partners from all agencies involved who helped make sure today was a safe and enjoyable affair for a vast majority of those concerned.'

A statement from Greater Manchester Police read: 'Patrols in city centre made aware of some isolated incidents of disorder at premises in the area.

'We're working closely with those premises to support licensees at early signs of any disorder and negate it as swiftly as possible.'

Another video shared online shows the moment a police van arrives to a brawl which has spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

Men can be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the fight, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring.

Police warned on Twitter: 'There have been isolated incidents of disorder in the city ahead of this afternoon's game at Old Trafford and we have worked closely with licensed premises to ensure we could act swiftly to negate any incidents of concern and move people on safely.'

A police van arrives to the scene at Piccadilly Tavern in central Manchester

Video shared online appears to show a fight spilling out of the pub ahead of Man Utd v Leeds clash at Old Trafford Saturday

Some 200 police officers are on patrol in Manchester today (Pictured: Arriving to scene of brawl at Piccadilly Tavern)

London Mayor Sadiq Khan watches AFC Wimbledon AFC Wimbledon v Bolton Wanderers

Crowds of football fans smiling and singing before the match at Old Trafford. Today is the first time in 17 months that the Theatre of Dreams will be at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans

Officers will remain in the city for the rest of Saturday to keep disruption to a minimum, the force added

Manchester United fans during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Manchester United fans react during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Aston Villa fans show their support during the Premier League match between Watford and Aston Villa at Vicarage Road

Leicester City fans wave flags on their return to the King Power stadium for their Premier League clash with Wolves

Fans applaud staff from an NHS Trust at half time during the Premier League match at Vicarage Road, Watford

Manchester United fans react during the Premier League match between Manchester United and Leeds United at Old Trafford

Cesar Azpilicueta of Chelsea applauds the fans during the Premier League match between Chelsea and Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Wolverhampton Wanderers fans show their support during the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

Chelsea fans watch on as their side take on Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Fans invade the pitch as Everton's French midfielder Abdoulaye Doucoure (unseen) is mobbed by teammates after scoring their second goal during the English Premier League football match between Everton and Southampton at Goodison Park

A Crystal Palace fan gestures towards the Chelsea fans during the English Premier League football match between Chelsea and Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge

Chelsea fans applaud the players at the end of the Premier League match at Stamford Bridge

Fans show their support prior to the Premier League match between Norwich City and Liverpool at Carrow Road

Chelsea fans return to Stamford Bridge in numbers following a year and a half of lockdown restrictions

Fans of Leicester City celebrate after the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

Norwich City fans in the stands during the Premier League match at Carrow Road

Chelsea fans return to Stamford Bridge in numbers following a year and a half of lockdown restrictions

Fans of Leicester City celebrate after the Premier League match between Leicester City and Wolverhampton Wanderers at The King Power Stadium

'It's worth a reminder that successful prosecution can lead to a two-year football banning order.'

Officers will remain in the city for the rest of Saturday to keep disruption to a minimum, the force added.

Today is the first time in 17 months that the Theatre of Dreams was at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans.

But scenes of brawls have put a dampener on the otherwise celebratory return of the Premier League.

It comes after police on Friday pleaded with fans to behave responsibly, announcing that 200 officers would be on duty across Manchester.

Chief superintendent Stuart Ellison, Greater Manchester Police's gold commander for public order operations, said: 'It feels like a long time since we last had capacity crowds, but we have worked on hundreds of events in the past and our priority this weekend remains the same.

'The Premier League starts with Manchester hosting the biggest game of the weekend, 70,000 fans returning to Old Trafford to see Manchester United hosting Leeds United.

'That's just one of four matches on our patch on Saturday afternoon.

'Our officers are working extended hours this weekend to help keep the public safe. All that we ask is that you behave responsibly so everyone can enjoy themselves.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England may have got away with a draw after rain washed out the last day of the first Test but they are now without a win in six Tests.

Captain Joe Root scored a magnificent 109 to leave the sides intriguingly poised before the fifth and final day, but it rain meant neither side could push for the win.

Here Sportsmail's panel of experts — former England captain Nasser Hussain, cricket correspondent Paul Newman and Wisden editor Lawrence Booth — answer the burning questions still facing England ahead of Thursday's second Test.

Sportsmail's panel of experts, including former England captain Nasser Hussain (pictured), has given their thoughts on the questions still facing England ahead the second Test against India

England are meant to be peaking for this series. How is that going?

Nasser Hussain: You can't legislate for injuries and poor old Joe Root has rarely been able to field his best side — Jofra Archer, Olly Stone and Chris Woakes are all missing, and Ben Stokes is taking a break because of mental health reasons and his finger.

England play more cricket than anyone and I applaud Ashley Giles and Chris Silverwood for looking after the players' wellbeing.

The only thing I'd have done differently with rest and rotation is make sure the best players were available for all the big series, including the Tests in India and at home to New Zealand. But it's not easy given the schedule.

Paul Newman: I'm afraid they are almost back to square one and the next nine Tests against India and Australia could expose the chronic failure of the ECB to protect and prioritise the most important and lucrative form of the game in Test cricket.

The well-intentioned rest and rotation policy has hindered England at key times recently

The plan devised by Root and Silverwood in late 2019 was good in theory but they have been let down by a number of factors, not all of them the ECB's or their own fault. But the result could be a lot of pain and soul-searching in the next six months.

Lawrence Booth: They're still scrambling around at base camp. Some of it — the absence of Stokes and injury to Woakes — is no one's fault. Some is down to the well-intentioned rest and rotation policy but that deprived the Test team of momentum. Some is systemic: top-order red-ball batting is going out of fashion.

But there are broader questions. Have Archer and Moeen Ali been handled properly? Have England lost faith in Jack Leach? And how are they going to produce Test openers in future when everything is geared towards white-ball formats?

Can a top three of Rory Burns, Dom Sibley and Zak Crawley deliver?

Newman: The time for change if it were coming was before the India series, not during it. The way Silverwood has been talking all three might get another chance at Lord's but with Sibley and Crawley it must surely be their last one.

Zak Crawley is highly rated but may need a break from Test cricket to rediscover his off stump

I really do think there's a top player in Crawley but he may have to go away from Test cricket to rediscover where his off stump is. Sibley, sadly, just doesn't seem to have enough scoring options to survive at this level.

Burns is a strong character and one of the few captaincy alternatives to Root but the way he plays will always raise questions if he is not scoring heavily. Dawid Malan for the Ashes anyone?

Booth: After 26 Tests, Burns averages 32. After 21, Sibley averages 30. And after 15, Crawley averages 28. As platforms go, that's shaky. Crawley has the most organised, orthodox game, but looks lost outside off stump.

Sibley appears to have gone backwards and Burns rarely seems secure. But Haseeb Hameed is, finally, showing the form which saw him shine in India in 2016-17.

Opening batsmen Rory Burns (left) and Dominic Sibley are struggling for form and runs

Hussain: The jury's still out, but you could argue that a middle order of Root, Stokes, Ollie Pope and Jos Buttler, plus a bit of Jonny Bairstow, can provide those runs.

That opening over from Jasprit Bumrah at Trent Bridge was a reminder of just how hard it is against the new Dukes ball, and I do admire the selectors' determination to pick on county form.

But Haseeb Hameed ticks a lot of boxes: he bats long, he's scoring runs for Nottinghamshire, he's got international experience and he's got potential. That's what worries me a bit about Sibley. How much potential does he have to grow as a Test opener?

Are you worried about Root as captain?

Hussain: No. He's in the same mould as Virat Kohli and Kane Williamson, who both seem to cope. Root is not always the smiley, boyish character he once was, but that's international captaincy for you.

Joe Root responded brilliantly to captaincy difficulties with a superb 109 in the first Test

I agree England are too reliant on him. But we should enjoy his excellence. He's such a good ambassador for cricket, and without that superb second-innings century in Nottingham, England would have lost in four days. I said before the Test I hoped he didn't settle for the team policy of batting time, and he got his tempo spot on.

Booth: At the start of 2021, I'd have said 'yes'. He was approaching four years in the job, traditionally the shelf life for England captains, and he had not enjoyed a productive summer.

Then he scored 228, 186 and 218 at Galle and Chennai — the response of a champion. And he's just made one of his very best Test hundreds. At some point — perhaps after this winter's Ashes — it may all become too much. But we're not there yet.

Newman: Joe had that haunted look before Trent Bridge that I have seen in so many England captains and who could blame him after all he has gone through. But he looked more like his old self after that brilliant century.

Paul Newman has tipped Ben Foakes as a dark horse to become the next England skipper

For the sake of his own batting I can't see how he goes on beyond his third Ashes in charge, win or lose, but there is a complete dearth of alternatives. Here's one for you — Ben Foakes as the possible next England captain?

What changes would you make for the second Test?

Booth: England have finally acknowledged that the best way to balance the side in Stokes' absence is to recall Moeen.

They've been reluctant because they're not planning to take him to Australia, but there is a series to win against India first and Ali allows them to play four seamers — and possibly bring in Mark Wood for Curran.

I'd also bring in Ollie Pope for Dan Lawrence, who hasn't lived up to the promise of his 73 on debut at Galle in January.

Newman: The absence of Moeen was a mystery to me and I'm pleased he has been called up to bring that balance at Lord's. He bats at seven, where he averages 37 in Test cricket, for me.

The potential return to the side of all-rounder Moeen Ali could give the side more balance

I'd also pick Hameed for Sibley, promote Bairstow to three and give Crawley a break and then have one of Pope or Lawrence at five with Buttler at six. Then after Moeen pick your best four seamers for the conditions. I'd have Wood in for Sam Curran.

Hussain: I'd give the top three another go. All three are vulnerable, but they should wait until the end of the game before deciding who — if anyone — is replaced by Hameed at Leeds.

It's possible to balance the team properly now Moeen has been called up. He's taken 31 wickets against India in England at 22! And if he batted at 7 or 8, that would give the team depth, plus allow them to pick all their seamers.

Is Ollie Robinson taking over from Stuart Broad and how worried are you about England's bowling?

Hussain: Broad has been magnificent for England for a long time, and one average game doesn't change that. I was very impressed with Robinson, who adds depth to the seam-bowling unit.

The biggest concern is Archer: who is going to perform his role in Australia? A lot of onus will be on Mark Wood.

Hussain was very impressed with Robinson (above), who adds depth to the seam bowling unit

I'm also worried that the policy of leaving out Leach is a sign of what's to come in the Ashes. England reckon no finger spinner has done well there since Graeme Swann, but it's risky.

Booth: The baton has not been handed over just yet. Broad needs time in the middle. He was superb last summer so it will be a great shame if he is injured and misses the second Test.

I was worried about the Ashes even before Stone and Archer broke down. If Wood doesn't play in more than two of the five Tests in Australia — which would be in keeping with his career ratio — it's hard to see how they take enough wickets to win back the urn.

Newman: Broad has had three quiet home Tests this summer now, but, as Ed Smith discovered, it is never wise to write him off. As it is, he may have to spend some time out now after injuring his calf on Tuesday.

But England have lost the last two away Ashes 5-0 and 4-0 with him and Jimmy Anderson leading the attack and the absence of Archer is a blow. Robinson will be a key man in Australia with his height and bounce. I'd certainly prefer him to Broad there.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jadon Sancho has trained with Manchester United for the first time as Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side gear up for their Premier League opener on Saturday.

The £73million star completed his move three weeks ago but had been on holiday since missing a penalty in England's Euro 2020 final defeat to Italy on July 11.

But with five days until United begin the new campaign against Leeds United at Old Trafford, the 21-year-old winger has reported for duty at Carrington.

Jadon Sancho has trained with Manchester United for the first time after reporting to their Carrington base following his post-Euro 2020 holiday

United's £73million arrival from Borussia Dortmund was greeted by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer

Solskjaer hinted that Sancho could be on the bench for United's season opener against Leeds

Sancho was all smiles as he completed gym work on the exercise bike before heading out onto the pitches for some more fitness training with United's coaching staff.

He was greeted by Solskjaer, who will assess his fitness levels to see whether Sancho will make the season opener on Saturday.

'Jadon is in for Monday and hopefully then he's in decent nick and can be involved,' Solskjaer said after United's 4-0 friendly win over Everton on Saturday.

In a separate interview with ESPN, Solskjaer suggested that Sancho and new signing from Real Madrid Raphael Varane could make the bench against Leeds.

It was the gym and exercise bike first of all for Sancho as his fitness levels are assessed (left) before heading out onto the training field for some running drills (right)

Sancho gets to know his new surroundings at Carrington on his first day training with United

The arrival of the England star will bolster Solskjaer's attacking options ahead of the season

Sancho completed his move from Borussia Dortmund on July 23 having feature in England's matches against the Czech Republic and Ukraine at the Euros.

Gareth Southgate brought him off the bench in the final minute of extra time against Italy in order to take a penalty but Sancho failed to convert as England lost 3-2 in the shoot-out at Wembley.

Having signed off at Dortmund by winning the German Cup and helping them qualify for this season's Champions League, Sancho is aiming to end United's wait for silverware.

Sancho, who will wear the No 25 shirt, pictured in United kit during his unveiling photos

Sancho completed his highly anticipated £73million transfer to United last month

They finished a distant second to Manchester City in the 2020-21 Premier League and were beaten on penalties by Villarreal in the Europa League final.

Sancho and United team-mate Marcus Rashford have been away on holiday to the Turks and Caicos Islands in the Caribbean.

Ahead of linking up with his new team-mates, Sancho was evidently keen to keep fitness levels high and shared a social media video of him working out on holiday.

Jadon Sancho has uploaded a social media video of him training hard before the new season

Man United fixtures All Premier League Saturday Leeds United (H) August 22 Southampton (A) August 29 Wolves (A) September 11 Newcastle United (H) September 19 West Ham United (A) September 25 Aston Villa (H) Advertisement

Despite still technically being on holiday, Sancho posted on his Instagram page showing him with his nose to the grindstone to make sure he is in top shape when he returns.

His four-part story, shown to his 6.7million followers, shows him pounding a treadmill with the caption: 'Rise and graft!' while listening to Drake song One Dance as the camera flips to a friend working out.

The former Manchester City forward then continues to run hard, whooping and mouthing along to the lyrics of Drake track Blem.

United’s pre-season form has been a mixed bag with Solskjaer forced to use youngsters and fringe squad players in a 2-1 win over Derby County, a 4-2 defeat at Queens Park Rangers and a 2-2 draw with Premier League newcomers Brentford.

But a more familiar-looking United team featuring Bruno Fernandes, Harry Maguire, David de Gea, Luke Shaw and Anthony Martial thrashed Everton 4-0 at Old Trafford on Saturday.

Solskjaer will be desperate to avoid a repeat of last season’s slow start in the Premier League and United do have a pretty favourable opening set of fixtures.

Their crunch meeting with bitter rivals Leeds is followed by visits to Southampton and Wolves, a home game with Newcastle and a trip to West Ham.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raul Jimenez has scored for the first time since his horrific skull fracture as the Wolves striker found the net against Stoke in a pre-season friendly.

The Mexican, 30, has been out of action since his distressing injury sustained last November, when he clashed heads with Arsenal's David Luiz in the early stages of Wolves' 2-1 win in north London.

Jimenez has been steadily recovering from the serious injury at the club's Compton training base and returned for full pre-season training under new boss Bruno Lage earlier this month.

Raul Jimenez has scored for the first time since his horrific skull fracture last November

The 30-year-old was on the mark to tap home a rebound for the Molineux side at Stoke

Raul Jimenez is back scoring goals again 💚 (🎥 @Wolves) pic.twitter.com/qhs297OlPm — B/R Football (@brfootball) July 31, 2021

And the former Benfica and Atletico Madrid striker got back on the scoresheet on Saturday after coolly slotting home to equalise after Nelson Semedo's shot was parried by Josef Bursik.

Due to the nature of his injury, Jimenez will wear a special headband to protect his skull for the foreseeable future. The Mexican was confident in challenging for aerial contests and won plenty of headers in the first half.

A packed out away end warmly serenaded Wolves' No 9 at the Bet365 Stadium, with the West Midlands club looking to implement Lage's attacking style of football ahead of the new season.

Jimenez put in a good showing as he played 74 minutes in Stoke before being replaced by former AC Milan striker Patrick Cutrone.

Jimenez has been out of action since his distressing head injury against Arsenal last year

The Mexican star looks up to the skies after scoring again for the men in old gold on Saturday

Wolves parted ways with Nuno Espirito Santo at the end of the last campaign, with club chiefs looking to move away from the Portuguese's organised, defence-first approach.

Wanderers have looked slightly leaky at the back this pre-season, having lost to Crewe and conceded three to Las Palmas, while Danny Batth found the net in the opening half for the Potters.

The Molineux side finished 13th in the Premier League last season - their lowest league position since returning to the top flight in 2018-19.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Johanna Konta says she will make a 'personal choice' as to whether she gets the Covid vaccine after testing positive for the virus.

The British No.1 said it was 'heartbreaking' to miss Wimbledon and the Olympics after contracting the virus and said it was 'definitely the worst illness' she had 'experienced for a very long time'.

Konta admits she is 'not against getting the vaccine' but says that she would like to 'take a little bit of time' to assess her options first.

Johanna Konta says she will make a 'personal choice' as to whether she gets the Covid vaccine

Speaking to The Mirror, Konta said: 'I'm definitely not against it, by no means.

'I think, obviously, now I'm not advised to get vaccinated quite yet.

'I think it'll give me a little bit of time to also see where the world is, how everything is going and then I'll make a personal choice on kind of when and how and where and all those things.'

Konta was forced to take a two-month absence from the sport after contracting Covid in July.

As a result, she was forced to withdraw from both Wimbledon and the Olympics to isolate and recover.

The British No.1 said it was 'heartbreaking' to miss Wimbledon and the Olympics due to Covid

Konta admits she is 'not against getting the vaccine' but says that she would like to 'take a little bit of time' to assess her options first (File photograph of the COVID-19 vaccine)

She said it was one of the most 'difficult' times in her life and that there was 'nothing fun about having Covid'.

She said: 'It was very heartbreaking and it was very difficult. There was nothing good and nothing fun about having Covid and having to miss Wimbledon and the Olympics.

'There's just no way around that. However, I consider myself quite a happy person, quite a positive person, and definitely a pragmatic person, and I like to practice perspective in all the good things I do have in my life.

'So I had to definitely utilize those tools. And at the end of the day, I looked at my life and everything's okay.

'I just tried to draw energy from there and looked forward to when I could start training and get back out onto the match court.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham star Harry Kane has not travelled as part of the matchday squad for their Premier League opening fixture against the very team he is desperate to join, Manchester City.

Both sides meet in north London for the curtain-raiser after an intense few weeks of negotiations over the top flight's most sought after goal scorer.

After only returning to full senior training on Friday, it is understood that Kane has been deemed as not yet ready to return to Premier League action.

The wantaway striker has made no secret of his desire to move on from the club this summer, and has been explicit in his wishes to join Pep Guardiola's side.

Harry Kane is not part of the squad to face Manchester City in the Premier League opener

Spurs however have remained resolute on their stance with Kane, informing the England captain he will not be sold while insisting his must honour his long-term contract as the club's highest paid player.

Speaking of Kane's absence from the City showdown, new boss Nuno Espirito Santo told Sky Sports: 'I think Harry needs to work. He worked today and he will keep on working until he can help the team.

'Players who have had not to many sessions need more work. It's a different case for Bruan he was at the Olympics, the same for [Cristian] Romero.

Spurs chairman Daniel Levy has continued to dig in and maintain that Kane will not be sold

'It's important for them to feel the stadium, the hotel, the team meetings feel the hotel. It's all important.'

When further pressed on whether Kane would be on hand to watch the match from the stands, he replied: 'He worked in the morning, I don't know what he's going to do.'

It is understood that City retain a confidence that a deal can yet still be achieved, and are poised to table an official £120million bid in the coming days.

Spurs chairman Daniel Levy has been digging in on the deal, and has so far turned away all advances for his star player.

There are 17 days remaining of the summer transfer window and now limited time left to strike a mega deal for Kane, meaning the odds are now increasing that he is likely to remain with Spurs for at least one more season.

At the end of the campaign he will have two years remaining on his contract and is then once again likely to evaluate his future.

Levy has always been a fiercely determined chairman at Tottenham and has often kept players in north London against their wishes.

Chelsea attempted to prise Luka Modric out of Spurs in 2011 but Levy refuted any offers and sold him to Real Madrid a year later with Moussa Dembele arriving as a replacement.

Replacing Kane would be a sizeable task so late in the window and despite agreeing a £60m fee with Inter Milan for Lautaro Martinez, they seem no closer to bringing the Argentine in as he looks to stay in Italy.

New manager Nuno Espirito Santo will be without Kane for his first league game in charge

Kane returned to training on Friday after returning a negative PCR test and Sportsmail exclusively revealed that he had made himself available to play against City for Sunday's opener.

The striker had to provide a negative Covid test to allow him to end his quarantine following an extended holiday in the Bahamas and USA.

Kane's professionalism was questioned over the past fortnight after skipping the start of his pre-season training schedule in an effort to force a move to City — but he is prepared to feature for Spurs again, even though his intention to leave is clear.

'Harry joined the group today,' Nuno said on Friday.

'He trained. We had a talk. Of course it's a private conversation but everything is OK. He is here with us and preparing himself.'

City boss Pep Guardiola was also asked about Kane on Friday but, unlike in his previous press conference, refused to discuss the potential transfer.

'He's a Tottenham player,' Guardiola said. 'I made an exception last time but usually I don't talk about transfers. It's not my business. That's all.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@So Anthony Martial will be staying at Manchester United for the season ahead.

Inter Milan were reportedly about to propose a £50million offer for the Frenchman, viewing him as a good replacement for Chelsea-bound Romelu Lukaku.

That Inter viewed the infuriatingly inconsistent Martial on an equal footing to the prolific Lukaku will have raised a few eyebrows among United fans but it's a moot point. Martial won't be sold.

Anthony Martial is back from injury and looks set to play a prominent part in the early season for Manchester United

The French striker celebrates with goalscorer Mason Greenwood during last Saturday's 4-0 friendly win over Everton at Old Trafford

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's United won't be selling Martial despite interest from Inter Milan

It's a colossal vote of confidence in a forward who has blown hot and cold throughout his six years at Old Trafford and who was accused by Paul Scholes of 'almost conning' United and worried Roy Keane 'by not looking like he loves the game.'

You get the impression that United are far from convinced too, given they've signed a player in Martial's position in four of the six summer windows plus a January one since he joined from Monaco.

But more by accident than design, the 25-year-old will not only be United's No 9 on the squad list this season but looks set to feature heavily. In the opening few weeks, at least.

Edinson Cavani, the 34-year-old who supplanted the injured Martial as United's first-choice centre forward towards the end of last season, has been granted extra leave following the Copa America.

And Marcus Rashford will be sidelined until October after undergoing surgery to fix a long-standing shoulder injury.

It has been a tale of inconsistency and frustration far too often for Martial at Old Trafford

Martial tends to score goals in fits and starts, moving in and out of scoring form for United

Martial at United 2015-16 17 goals in 49 games 2016-17 8 goals in 42 games 2017-18 11 goals in 45 games 2018-19 12 goals in 38 games 2019-20 23 goals in 48 games 2020-21 7 goals in 36 games TOTAL 78 goals in 258 games Advertisement

So Martial has a good chance of being picked for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer as either United's centre forward or left-sided forward well into the autumn.

Just back from the ruptured knee ligament injury that curtailed his 2020-21 campaign and ended his Euro 2020 chances, Martial should be desperate to silence a few doubters.

But he must be in the last chance saloon at United. Having responded brilliantly to Solskjaer making him first choice centre forward in 2019-20 by scoring 23 times, Martial should have kicked on.

But last season was massively underwhelming even before that injury ended it in late March. Just seven goals in 36 outings simply confirming his inconsistent streak, to the frustration of fans and pundits alike.

Eye-catching performances such as in United's 2-0 win over Manchester City on March 7, in which he won a penalty after 34 seconds, only serve to further irritate.

That came just a week after Solskjaer left Martial out of the team to play Chelsea at Stamford Bridge following a poor run of form.

Keane said on that occasion: 'He doesn't look like he loves the game, which is always a worry.'

Alongside him, Souness opined: 'I think he's a young man who has all the talent in the world to succeed at the highest level but will he be disappointed he's not playing today?

'Does he ever show he has a passion about the game or emotion about the game? He's one of those players that will look back and think, 'I could've done so much more.'

Martial played well against Manchester City back in March, winning an early penalty kick

But he was also sent off in United's 6-1 defeat to Tottenham towards the start of the season

Martial certainly needs to be bothered against Leeds United in the Premier League opener this Saturday and in the weeks ahead because his status in the squad has diminished.

When everyone is fit and available, you can imagine a scenario where Martial is third-choice to both Cavani and Mason Greenwood at centre forward as well as below Rashford and even Paul Pogba - also staying put - on the left.

With Daniel James another option and new £73million arrival Jadon Sancho also capable of playing there, Martial could be seeing a lot of the subs' bench. He just hasn't scored regularly enough to nail down his position.

So Martial needs an electrifying start, to produce the kind of purple patch seen when he first arrived at United as a £58m teenager in September 2015 or, even better, the scoring form he managed to string out for all of 2019-20.

Edinson Cavani, 34, supplanted Martial as United's first choice centre forward last season

Even if Cavani remains up top, Martial could play on the left with Marcus Rashford sidelined

Man United fixtures All Premier League Saturday Leeds United (H) August 22 Southampton (A) August 29 Wolves (A) September 11 Newcastle United (H) September 19 West Ham United (A) September 25 Aston Villa (H) Advertisement

United thought they'd cracked it at that point, only for Martial to begin the following season by getting sent off against Tottenham, scoring just four times before Christmas and then, shockingly, only three times in 21 games before his injury.

Martial ended up joint-fifth among United's goalscorers, equal on seven goals with Scott McTominay. Yes, that's Scott McTominay.

Scholes summed up the thoughts of many last October, saying: 'Martial almost conned us into thinking he was a centre forward at the end of last season because he scored so many goals and was quite good.'

Cavani, a proper centre forward, has left Martial exposed with his own purple patch at the tail end of last season.

The Uruguayan last summer joined Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Romelu Lukaku, Alexis Sanchez and James in being signed, at great expense, after Martial's arrival.

While a club like United will always need squad depth to compete on multiple fronts, this constant return to the transfer market doesn't strike you as a firm belief Martial will become a club legend.

78 goals in 258 matches for United so far is a creditable return but you're still left wanting more.

Solskjaer's side have a favourable opening to the Premier League season and if Martial is to be leading their attack, we need to see him rattling in the goals.

Otherwise, they should have taken that £50m.

Jose Mourinho was far from convinced by Martial during his time as United's manager
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal's pursuit of James Maddison is reportedly dead in the water, with the Gunners not seriously chasing the Leicester City star this summer.

The Gunners are in the market for a creative midfielder this window, with Martin Odegaard's return to Real Madrid following his loan spell leaving Mikel Arteta short of options.

Maddison has been strongly linked with a £60million move to the Emirates Stadium, although Brendan Rodgers has long maintained that the Foxes have not received any offers for their star man.

Arsenal's pursuit of James Maddison is said to be over due to problematic finances behind deal

And according to The Athletic, Arsenal are not seriously pursuing the Englishman this summer.

The outlet reports that intermediaries are attempting to 'match-make' Arsenal with Maddison, given the club's obvious need for a creative midfielder.

However, the finances behind the deal prove problematic for the Gunners. Maddison would expect an upgrade on his current £110,000-per-week wage at Leicester while the Foxes would demand a big fee for the midfielder.

The Leicester City midfielder has been linked with a high-profile switch to North London

Despite rumours linking him with a Big Six club, Rodgers insists that Maddison is 'very happy' at Leicester as the Foxes boss attempted to play down the links.

‘I know he is very happy here and he wants to be here. If anything comes to the club, Jon Rudkin (director of football) would tell me straightaway and I would deal with it then, but there has been nothing that’s come my way,' he said.

'I’ve not been told anything to say [he won’t stay]. He is happy in training and he is working hard, and he is a talented, important member of the squad.

Martin Odegaard (L) and Houssem Aouar (R) remain the Gunner's top targets this summer

‘He had his season disrupted by injury last year but hopefully this season he can show what a real top player he is.’

Other than Maddison, Arsenal have been heavily linked with swoops for Odegaard and Lyon's Houssem Aouar.

Arteta is keen on bringing the Norwegian back to North London, but is waiting on Real Madrid and Carlo Ancelotti to make a decision on the youngster's Los Blancos future.

Aouar was a top target for the Gunners last summer, but club chiefs failed to thrash out a deal with the French side for their star man.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris St Germain will not rush Lionel Messi into action following his signing from Barcelona earlier this week.

The six-time world player of the year signed a two-year deal with the French side and many fans are eager to see him line up for Mauricio Pochettino's team against Strasbourg in Ligue 1 on Saturday.

But Pochettino is in no hurry and he warned fans they may have to wait a little longer to see the Argentine in action.

Mauricio Pochettino says he will wait until Lionel Messi is fully fit before giving him his debut

The Argentine superstar has started working his way back to fitness after a break

Pochettino said in his press conference: 'As for when we might see Leo Messi, it is his second day of training after a month since he played the last game at the Copa America.

'We will take it step by step, get to know each other and have him feel fit and comfortable so that he is able to make his debut when he is fully fit.'

Messi trained with his PSG team-mates as they prepared for their first home game of the season.

But the 34-year-old has not played any football since winning the Copa America, his first international trophy with Argentina, in July.

PSG are preparing to take on Strasbourg in a game that will come too soon for the new man

Pochettino also said: 'The priority is that he is ok, feels good and when he is in the best condition he can play.'

'I want to have the best players like any coach. Everyone knows that Messi is one of the best in the world.'

The Parisian side will boast one of the best attacking front lines in world football with the prospect of Messi lining up alongside Kylian Mbappe and former team-mate Neymar.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shericka Jackson was brutally punished for jogging over the line as she was knocked out of the women's 200 metres in dramatic fashion after carelessly slowing down at the end of her heat.

Jackson was cruising into the semi-final in second place, but ended up finishing fourth as she was pipped at the line by two of her rivals after easing up for the final few metres.

The sprinter, who won a bronze medal in the 100m as part of a Jamaican one-two-three alongside compatriots Elaine Thompson-Herah and Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce over the weekend, failed to make it into the semi-finals of the longer sprint, missing out by four thousandths of a second.

Had she finished strongly, Jackson would have undoubtedly advanced. She had been hotly tipped to challenge for a medal in the 200m, but has fallen at the first hurdle after a costly error in judgement.

Her strange decision to let up at the line was met with fierce criticism as fans rubbed salt in the wounds by blasting the 'foolish' Jamaican star.

Shericka Jackson (pictured) was dramatically knocked out of the 200 metres in the heats

100m bronze medallist Jackson (right) was in a good position but started jogging near the end

Wow. Just…wow. Shericka Jackson doesn’t automatically qualify for the women’s 200m semifinal after placing 4th in 23.26, the same time as Italy’s Dalia Kadari who placed third. #Olympics #Jam pic.twitter.com/sOkmS3iikE — Ogun Size 轢 (@IamSeanAB) August 2, 2021

Former runner Steve Cram said on the BBC: 'Shericka Jackson was almost just jogging round - what on earth? Why take such risks? I'm sorry to sound exasperated but I am, on her behalf, on her coach's behalf and her team-mates. It's just not necessary.'

Two-time former world champion hurdler Colin Jackson added: 'She looked at the starting list and thought "oh, I'll get through this quite comfortably". But one of the things you don't so is slow up - you run from the gun to the tape.

'She made a mistake, it's a costly one. The fans are going to miss an incredible race with her not being in it - she's one of the fastest 200m runners in the world.

'Craziness, just crazy. It's really lazy performance. As a coach, I don't think I could talk to my athlete for weeks if they did that.'

Jackson, running in lane two, looked to be comfortably in the top three automatic qualifying slots in the fifth heat after coming into the straight.

Running in lane two in the fifth heat, she was comfortably in the qualification slots at first

The 27-year-old seemed to be unaware of her onrushing opponents to her right hand side

She was pipped on the line by Italy's Dalia Kaddari (in blue), who finished third and qualified

However, potentially to try to conserve energy, the sprinter started jogging with plenty of track still yet to cover.

Rather than look to her right to check on the positions of her competitors, Jackson carelessly seemed to be unaware of their presence and even seemed to lean back as she approached the line.

She was then pipped to the line by Italy's Dalia Kaddari and did not make it through as a fastest loser.

Jamaican sprint coach Stephen Francis reflected that Jackson 'misread' the situation and that her inexperience at 200m level proved costly.

'She obviously misread, she paid the price,' he told Andre Lowe. 'She is not a senior athlete, she is a senior athlete in the 400m and a rookie at the 200m. I expected her to do better. She will learn.'

Fans took to Twitter to slam Jackson's 'foolish' decision after she was dumped out of the 200m

Fans took to Twitter to share their shock at Jackson's 'foolish' decision to trot over the line in Tokyo.

'One of the most foolish heat performances of all time by Shericka Jackson of Jamaica,' one fan posted. 'The 100m bronze medallist is out after jogging the whole race and easing up too much at the finish, trying to look casual, going from second to fourth in the final yards. Bonkers.'

'I don't know what was that,' another said, while one fan wrote 'It's hard to comprehend really'.

Other supporters, searching for an explanation as to Jackson's off-par performance, suggested that the Jamaican may have been nursing an injury.

'Is she injured, I'm so confused. She just jogged the whole thing,' one fan posted on Twitter. Another said: 'Must have been injured. its difficult to explain such a run otherwise'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Thomas Tuchel gambled one last time. The ultimate gamble. The biggest one a manager can make with a minute to go in extra time. He changed goalkeepers. And not just any goalkeeper, either. Tuchel played the joker; the goalkeeper whose refusal to stand down for a penalty shoot-out had until now come to define his career at Stamford Bridge. He brought on Kepa Arrizabalaga.

Edouard Mendy had not put a foot wrong. It certainly wasn’t a reflection on his performance on the night. And he did not look displeased, because this was the plan all along and had been discussed as far back as an early FA Cup tie, last season, against Barnsley.

So it was a change far removed from Arrizabalaga’s tantrum that day at Wembley when he refused to make way for Willy Caballero. He finished a loser in more ways than one that afternoon. Manchester City won and Arrizabalaga was castigated as selfish and vain. No such judgements on Wednesday night. Chelsea had lost their last three UEFA Super Cup finals – and Villarreal were proven penalty specialists.

Chelsea won the UEFA Super Cup after Kepa Arrizabalaga heroics saw the Blues defeat Villarreal on penalties in Belfast

The back-up goalkeeper made two saves to end Chelsea's Super Cup hoodoo and send the trophy back to Stamford Bridge

Chelsea boss Thomas Tuchel gambled late to substitute the Spaniard on for Edouard Mendy, who had played 119 minutes

And Tuchel's gamble paid off in full as Arrizabalaga made two saves, with Chelsea stars congratulating the back-up stopper

Arrizabalaga, who refused to be substituted in the Carabao Cup final, saved Raul Albiol's penalty to win the Super Cup

Mason Mount, Kai Havertz and Co race towards Arrizabalaga after the Spaniard saved the decisive penalty

Matteo Kovacic, Cesar Azpilicueta and Antonio Rudiger hold Arrizabalaga aloft following his penalty heroics on Thursday

Mason Mount and Edouard Mendy rejoice with the travelling Chelsea supporters after winning in dramatic fashion in Belfast

Chelsea's Spanish trio Marcos Alonso (L), Kepa Arrizabalaga (C) and Cesar Azpilicueta (R) pose with the Super Cup

Chelsea fans are sent into sheer pandemonium after watching their side add to their trophy collection in Northern Ireland

MATCH FACTS Chelsea (3-4-2-1): Mendy (Arrizabalaga, 119); Chalobah, Zouma (Christensen, 66), Rudiger; Hudson-Odoi (Azpilicueta, 82), Kante (Jorginho, 65), Kovacic, Alonso; Havertz, Ziyech (Pulisic, 43); Werner (Mount, 65) Subs not used: Abraham, Chilwell, Emerson, James, Loftus-Cheek, Silva Goals: Ziyech (27) Booked: Rudiger, Tuchel, Arrizabalaga Manager: Thomas Tuchel Villarreal (4-3-3): Asenjo; Pedraza (Estupinan, 58), Torres, Albiol, Foyth; A.Moreno (Morlanes, 85), Capoue (Gaspar, 70), Trigueros (Gomez, 70); Dia (Raba, 86), Pino (Mandi, 91), G.Moreno Subs not used: Alcacer, Cuenca, Iborra, Nino, Pena, Rulli Goals: G.Moreno (73) Booked: Pino Manager: Unai Emery Advertisement

This was a big call, in a big match. No club plays in the UEFA Super Cup without winning one of European’s football’s two biggest trophies. No Champions League, no Europa League, no Super Cup. There wasn’t a player out there who didn’t care about the colour of his medal. And Tuchel had handed the responsibility for that to Arrizabalaga.

Much like Chelsea in the 120 minutes, he wasn’t perfect. He went the wrong way on four occasions, guessed right against Moi Gomez but was beaten by a simply terrific shot. But twice – the second penalty from Aissa Mandi and the last from captain Raul Albiol – he saved. And that was why he was there.

To be fair, Albiol’s penalty, Villarreal’s seventh, wasn’t great, but Arrizabalaga judged it, covered it, got his body and both hands behind it. And seconds later he was buried within a jubilant huddle of players, Cesar Azpilicueta first on the spot, then followed by the rest, including Mendy. On the winners’ podium, they all celebrated together. If Mendy felt any resentment, it did not show. He had done his bit, Arrizabalaga his. Their medals were exactly the same.

It was a triumph for Tuchel, too. A bold move that could easily have backfired in defeat. Had Chelsea lost Tuchel would have been accused of undermining his number one, Mendy, of disrupting unnecessarily. Yet here was a manager taking control. Followers of Manchester United will be reminded that in similar circumstances and with David De Gea between the posts, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer did not change, despite the Spaniard’s dismal record against penalties. That criticism seemed harsh on Solskjaer at the time. Switching goalkeepers is still a maverick move. Yet it did not look so on Wednesday night as Chelsea paraded their trophy and danced.

Earlier, Tuchel had sat on the touchline, quietly fulminating. He looked like a man who could not wait to get his Chelsea on the park. A Chelsea that included a goalscorer of the ability of Romelu Lukaku: a player who he hopes will ensure a game like this is won, and stays won.

He knew Chelsea should have been long gone over the horizon, but it couldn’t be argued that Villarreal didn’t deserve parity by the end of 90 minutes. They battled their way back into it and hit the woodwork twice before equalising. Adding insult to injury the goal came after Chelsea had introduced the cavalry to retake control of the game: Jorginho and Mason Mount. The A team.

All the stats from Windsor Park as Chelsea beat Villarreal on penalties to win the UEFA Super Cup - provided by SofaScore

Hakim Ziyech gave the Champions League winners the lead in the first half with a well-taken finish beyond Sergio Asenjo

The Moroccan celebrates after putting the Premier League outfit ahead in the showpiece event on Thursday evening

Thomas Tuchel celebrates after former Ajax star Ziyech put his side in front against Unai Emery's Europa League winners

Mount did not have the hoped-for impact and Jorginho was initially too often slow to move the ball on and caught in possession. As often happens, he came onto a better game with time. It was Antonio Rudiger’s sloppy pass, however, that was cut out for Villarreal’s goal, intercepted with Gerard Moreno playing the ball into Boulaye Dia. His backheel was exquisite, caught Chelsea’s back line out, and Gerard pounced on it, lashing the ball past Mendy. It had been coming, but the game should have been Chelsea’s long before.

Anyone still unsure of why Chelsea paid such a significant sum for Lukaku would no doubt have a clearer idea after this. No team should be as dominant as Chelsea and wait so long to take the lead. No team should create Chelsea’s chances and feel fortunate to be level. Chelsea murdered Villarreal early on. They were a different class.

Yet, at half-time, they led by a single goal. There are some good, experienced teams in Europe. Villarreal may not have the cache of Real Madrid or Barcelona, but they have been around the block a few times. Their coach, Unai Emery, has too. And Spain and England are by some distance the strongest leagues in Europe. It was 2003 when a UEFA Super Cup final took place without a representative of one, the other, or both.

So even though Chelsea were sometimes working with more than 80 per cent possession, Villarreal could never be taken for granted. They went long periods without threatening, barely getting out of their half, but absorbing pressure is what they do. The reason they, and not Manchester United, are here is because their game management is quite superb.

Villarreal, however, came on strong in the second half against weary Chelsea legs as Gerard Moreno levelled for the Spaniards

The Villarreal marksman wheels away in celebration after putting the Europa League winners back into the contest in Belfast

Christian Pulisic goes close to scoring the winner as he hooks a shot wide of goal with the game headed to extra time

Ziyech was withdrawn before half time with a shoulder injury picked up in bizarre fashion to Chelsea's disappointment

The Moroccan has enjoyed a strong pre-season but will once again start the season injured following the shoulder injury

Yet if Chelsea had a goalscorer, a Lukaku, on board for this game it might have been over rather quickly. He wasn’t registered in time and within six minutes Chelsea would have been cursing that fact. Marcos Alonso broke down the left side, crossed beautifully, and there was nobody in the area to make it count. Even without a cutting edge striker, however, it still looked a matter of time before Chelsea scored and in the 28th minute the goal came. It was a typically quick counter-attack. Alsono, excellent going forward, played a ball in to Kai Havertz on the move down the left flank. His cross was equally incisive and Hakim Ziyech turned the ball in with goalkeeper Sergio Asenjo helpless.

Ziyech has been receiving excellent reports from the pre-season matches and was certainly influential here. In the 35th minute, he played a neat ball inside to Alonso whose shot forced another fine save from Asenjo at the near post. A minute later it was his free-kick that fell to Kurt Zouma at the far post, his wasteful volley over the bar spurning a chance that could have taken the game away from Villarreal. Instead, it began to turn in their favour.

Mendy made two good saves and then Ziyech suffered some rotten luck. Defending a dead ball he jumped with Juan Foyth and appeared to suffer a shoulder injury. It looked innocuous at first – very little aerial contact, not so much of an awkward landing – but the reaction was real enough and at one stage he was treated with an inhaler as the pain became extreme. He left the field using his blue shirt as a makeshift sling, his right arm held within. It looked like an injury that will extinguish any hopes of starting the domestic season.

Villarreal made the most of the disruption, helped by Russian referee Sergei Karasev. He booked Rudiger for the best tackle of the game, winning the ball cleanly, but clearing out Yeremi Pino with his follow through. How was he meant to have stopped? He was sprinting, as was Pino. He got there first, by some distance and only his momentum initiated contact. What was he meant to do, let him through? Tuchel agreed with this logic, and was booked too. Logic won in the end, though.

Sergio Asenjo punches the ball clear from the head of Antonio Rudiger during a nip and tuck contest on Wednesday evening

Re-live Sportsmail's live coverage of Chelsea's Super Cup victory, brought to you by OLLIE LEWIS.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea defender Antonio Rudiger will reportedly weigh up all his options before making a decision on his future at Stamford Bridge.

The Germany international's current deal expires next summer though he has confirmed that he has begun talks with the club over a new contract.

Sky Sports have reported that Rudiger will consider his options before he puts pen to paper, with both Real Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain monitoring his current situation.

Antonio Rudiger confirmed that he has entered contract discussions with Chelsea

The 28-year-old has told manager Thomas Tuchel that he is fully committed to the European champions this season.

If Rudiger decides his future lies elsewhere however, he will be able to sign a pre-contract agreement with a foreign club in January.

Speaking in a press conference ahead of the UEFA Super Cup tie against Villarreal, he said: 'As I said before, I wanted to concentrate on the Euros then after I come back, talks can start.

'That is what has happened for now. Talks have begun and we will see what time brings.'

Since joining Chelsea from Roma back in 2017, Rudiger has made 149 appearances for the Blues scoring seven goals.

Rudiger had fallen out-of-favour under previous manager Frank Lampard, though he has rarely been left out since the appointment of Tuchel back in January.

Chelsea though are looking to strengthen their defence this summer, with Sevilla centre-back Jules Kounde heavily linked with a move to Stamford Bridge.

Paris Saint-Germain and Real Madrid are both monitoring the situation of defender Rudiger

Chelsea meanwhile are hoping to sign Sevilla centre-back Jules Kounde this summer

The Champions League winners are expected to prioritise a move for the 22-year-old after they complete the signing of Inter Milan striker Romelu Lukaku.

PSG are stacked at the centre-back position with Sergio Ramos joining Marquinhos and Presnel Kimpembe at the Parc des Princes.

Real Madrid have signed David Alaba but are expected to lose Raphael Varane who is set to a complete a move to Manchester United.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Professional rugby is 'unsafe' in its current format as players get bigger and impacts get harder, a not-for-profit has warned after a brutal British and Irish Lions' tour.

Elite athletes, who can be up to 6ft 8in and weigh 26st, are leaving the sport with structural changes to their brains due to huge tackles, The Drake Foundation said.

The group said medical evidence and recent cases of stars' having brain abnormalities paint a 'concerning picture' for the game.

Founder James Drake said the battering some British stars took during the Lions' tour of South Africa had brought the issue back into focus.

He urged rule makers to 'increase punishments for those who repeatedly tackle high' to prioritise player welfare ahead of the coming domestic season.

It comes after the Drake Foundation released a report involving the RFU and found 23 per cent of 44 elite stars between 2017 and 2019 had changes to their brains.

The Drake Rugby Biomarker Study, published last month, said rugby players had abnormalities to the white matter and changes in the white matter volume.

The study also found 50 per cent of the rugby players had an unexpected reduction in brain volume.

Meanwhile over the last four decades the average professional athlete has swelled in size from 14st and 5ft 11ins to 16st 3lbs and 6ft 1in. Scotland's Richie Gray is 6ft 8in while Bill Cavubati - who used to play for Fiji - was 26st.

Elite athletes are leaving the sport with structural changes to their brains due to huge tackles in matches, The Drake Foundation said. Pictured: Robbie Henshaw in action for the Lions against South Africa this month

The average height and weight of rugby players as the sport moved from the amateur to professional era

Former rugby players who have been diagnosed with dementia: Steve Thompson

Dan Scarbrough

Adam Hughes

Neil Spence

Alix Popham

Michael Lipman Advertisement

Mr Drake told MailOnline: 'We believe that elite rugby, in its current format, is an unsafe sport.

'The long-term consequences of these brain structure abnormalities are unknown and require further research.

'But taken together with existing evidence across different sports, as well as recent cases of rugby players being diagnosed with brain diseases in their 40s, they are painting a concerning picture when it comes to players' long-term brain health.'

He continued: 'Players are getting bigger, impacts are becoming harder, so it is only right that we see meaningful changes to rugby to ensure that player welfare is the number one priority for the sport.'

Mr Drake said the issue had been dragged into focus again during the British and Irish Lions' tour of South Africa over the last few months.

He pointed out the huge head impacts in the matches - sometimes due to high tackles - including Dan Biggar being clattered by a knee in a ruck.

He said: 'Throughout the tour, there have been several incidents regarding high tackles and head knocks that have grabbed the headlines.

'With the new rugby season almost upon us, we need rugby's governing bodies to take action to make the game much safer, which could include increased punishments for those who repeatedly tackle high.'

A spokesman for Progressive Rugby, a lobby group working with World Rugby to make the game safer, added: 'The British and Irish Lions tour again shone a light on the inadequacy of the current six stage return to play protocols.

'With the game faster and more physical than ever, how can you justify a player knocked unconscious returning to the field the following Saturday when 30 years ago they would have been stood down for three weeks?

'Rugby is a wonderful game but there is an increasingly amount of research, evidence and distressing testimonials from former players suffering early onset dementia that demonstrates decisive action needs to be taken to ensure that it can be enjoyed by future generations of the rugby family.

'This is not a time to make the mistake of burying heads in the sand, the future of the game can ill afford it.' The Drake Foundation released their findings on how tackles impact rugby players' brains last month.

This diagram shows a comparison of diffusion metrics between groups and how it affected their brains

After scans of 44 elite adult rugby players, they found 23 per cent had abnormalities in brain structure, specifically in white matter and blood vessels of the brain

Thirty-seven elite male and three female rugby union players, and four male rugby league players were recruited from professional rugby clubs in England. Twenty-eight players had baseline study visits without an acute injury, while 21 players attended study visits shortly after a head. Post-injury study visits for acutely injured players were performed a maximum of seven days after injury. Five players had both a baseline non-injury study visit and a study visit following an acute head injury, and 18 rugby players attended a second assessment. Three control groups were recruited to the study, including a Non-Sport and Sport Control group for cross-sectional comparison, and a separate group of Longitudinal Controls for longitudinal comparison. Longitudinal Controls only completed the structural imaging components of the study

After scans of 44 elite adult rugby players, they found 23 per cent had abnormalities in brain structure, specifically in white matter and blood vessels of the brain.

White matter mainly comprises the neural pathways, the long extensions of the nerve cells, and is crucial to our cognitive ability.

The study also found 50 per cent of the rugby players had an unexpected reduction in brain volume.

The Drake Foundation, which backed the study, called for immediate changes in rugby protocols to ensure long-term welfare of elite players.

Contact sports including rugby already been under the radar for their potential to have irreversible effects on the brain and even lead to dementia.

The foundation has invested more than £2.2million into researching the short- and long-term impact of sport on brain health in rugby and football.

Mr Drake said: 'I have invested in research into the relationship between head impacts in sport and player brain health for almost a decade because I have been concerned about the long-term brain health of sportspeople, including elite rugby players.

'Common sense dictates that the number and ferocity of impacts, both in training and actual play, need to be significantly reduced.

'These latest results add further support to this notion, particularly when coupled with existing findings across sport and anecdotal evidence.'

This diagram from the study shows the longitudinal changes in volume in rugby players over time

A diagram from the study shows how the experts went about their experiments on the professional players

Concussions in rugby: As a contact sport, rugby does involve frequent body impacts and a risk of accidental head impacts, and therefore a significant potential risk of concussion. According to the data collected through the RFU's Community Injury Surveillance & Prevention Programme (CRISP) in age grade rugby (age 15 – 18) the most recent rate shown equates to 1 concussion per team every 10 games and 1 concussion per team every 25 games in adult male rugby. In professional rugby it is 1 every 2-3 team games. The rise in the rates seen since 2012/13 are almost certainly due to the increased awareness and the much lower threshold for suspecting concussion, and reflect the success of the awareness and education programmes, and media coverage. Source: England Rugby Advertisement

He said the game of rugby has 'changed beyond all recognition' since it turned professional in the 1990s, becoming more dangerous.

He added: 'Players are now generally bigger and more powerful, so we have to be mindful of all the ramifications that increased impacts will have on their bodies.

'Seeing younger players suffer with the consequences of that, I am not convinced that the game is safer now than it was when I started The Drake Foundation in 2014.

'More must be done to protect players, and without delay.'

The results from the Drake Rugby Biomarker Study was undertaken by researchers at Imperial College London, UCL, the RFU and clubs across rugby union and league.

It assessed 41 male and three female elite rugby players, all of whom had their data shared without naming them.

The research team used advanced neuroimaging techniques to look at the brains of the players in comparison with control participants.

Techniques included advanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), including diffusion tensor imaging, which allows assessment of microstructural damage.

Increased presence of small microhaemorrhages (bleeds) among the players may indicate damage, and potentially neurodegeneration – a loss of nerve cells – which is characteristic of diseases including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.

Derek Hill, a professor of medical imaging science at UCL, who was not involved in the study, pointed out brain differences might not be damage.

He said: 'The MRI methods they use are sensitive to changes, but are not specific to the cause of the change.

'Brain scans can be changed by factors other than irreversible brain damage. For example, dehydration and some medicines can result in change in fluid balance in the brain that can be picked up by advanced MRI.'

Even if the results are indicative of brain damage, the long term implications of this damage 'are not clear', Professor Hill added.

'A longer study would be needed to determine of the brain changes lead to harmful long term effects,' he said.

Former England rugby international Lewis Moody has previously said player welfare 'is not always at the forefront of people's minds' in the game.

He said: 'We need to ensure that everyone involved in the game, from Premiership to grassroots, is educated to ensure that the priority is focused on player welfare, rather than returning to competition.

'I would like to see a clear set of standards outlined across the game, from Premiership to grassroots, informing the maximum amount of contact training (and protocols around this) permissible per season.

'From the findings, as well as the players coming forward with early signs of brain conditions, there is still much to do to ensure that the game, we love, is safe and enjoyable for all involved.'

The results of individualised analysis of fractional anisotropy across the groups are pictured

Neuropsychological performance in all controls and rugby players is pictured on a chart released by the study last month

The RFU has said it will undertake more research into head impact exposure as well as plans to address the risks to rugby players.

Premiership players will participate in 'instrumented mouthguard project' – involving mouthguards with embedded devices – to measure movements of the head in matches and training.

It will also open a 'Brain Health Clinic' for retired retired elite male and female rugby players, due to start operations later in the year.

The specialist clinical service will be based at the Institute of Sport, Exercise and Health (ISEH) in London.

It will help assess and manage retired players between the ages of 30 and 55 who have concerns over their individual brain health.

A surgeon who treated afflicted ex-England hooker Steve Thompson previously told MailOnline said being tackled in the modern game is 'like being hit by a truck'.

The sport is facing a reckoning as former stars reveal their crippling injuries inflicted by a career of fierce collisions.

Calls for reform to avoid an 'epidemic' reached a crescendo when Thompson went public with his early dementia diagnosis and said he had no memory of winning the 2003 World Cup due to brain damage.

Professor Bill Ribbans, consultant in trauma and orthopaedic surgery who treated the forward while at Northampton Saints, said rugby's move away from amateurism in the 1990s had dramatically ratcheted up the sport's intensity.



He told MailOnline: 'It's been 25 years since the game went professional and the changes were very quick.

'As Steve Thompson has said, he was a builder who went from training once a week to several times a week.'

Advances in sport science and investment in strength and conditioning saw players swap the pub for the gym and pile on muscle.

Asked what it would be like to be hit by one of the new-era players, Professor Ribbans flatly replied: 'It's like being hit by a truck.'

That such alarming accounts from ex-players are only coming to the fore now - when the sport was founded in the early 19th Century - has been traced to the pro age.

Professionalism largely flushed the post-match drinking culture and put emphasis on nutrition and athleticism.

A 2012 analysis found players in the 1980s weighed an average 14st and stood at 5ft 11ins.

By contrast in 2020 the average English Premiership player weighed 16st 3lbs and was 6ft 1in.

The gulf in size between the generations is most striking in some positions in particular.

LOCKS: Left is former England captain Bill Beaumont (6ft 3in) in 1980, and right is current player Joe Launchbury (19st 12lbs and is 6ft 5in) playing last month

CENTRES: Left is England centre Clive Woodward (12st 8lb and 5ft 11in) in 1982 and right is Manu Tuilagi (17st 4lb and 6ft 1in) in a recent game

FLANKER: Left is England's Nick Jeavons (16st 1lb and 6ft 3in) in action against Scotland in 1982, and right is current player Sam Underhill (16st 10lb and 6ft 1in) earlier this year

Demands for action reached a crescendo when Steve Thompson (pictured) went public with his early dementia diagnosis and said he had no memory of winning the 2003 World Cup due to brain damage

PROP: Left is Fran Cotton (16st 7lb and 6ft 2in) playing for the Lions in 1980 and right is England's Kyle Sinclair (18st 13lb and 5ft 10in) in 2019

'I can't remember any of the games whatsoever': Steve Thompson revealed the extent of the damage done to his brain Steve Thompson, 42, who retired in 2011, revealed last year his memory of winning the World Cup had vanished. He said: 'I have no recollection of winning the World Cup in 2003 or of being in Australia for the tournament' 'I can't remember any of the games whatsoever or anything that happens in those games. 'It's like I'm watching the game with England playing and I can see me there, but I wasn't there, because it's not me. 'You see us lifting the World Cup and I can see me there jumping around. But I can't remember it.' Advertisement

Once slight and nimble wingers were replaced by powerhouses built in the image of the late All Black icon Jonah Lomu - whose devastating combination of size, strength and speed set the bar for the next generation of players.

Stars of the amateur age included the likes of legendary Welsh winger JJ Williams, whose slight build of 12st and 5ft 9ins allowed him to carve through the opposition's defences.

The difference is striking compared with George North, the current Welshman to wear the Number 11 jersey, who stands at 17st and is 6ft 4ins, allowing him to bulldoze through players.

Professor Ribbans said tackling one of the bigger stars could put as much as a fifth of a tonne of force on one shoulder.

The volume of impact has also ballooned, with the number of tackles per game more than doubling in the last three decades.

In 1987 there was an average 94 tackles per game compared to 257 in 2019, according to official World Rugby statistics.

Richard Boardman, the lawyer bringing Thompson's case to World Rugby, echoed the concerns over rugby's physicality.

He said: 'Every guy involved in this action loves the game, and they love the physicality of it.

'The caveat to that is, since 1995 when the game went professional, the size of the guys has increased, the power, the strength, the pace of the game and therefore the collisions have increased.

'I certainly think potentially there are things within a game that could change. If you think of the 2019 World Cup final when the 'bomb squad' - six 18-stone South Africans - came off the bench in the second half, that just means that the days of the 15-stone Jeff Probyn have gone.'

Professor Ribbans added the laws have evolved in a way that encourages players to tackle higher, leading to more serious injuries.

He said 'rugby always had the potential to be a dangerous game' but hoped that recent players would not suffer the same damage of the likes of Thompson because of improved treatment.

But the surgeon, whose book Knife In The Fast Lane chronicles his career in sports medicine, said 'a lot more needs to be done'.

He joined calls for clubs to reduce the amount of contact training during the week to allow players' bodies to recover, and also suggested a review of the substitute rules to stop fresh players coming on and smashing tired opponents.

Mr Boardman warned of an 'epidemic' in brain disease among retired professionals without serious reform of the game.

He said: 'We believe up to 50 per cent of former professional rugby players could end up with neurological complications in retirement.

'That's an epidemic, and whether you believe the governing bodies and World Rugby are liable or not, something has to be done to improve the game going forward.'

Thompson, 42, who retired in 2011, revealed that his memory of winning the World Cup had vanished.

He said: 'I have no recollection of winning the World Cup in 2003 or of being in Australia for the tournament'

'I can't remember any of the games whatsoever or anything that happens in those games.

'It's like I'm watching the game with England playing and I can see me there, but I wasn't there, because it's not me.

'You see us lifting the World Cup and I can see me there jumping around. But I can't remember it.'

The volume of impact has also ballooned, with the number of tackles per game more than doubling in the last three decades

Once slight and nimble wingers were replaced by those built in the image of the late All Black icon Jonah Lomu - whose devastating combination of size, strength and speed set the bar for the next generation of players (pictured in 2006)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Joe Willock is set to complete his £22million move to Newcastle from Arsenal after agreeing personal terms.

The deal had stalled in the early part of the week with the 21-year-old preferring not to sign the six-year contract offered by the Magpies.

An agreement on that and his financial package has now been reached and Willock will undergo a medical on Tyneside.

Newcastle have held positive talks with Joe Willock and a deal should be agreed today

Mikel Arteta looks set to allow the 21-year-old academy product to leave Arsenal this summer

The midfielder scored eight times during a loan spell at St James’ Park last season and, while Steve Bruce’s transfer budget was originally limited to around £10m this summer, it was always known Mike Ashley would make an exception for Willock.

The player’s wages will be in line with the club’s top earners - such as Callum Wilson and Allan Saint-Maximin, who make in excess of £80,000-per-week - and it is said that has raised eyebrows elsewhere in the dressing-room.

However, there is no doubting the talent and popularity of Willock and Newcastle believe they have landed a coup given the profile of the young Englishman.

Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta on Thursday: 'What he's done is put himself in a really strong position where he can choose a little bit with more options of what his future could look like.

'This is what we're trying to define right now.'

Willock is poised to leave Arsenal on a permanent basis as he looks to play regular football

Willock was left out of the Arsenal squad for their pre-season friendly against Tottenham on Sunday.

After the game, Arteta was asked about Willock's omission and said: 'We will explain the reasons when we can.'

A product of Arsenal's academy, who joined at the age of four, Willock has made 78 appearances for the Gunners, scoring 11 goals.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona's four club captains will be taking salary reductions to help the financially troubled club, Gerard Pique insisted on Sunday.

Pique said he has already accepted a reduction and his fellow captains Sergio Busquets, Jordi Alba and Sergi Roberto are expected to do the same soon.

Pique said he had to be the first to take the reduction so the club could register some of its new players in time for its opening game of the new 2021-22 LaLiga campaign, which Barcelona won 4-2 at the Nou Camp against Real Sociedad.

Gerard Pique says all of Barcelona's captains will take a pay cut to help the club out

The Catalan club lost club icon Lionel Messi because they couldn't give him a new contract that would fit into LaLiga's strict financial fair play regulations – leaving him to make the shock switch to PSG last week.

Memphis Depay and Eric Garcia, who both started on Sunday, reportedly couldn't have been registered without Pique's salary reduction.

'It's what had to be done,' the 34-year-old defender said.

(L-R) Jordi Alba, Sergio Busquets and Sergi Roberto are expected to follow Pique's example

'The other captains will do the same soon. Because of a timing issue I had to be the first one so we could register the players. The captains have always intended to make the adjustments needed by the club. We are proud of this decision.'

There had been some reports that Alba had not intended to reduce his salary, which saw the left-back jeered by some returning fans on Sunday.

'Sometimes there are misunderstandings,' Pique said. 'After last season ended, the captains talked and we were on the same page to try to reach a deal with the club.'

Alba said it hurt to hear 'lies' about his commitment to Barcelona, and dismissed the notion that the club couldn't keep Messi because other players didn't want to reduce their salaries.

Pique said he had to be the first to take the reduction so the club could register some of its new players in time for the season, which saw Memphis Depay (left) and Eric Garcia feature

'I've always been willing to help the club,' he said.

'No one should doubt me. I've been here for 10 years, and eight more in the youth squads. This is my home, the club of my life, and I'll always help it.'

Barcelona's debt is more than £1billion. Barcelona president Joan Laporta blamed the previous administration of Josep Bartomeu for leaving the club in the dire situation that led to Messi's departure.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United have no intention of selling Anthony Martial despite Inter Milan identifying him as a potential replacement for outgoing Romelu Lukaku.

The 25-year-old forward swapped Monaco for Manchester in 2015 and has scored 78 goals in 258 appearances, with his current deal running until 2024 with the option of a further year.

However, Inter were hopeful of prising Martial away from the Red Devils as they look to replace Lukaku - who is closing in on a £98million return to Chelsea this summer.

Manchester United have no intention of selling Anthony Martial (above) to Inter Milan

Saturday's 4-0 friendly win against Everton marked the forward's first minutes since sustaining a knee injury in March on international duty with France.

Speaking after the game, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer said: 'Anthony has had a bad spell with injuries.

'He's been training well with us but as players who've been out for a while, they need some more sharpness, need some more work.

'He tried to do the right thing; it didn't come off all the time, but it's better than what you fear sometimes when he's been injured for five months – since March.'

Inter were hopeful of prising Martial away from United as they look to replace Romelu Lukaku

However, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has no intention of accepting their £50m bid for Martial

Despite Martial's struggles, United are not willing to let him leave this summer and will reportedly reject their £50million offer.

Meanwhile, on the other end of the transfer spectrum, United could be open to signing further reinforcements.

The noises out of Old Trafford suggest further acquisitions would be dependent on summer sales.

However, boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer last week admitted any more business would be a 'bonus' having signed Raphael Varane, Jadon Sancho and Tom Heaton.

Rennes teenager Eduardo Camavinga is among those admired by United, who have an inflated squad heading into Saturday's Premier League opener against Leeds.

Jesse Lingard, who has tested positive for Covid-19, continues to be linked with a move away.

Meanwhile, on the other end of the transfer spectrum, United could be open to signing further reinforcement for their squad - despite having already bought players like Raphael Varane

Solskjaer said any more business would be a 'bonus' having signed Varane, Sancho and Heaton

Having impressed on loan at West Ham in the second half of last season, Leicester is the latest potential destination mentioned for the home-grown attacking midfielder.

Phil Jones is recovering from a lengthy lay-off and Andreas Pereira's role remains unclear after spending 2020-21 on loan with Lazio, but Diogo Dalot looks to have played his way into Solskjaer's thoughts for the coming campaign.

The 22-year-old was at AC Milan last term and has impressed since returning from Euro 2020 with Portugal, seemingly putting paid to United's move for Kieran Trippier. Atletico Madrid's asking price has always been a stumbling block.

Axel Tuanzebe, Facundo Pellistri and Tahith Chong are among those to have headed out on loan, while talk of Brandon Williams following suit continues to rumble on.

Ethan Laird is understood to be closing in on a loan switch to Swansea, where he would link up again with Russell Martin having managed him at MK Dons last term.

Dylan Levitt and Ethan Galbraith are others likely to make temporary exits.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Lionel Messi has arrived in Paris with his wife and children for his medical with Paris Saint-Germain where he will sign a £1million-per-week, two-year deal after leaving cash-strapped Barcelona.

The 34-year-old was pictured at Barcelona airport alongside his wife Antonella and their three children, Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three, earlier on Tuesday. Antonella, 33, later posted a selfie alongside her husband as they sat on their private jet waiting to fly to France.

But the Argentine star, who was wearing a t-shirt that said 'Ici c'est Paris' which translates to 'Here is Paris' and is widely used on PSG merchandise and branding, touched down later in the afternoon and was pictured waving to the supporters who had gathered to see Messi's arrival at Paris–Le Bourget Airport.

PSG have posted a teasing clip to their Twitter account, showing six Ballon d'Ors - the amount Messi has won - in front of the Eiffel Tower and a space in the dressing room between Neymar and Kylian Mbappe, who the Argentine is likely to play alongside in attack.

Sources at the French club confirmed Messi's lawyers had been poring over the contract proposal since Sunday but gave it their approval this morning.

The final points of negotiation were understood to have concerned the six-time Ballon d'Or winners image rights, as well as the breakdown of his wages and various bonuses.

Italian journalist Fabrizio Romano confirmed in the hours following Messi's arrival in Paris that he had completed his medical and would move to his hotel to complete formalities over his big-money move, with the player expected to be unveiled as a new PSG player tomorrow morning at 11am, local time.

The 34-year-old was spotted wearing a PSG face mask as he left the hospital and made his way to his hotel to finalise paperwork.

Messi's annual salary will be in the region of €63m (£53m), putting his earnings at just over £1m a week. He will sit in France's highest tax bracket of 45 per cent, leaving his take-home pay at around £550,000 per week.

Lionel Messi waves to the gathered fans after arriving in Paris on Tuesday wearing a t-shirt that said 'Ici c'est Paris' - which translates to 'Here is Paris' and is widely used on PSG merchandise and branding

Lionel Messi was all smiles on a private jet alongside wife Antonella as they boarded a flight to Paris to sign a deal with PSG

Messi, pictured at the airport today, will become a PSG player after agreeing a two-year contract to move to France

The 34-year-old attacker was pictured at the airport with wife Antonella and their three children: Thiago, Mateo and Ciro

Messi shared a hug prior to going through airport security as he said his final goodbyes before jetting off to sign his PSG deal

Jorge Messi was mobbed as he arrived at the Josep Tarradellas Barcelona-El Prat Airport as he jetted out prior to his son

PSG's passionate supporters gathered in large numbers on Tuesday in the hope of seeing Messi arrive at the Parc des Princes

Fans captured footage of Messi and his entourage being driven through the centre of Paris with a heavy police presence

After Messi left the airport, fans captured footage of him being driven through the centre of Paris with his entourage in a collection of black cars that were being accompanied by a heavy police presence.

His father, Jorge, today arrived in Paris ahead of his son and fielded questions from reporters having confirmed the deal was done.

Asked who was responsible at Barcelona for allowing their greatest ever player to leave, Jorge Messi replied: 'You have to ask the club.'

The player's representatives and Barcelona had earlier moved to dispel reports that the Spanish side made a last ditch bid to keep Messi.

Sources close to negotiations have re-affirmed that Barcelona could not afford to keep Messi even if he stayed for free as, even without him, they are above the wage cap for LaLiga this season. For that reason they did not attempt to persuade Messi to drop his salary.

PSG released a teasing video clip on their social media channels, including Messi's six Ballon d'Ors in front of the Eiffel Tower

There was also a shot of the PSG dressing room with a space empty in between current stars Neymar and Kylian Mbappe

On Sunday, Messi said a tearful goodbye to his club of 21 years which he had joined as child, being signed to the academy and moving from his native Argentina.

He scored 672 goals in 778 appearances but Barcelona were unable to hang onto him after falling foul of financial fair play rules set by Spanish league La Liga.

Barcelona blamed the league but are reportedly in debt to the tune of more than £700 million, meaning that Messi's contract - even with a 50 per cent pay cut - wasn't in line with the regulations.

Messi had remained at home in Barcelona awaiting the all-clear to travel to Paris ahead of agreeing a two-year deal, with the option of a third. He was seen leaving his home shortly after 1pm local time to go to the airport.

Ex-Barcelona team-mate Neymar posted a picture of him and Messi on Instagram earlier with the caption: 'Back together'

Messi will form a devastating attacking trident alongside Neymar (centre) and Kylian Mbappe (right) in Paris next season

New PSG team-mate Neymar has appeared to confirm Messi will be joining him in the French capital as he posted a photo of them together alongside the caption 'back together'.

Messi and Neymar have remained close friends ever since the latter left Barcelona for PSG in 2017. The Brazilian star has spoken frequently about his desire to play with the Argentine again one day.

Neymar and Messi spent four years together at the Nou Camp. They won two LaLiga titles, three Copa del Reys and a Champions League.

They formed a deadly partnership with Luis Suarez but the MSN trio was broken up when the Brazil star decided to join PSG in the summer of 2017 for a record €222million (£187m) fee.

His pending arrival comes at a time when French clubs are reeling from failed TV deals which has impacted revenue.

It is hoped Messi's presence will stimulate new negotiations with interested TV companies to benefit clubs across the French league.

Contractors at Barcelona were seen removing posters of Messi at their Nou Camp stadium prior to his flight to Paris

Lyon president Jean-Michel Aulas, talking to L'Equipe, explained how it could lead to an increase in income from beIN's overseas rights deal.

He said: 'If this is confirmed, it'll be fantastic for us all. For the TV rights and the general marketing value of Ligue 1, it would undeniably be a plus.

'This time, with Messi, you can't imagine that in a transparent context the broadcasting rights sold by BeIN abroad wouldn't explode.

'I am very confident. If this transfer goes through, with Neymar and Mbappé there, we are in a favourable position.

'If Qatar take the initiative to build a great team at PSG, we'll all be happy – even if it makes the competition more difficult.

'But you need the other clubs, at least the ones going for European places, to have the means to sign players like Messi.

'In that case, we would become the number one league in Europe. For that to happen, BeIN has to be positive with the international rights to develop them even further.'

Messi's father, Jorge, was central to the negotiations on behalf of his son's PSG switch but was left bemused at Barcelona

The 34-year-old (left) was in Ibiza with PSG's biggest names including Neymar, Angel Di Maria and Marco Verratti last week

Signing Messi gives PSG the highest wage bill of any sports team on the planet at £256M, overtaking Real Madrid and well ahead of the New York Yankees, Dallas Cowboys and the Golden State Warriors

By Kieran Jackson for MailOnline

Messi's impending move to PSG still seems very hard to fathom - but wait till you see the money at play.

The 34-year-old Argentine great is going to earn £25m a year as he signs a two-year deal at the Parc des Princes, with a deal to be officially confirmed in the coming hours.

With seemingly no end to PSG's expenditure this summer, the Ligue 1 club now have an astronomically high wage bill which is way out in front on a global scale.

Sportsmail gives you all the figures and explains how they're outspending sporting heavyweights across a number of different sports.

5) LOS ANGELES DODGERS - £193m

The highest-paid non-football sports team is MLB franchise the LA Dodgers, who won their first World Series in 32 years last year.

Trevor Bauer earns the most, at £24.5m, while Mookie Betts was recently handed an astonishing 12-year $365m deal, which works out at $30.4m (£21.9m) a year.

The Dodgers are someway ahead of the second highest-paid MLB team, the New York Yankees who have an annual payroll of £146m.

Source: spotrac

Trevor Bauer earns the most at the Los Angeles Dodgers, on a whopping £24.5million a year as they rank fifth on the list

4) BARCELONA - £195m

This is the Messi effect. Before this summer, Barcelona actually topped this list on £238m.

But as the Catalans failed to agree a new contract for their most prized asset, their total wage bill dropped dramatically as they look to rid themselves of the astonishing levels of debt they find themselves in.

Nevertheless, Antoine Griezmann is still on a yearly salary of £30.8m, with Philippe Coutinho now the third-highest earner on £21.2m. New signings Sergio Aguero and Memphis Depay are reportedly on £5m and £4.3m a year respectively.

Source: Salary Sport

3) MANCHESTER UNITED - £201m

The big-money signings this summer of Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane - whose move is not yet fully completed - sees the Red Devils third in the list of the highest wage bills of global sports teams.

Sancho - signed for £73m from Borussia Dortmund - is on £18.2m a year while the club's highest earner is still goalkeeper David de Gea, on £19.5m.

French defender Varane is reportedly set to earn £10.25m per season at Old Trafford, with Paul Pogba, Edinson Cavani, Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford also all earning £10m+ a year.

Source: spotrac

Jadon Sancho - signed this summer for £73million from German giants Borussia Dortmund - is on £18.2m a year in Manchester

2) REAL MADRID - £212m

The Spanish giants have seen their wage bill reduced somewhat by Sergio Ramos' departure this summer, given their former captain was on £17.5m-a-year according to Salary Sport.

Yet with David Alaba reportedly earning in the region of £10m-a-year, Madrid still retain second spot.

Their highest-earner is Eden Hazard, on an annual wage of £21m-a-year, while Toni Kroos, Karim Benzema and Luka Modric are all above £15m a year too.

Source: Salary Sport

Real Madrid's highest-earner is winger Eden Hazard, on an annual wage of £21m-a-year, having joined them from Chelsea

1) PSG - £256m

It's been quite the summer for the Parisians.

As well as Messi's £25m-a-year deal, the Ligue 1 club have splashed out on free agents Georginio Wijnaldum, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Ramos for a reported combined annual salary outlay of £29.2m.

It means the Ligue 1 club - backed by Qatari investment - now by some distance have the highest wage bill of any sports team on the planet, at around £256m. A huge renewal of Kylian Mbappe's contract will see that figure increase this summer too.

Source: Salary Sport
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Conor McGregor has declared that he wants to 'eat' Khabib Nurmagomedov's children in another shocking insult directed at his arch rival after the Dagestani labelled him 'evil' and 'dirty'.

Nurmagomedov - who comprehensively defeated McGregor in 2018 - told Mike Tyson's Hotboxin' podcast that the Irishman was 'evil' and 'dirty' after mocking his late father Abdulmanap's death in a since-deleted tweet.

McGregor, 33, took to Twitter to respond with a deplorable claim in a bid to rile the former UFC star considered the greatest lightweight fighter of all time.

Conor McGregor (L) has claimed he wants to 'eat Khabib Nurmagomedov's (R) children

Nurmagomedov labelled McGregor 'evil' and 'dirty' for mocking his late father's death

'I wanna eat his children!!!!' McGregor posted to his 8.8million Twitter followers. 'When's the last time he's even seen them actually? His wife? Mother?

'How bout you go spend some time with your kids and family for a change and keep my name out of your mouth b4 you get trapped somewhere again you mightn't be so lucky next time.'

The Notorious has since deleted the shocking tweet, which echoes Tyson's claim that he wanted to eat Lennox Lewis's children before their bout in 2000.

McGregor's tweet mocking the passing of Khabib's father to Covid was posted in response to the Dagestani's reflection on his UFC 264 defeat by Dustin Poirier.

Abdulmanap Nurmagomedov died of Covid and McGregor mocked the MMA legend's death

Now, McGregor has claimed he wants to 'eat' Nurmagomedov's children in a deplorable tweet

Nurmagomedov tweeted: 'Good always defeats evil'. McGregor responded: 'Covid good and father is evil?' The Irishman also deleted that tweet shortly after posting it.

The Eagle told Tyson that McGregor's comment about his late father was yet another incident to showcase that he is 'dirty'.

'When someone is not with us – he is not even alive – this shows what you have inside,' the 32-year-old said. 'This shows how dirty you are.

McGregor was outclassed by Nurmagomedov when the lightweight rivals met at UFC 229

'When you one of the best in the world and you come and you punch someone who is like 70 years old, like an old man (in a pub), this shows your heart.

'This shows who you are inside, how dirty you are. When you have parents and you have kids, how can you show yourself like this?

'I don't understand why his close people don't go, "Hey, what's going on?"'

McGregor's latest defeat to Poirier - in which he broke his leg in a freak injury - is his third defeat in four UFC fights and he is expected to be sidelined for at least one year with the injury.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku has arrived in London as he gets set to complete his £98million move to Chelsea from Inter Milan.

The 28-year-old landed at Biggin Hill airport on Wednesday evening ahead of his move back to Stamford Bridge, after leaving the club back in 2014.

Lukaku passed the main part of his medical in Milan on Monday before flying to Nice for meetings with his agent Federico Pastorello in Monaco on Tuesday.

Romelu Lukaku (in grey) has landed in London ahead of his £98m move to Chelsea

Pastorello has confirmed on Instagram that he has extended his contract with Lukaku and will continue to represent him until 2023.

The pair were then due to fly into London to finalise his switch on Tuesday, but those plans were delayed by Inter’s bid to secure Edin Dzeko from Roma as a replacement for Lukaku.

As reported by Sky Sports, the paperwork is now with club lawyers and once everything is agreed, Lukaku is expected to sign a five-year contract worth £200,000 a week.

Lukaku completed the first part of his medical in Milan ahead of his return to Chelsea

Ahead of Chelsea's UEFA Super Cup clash against Villarreal, Thomas Tuchel hailed Lukaku as one of the world's best in his position.

He said: ‘Romelu is one of the guys like Haaland, Lewandowski and Kane, a real No 9 who loves to score and has a presence in the box,’ Tuchel said. ‘He has the kind of profile we are looking for.’

Lukaku made just ten appearances for Chelsea in his first spell at the club which saw him go out on loan spells to West Brom and Everton.

After moving to Everton on a permanent deal, he later joined Manchester United and then Inter Milan in 2019.

Lukaku scored 64 goals in 95 appearances for the Serie A side and led them to the league title last season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku has overtaken N'Golo Kante as Chelsea's top earner following his mega-money move from Inter Milan, according to reports.

Chelsea completed their £98million swoop for the 28-year-old on Thursday, with the European champions finally landing the elite goalscorer that Thomas Tuchel has sought after this summer.

Lukaku re-joins the Blues having left for Everton in 2013 for £28m, and returns to the club a player transformed from the raw talent that failed to make an impact at Stamford Bridge.

Romelu Lukaku is reportedly Chelsea's best-paid player following his mega-money return

The 28-year-old has joined from Inter Milan in a £98m statement signing for the Londoners

And according to The Athletic, Lukaku comes back to west London as the highest earner in Tuchel's squad, with the Belgian's salary dwarfing new team-mate Kante's £290,000-per-week wage.

The outlet reports that, once image rights and bonuses are taken into account, Lukaku is set to pocket somewhere between £325,000 and £450,00-per-week at Chelsea.

Lukaku's wage could be as much as £160,000-per-week greater than Kante's, while it puts him in the upper echelons of the Premier League's best earners.

Lukaku's (right) reported £450k-per-week earnings, when bonuses are taken into account, dwarfs the salary of Chelsea's previous highest earner, N'Golo Kante (left), of £290k-per-week

The 28-year-old returns to England having won the Serie A title with Inter last season

PREMIER LEAGUE'S TOP EARNING STARS Romelu Lukaku - £450,000-per-week (including bonuses) Kevin de Bruyne - £385,000-per-week Jack Grealish - £380,000-per-week (including bonuses) David De Gea - £375,000-per-week Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang - £350,000-per-week Raheem Sterling - £300,000-per-week Paul Pogba - £270,000-per-week Anthony Martial - £250,000-per-week Mo Salah - £220,00-per-week Jack Grealish - £200,000-per-week Ben Chilwell - £190,000-per-week Virgil van Dijk - £180,000-per-week Who is the top earning player at YOUR club? Click here for Sportsmail's comprehensive guide. Advertisement

Lukaku, who had led Inter Milan to the Scudetto last season, was understood to have been happy to remain in Italy this season, but the club's financial predicament made Chelsea's £98m bid an offer too good to refuse.

The 28-year-old has unfinished business in England, having left United without making the impact he had hoped.

His exploits in Italy, plus the seismic transfer sum paid and earnings he will pocket, sends a clear message that the Belgian returns with lofty expectations to storm the goalscoring charts for the Blues.

'I’m happy and blessed to be back at this wonderful club,' Lukaku told the club's official website.

'It’s been a long journey for me: I came here as a kid who had a lot to learn, now I’m coming back with a lot of experience and more mature.

‘The relationship I have with this club means so much to me, as you know. I have supported Chelsea as a kid and now to be back and try to help them win more titles is an amazing feeling.

‘The way the club is going fits my ambitions perfectly at 28 and just coming off winning Serie A. I think this opportunity comes at the right time and hopefully we can have a lot of success together.

'Since I left Chelsea, it’s been a long journey with a lot of ups and downs, but these experiences made me strong and the challenge is to try to help the team win some more trophies. I can’t wait to get started and to help the club achieve more success.’

Lukaku is set to wear the No 18 shirt for the Blues - the same number he was given when he first joined as a teenager from Anderlecht almost a decade ago.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mikel Arteta says he is satisfied with Arsenal's summer business but believes the club has work to do in the transfer market if they are to be competitive.

Ben White was Arsenal's biggest buy of the window at £50million but the club was linked with Tammy Abraham, James Maddison, Bernardo Silva and Martin Odegaard, none of whom they've signed.

The BBC asked its 20 television and radio pundits to predict their Premier League top fours and no one named Arsenal, who have finished eighth in back-to-back seasons.

Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta insists the club's transfer business is not finished for the summer

England centre back Ben White was Arsenal's biggest buy of the window at £50million

'Anything is possible and there are still a lot of things to be done,' said Arteta. 'It's been a difficult transfer window and probably a lot of things will happen in the last week or so.

'They (the fans) need to be excited and see a team capable of competing. Our history is related to that. That's the aim. And that should be the objective.'

Asked about Abraham, Maddison and Co who were linked and whether he was underwhelmed by the outcome, Arteta said: 'It's been really busy.

'You just named a few names but that tells you as well how much we had to do.

'We are talking about the most difficult transfer market in this industry over the last years, for sure, and we are trying to adapt. Myself, the owners, the club all have the same interests which is to make the team stronger.'

The Gunners open their Premier League campaign away at new-boys Brentford on Friday night

Arsenal face Brentford on Friday night in the Premier League's opening game.

When asked what constitutes a successful season, Arteta said: 'Our goal is to get the best version consistently that is going to bring us closer to winning football matches. If we do that consistently, we will be in a good place.

'But that's something we haven't done: consistently give the best version. That's something we must control and must do.'

On whether the top four was the target, he said: 'On Friday, win against Brentford and then we'll be in a strong position in the league.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Neville believes Manchester United should go 'all-out' to sign Harry Kane as acquiring his services will bring them 'five years of absolute gold'.

The former Red Devil is adamant that they must beat Manchester City in the £150million transfer race for the England captain.

Should they fail, Neville and his former team-mate Roy Keane believe United can 'forget winning the league' as City will be 'too difficult to stop'.

Gary Neville believes Manchester United should go 'all-out' to sign Harry Kane this summer

Speaking about Manchester United's requirements, Neville said: 'I would want to see a centre forward.

'Chelsea have gone and bought (Romelu) Lukaku, City are after Kane and got (Jack) Grealish. We got (Jadon) Sancho and (Raphael) Varane and they are good signings but I don't think it's enough.

'For me, I'd be going all-out to get Kane at Old Trafford. All-out. If City are going to buy Kane, why can't we get Kane? We can compete.

He believes signing the £150million striker will bring them 'five years of absolute gold'

Neville says signing Jadon Sancho (left) and Raphael Varane (right) is not enough for United

'Last year we said we needed a centre forward, a right winger and a centre back. if they got Sancho, varane and Kane they would have a great chance (of winning the league).

He added: 'If Kane goes to City - forget Manchester United winning the league. Forget it.

'If Kane goes to Manchester United you have 25 goals in your team. It's gold. Kane is gold. Fact. Five years of absolute gold. It's one player. It's Harry Kane.'

While Neville's former Manchester United team-mate Keane agreed, saying: 'If Kane goes to Man City, they will be very difficult to stop.

While Roy Keane agreed, saying Man City would be 'very difficult to stop if they signed Kane'

He said: 'I'd love to see United go in for him. Players need a lift and you want to see new players walking through the door and United have always been a club like that.

'God knows how many times they have broken the record but you have got to make statements all the time. If Kane is available, he's English, he's 28, they certainly have to be in the mix.

'If Kane wants to go and play for Man City and Pep (Guardiola) then fair enough. But you surely have to be in the hunt for him. You have to be.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku has called the opportunity to return to Chelsea as the 'chance of a lifetime' as he asks for forgiveness in an open letter to Inter Milan fans.

Lukaku sealed a £98million return to Stamford Bridge on Friday having guided Inter to their first Serie A title in a decade last season.

Inter's finances have seen them lose boss Antonio Conte as well as two of their stars in Lukaku and Achraf Hakimi which has left fans furious.

But Lukaku wanted to focus on the positives of his 'beautiful story' at Inter in an open letter to fans that was released on social media on Sunday morning.

Romelu Lukaku completed a £98million return to Chelsea last week which upset Inter fans

Lukaku addressed the Italian club's supporters in an open letter released on his social media

He wrote: 'Dear Inter fans, Thank you. Thank you for loving me as one of your own. Thank you for making me and my family feel at home in Milano.

'Thank you for the unconditional support and love on a daily basis. Thank you for motivating me even more after the first season.

'When I came to Inter, I immediately felt that I would do well for this club.

'The love and reception I first received at Malpensa airport was the start of a beautiful story. I made it my mission to never let you down every time I wore the Inter shirt.

'I gave 100% in every training session and every game so that I could make you proud.'

He went on to add: 'I hope you guys understand my decision to move on to Chelsea.

'It's a chance of a lifetime for me and I think at this time of my career it is a chance that I always dreamed of.'

His letter comes after a mural of him outside the San Siro stadium was defaced by Inter Milan supporters.

Romelu Lukaku's mural outside the San Siro was defaced by Inter Milan supporters last week

Inter fans also produced a banner attacking their club, saying: 'You have broken our balls'

The mural showed Lukaku pointing two fingers in the air towards the Inter Milan badge and the Italian flag, and most of the phrase 'Dear Milano, you're welcome' has been blocked out with black paint, barring the word 'Milano'.

Inter Milan's main ultra group in the Curva Nord are responsible for the vandalism of the mural, created for the Belgian when he first joined the club in 2019 from Manchester United.

And a message on the group's Facebook page to the departing Belgian striker read: 'Dear Lukaku, we expected more honest and transparent behaviour from you.

'But, despite the fact we protected you like a son, like one of us, you too proved yourself to be just like all the rest, going to your knees for money. We wish you the best, even if greed doesn't always pay.'

Meanwhile, a banner next to the mural directed towards the Inter hierarchy, led by Chinese club president Steven Zhang, 29, read: 'You have broken all our balls'.

Lukaku was sensational for Inter last season in which his goals fired them to the league title

Lukaku is quarantining and missed Saturday's win over Crystal Palace, but could make his debut against Arsenal next Sunday.

Accusations that Lukaku returned to Chelsea purely for the money were strenously denied by his agent, Federico Pastorello.

In a statement Pastorello said: 'The narrative - that Lukaku's transfer was 'engineered' and 'forced' just to pander to financial interests - is leading everyone absolutely astray.

'Where Lukaku has never publicly expressed any unease or discontent about his experience at FC Internazionale, his contractual situation or the well known events of the Club, the interest of Chelsea has really touched Romelu's soul from the very first moment because that club means to him something unique and special.

Lukaku's agent Federico Pastorello (left) said that his family received threats before the move

'In recent days I have seen a video from 2009 in which the 16- year-old visited the Stamford Bridge stadium with his school and swore that one day he would play on that pitch.

'I recommend everyone to watch it carefully: it's impressive how clearly a 16-year-old boy was already drawing his future. He wanted to wear that shirt, he succeeded when he was only 18 and unfortunately he left before he could make his mark and win something important.

'This challenge remained like a bug in his heart and mind for all these years. And when, almost unexpectedly, the opportunity to try again came up - at the age of 28 after two seasons as a main player with FC Internazionale - he almost didn't believe it.

'It was a chance to come full circle and being the exemplary professional that he is, he decided it was time to accept that challenge again.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham have been praised for their excellent performance in their 1-0 season opening victory against Manchester City.

Despite all of the talk surrounding Tottenham star Harry Kane and his potential move to the reigning Premier League champions, the hosts put in a spirited display to hand Pep Guardiola's side their fourth consecutive away defeat to Spurs.

Son Heung-min's 55th minute was strike was enough to separate the sides and take all three points.

Son Heung-min's 55th minute goal helped Tottenham to victory over the reigning champions

Sky Sports pundits lauded Nuno Espirito Santo's side after their opening-day victory

Sky Sports pundits lauded Tottenham for their performance after the match, which was Nuno Espirito Santo's first competitive game as manager of the club.

Graeme Souness said: 'Spurs had a gameplan, they knew they wouldn't have much of the ball but Spurs weren't hanging on.

'I was impressed by their tenacity, aggression and grit. They were all at it and the crowd responded to that - the atmosphere was just fantastic.'

Former Manchester City player Micah Richards was disappointed with their performance against Tottenham, admitting they were beat by the better side.

He said: 'It wasn't good enough by City's standards. They just didn't get going.

'There are no excuses - we were beaten by the better team. Tanganga, Sanchez were fantastic, Lucas Moura didn't stop running. It's a disappointing start.'

Graeme Souness said he was impressed by Tottenham's 'tenacity, aggression and grit'

There's not much expectations for Tottenham this season in terms of their chances of finishing in the Champions League places.

Former Spurs player Michael Dawson though says they need to be aiming for top four.

When commenting on Tottenham's goal, he said: 'This quality from Son we've seen for many years - that's why the fans adore him.

'Nuno's put his stamp on this team. There was negativity surrounding him, what with everything's going on. He changed formation, he's played with a back four.

'Spurs have to improve on last season - and I believe they will. These fans are special, you saw that today - Spurs have to aim to be in the top four.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is off the mark for Inter Milan as he nets his first goal in a friendly... but fans are left baffled by his strike coming hours BEFORE the club officially announced him
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Somewhere between the Czech Republic and Glasgow late last week, something definitely clicked into place for Ange Postecoglou's Celtic side.

The Australian's project in the East End of the city remains a work in progress and, doubtless, will continue to do so for some time to come.

But after struggling to detect tangible evidence of where this was all going in the early weeks of their new manager's tenure, the Parkhead supporters are now seeing clear patterns emerging.

Celtic supporters make their feelings clear to the club ahead of their Europa League qualifier

David Turnbull scores the first goal of the match on a night when he was the star of the show

There is a growing sense that Postecoglou's tactical demands have been taken on board and are now taking root. European football until Christmas has at least been secured.

If it's blindingly obvious that it will take much time and several fresh faces for the side to evolve in a manner to the manager's liking, he will be comforted by the buy-in that his players and supporters demonstrated here.

Those who took their seats in the stadium last night – many for the first time in 17 months – are all strapped in for the ride.

AZ Alkmaar, who Celtic now face in the play-off round, will be a step up in class but will not be viewed as an insurmountable obstacle.

The Dutch only play their first competitive game this weekend and will need to find their feet quickly to deny a Celtic team that's now in the ascendancy.

Postecoglou said prior to this match that the he hoped this would be one of those occasions in his career that he'd remember fondly once retired on a Greek island. He could scarcely have wished for it to go better.

Kyogo Furuhashi is left unimpressed after scoring another, only to see it disallowed for offside

Hoops fans enjoy themselves on a night when they were 4-2 up on aggregate before the start

The same applied to David Turnbull, who garlanded a superb midfield display with two goals.

The third, provided by James Forrest, gave the final score a more accurate sheen.

Having struggled to create openings in the early days of the season, Celtic have now managed 13 in three matches.

Just as pleasing for Postecoglou will be a second successive clean sheet which came courtesy of two outstanding saves by Joe Hart in the second half.

All in all, it was an impressive night's work for the Australian's fledgling side – and you sense that there's much more to come.

With Liel Abada nursing a minor injury, Postecoglou played Ryan Christie on the left, Forrest on the right and Tom Rogic – the attacking trio tasked with proving the ammunition for the club's new hero, Kyogo Furuhashi.

Turnbull hammers in the second goal with 55 minutes gone to underline Celtic's dominance

Although still short of capacity on the instructions of Uefa, Celtic Park crackled with expectation.

Any lingering doubt as to the outcome could have been extinguished within 35 seconds.

Rogic's pass pierced the Czech's high line. Perhaps spooked by the chance to score his fifth goal in Celtic colours, the Japanese's composure deserted him. Unable to get the ball under control, he allowed Jan Hanus to dash from his line and block with his legs.

If there's going to be a price to pay for the high-pressing, high-energy passing game that Postecoglou is implementing, it's likely to be a few heart-in-mouth moments in defence.

Callum McGregor, last night's quarter-back, has to show nerves of steel at times when dropping deep to link the play. The reality is that better sides than Jablonec may have capitalised.

Postecoglou will hope, though, that by the time tougher challenges arrive, his side will be in better shape, too.

James Forrest pounces to add a third goal in the 72nd minute at Celtic Park and seal a 7-2 rout

There was still much to admire about the way they went at Jablonec here. With Furuhashi a man in perpetual motion, Rogic and Turnbull took turns to laser passes into his path.

With Forrest and Christie bounding down the flanks and the full-backs, Anthony Ralston and Greg Taylor, driving into the central area, the Czechs must have felt like a swarm of wasps was after them.

The opening goal had been coming for 26 minutes and owed everything to Taylor. Stepping into the play, he rode a couple of tackles and played a disguised pass to Turnbull.

The midfielder made a decent chance look ridiculously easy, flashing the ball past Hanus with the outside of his right foot.

It was a reward for Celtic's patience. Stephen Welsh had already twice headed narrowly over, Turnbull had seen a fierce shot saved, while Furuhashi's moment of redemption was cut short by an offside flag.

Furuhashi has many qualities – none more so than his work rate. Not everything went his way here. But his willingness to dust himself down and go again never ceased.

His dancing feet almost brought Celtic their second goal before the break. Having shifting the ball from one peg to the next and back again, his low strike looked net-bound until Milos Kratochvil threw out a leg. The Czech was soon booked for a brutal hack on Turnbull.

With McGregor really the only defensive midfielder, Celtic left themselves open but there was much more defensive assurance than a week ago.

The sum total of the Czechs' chances in the first half was a sniff for Kratochvil which Carl Starfelt smothered and David Houska's low drive into Joe Hart's waiting arms.

Requiring three goals in the second half to progress, Jablonec predictably came back out swinging. Jakub Povazanec's curling effort briefly worried Hart but the ball drifted over.

New manager Ange Postecoglou shows his satisfaction as his side reached the play-off round

The issue was soon settled. McGregor had prodded and probed all night and one simple crossfield pass to Turnbull exposed Jablonec's back-line. Turnbull shifted the ball from his left to right foot and hammered the ball low beyond Hanus from 20 yards.

The raucous atmosphere was reduced to a hush when Hanus clattered into Furuhashi but the din was restored when the striker rose to his feet apparently unharmed. Odsonne Edouard was sprung from the bench, in any event.

The tie may have been over but a second consecutive clean sheet was still a big prize.

Twice in quick succession Hart denied Jablonec when he had no right to do so.

Martin Dolezal's attempt to capitalise on a rare McGregor error saw the former Tottenham man punch the ball into the sky. Within seconds, Kratochvil's meaty drive was met with the same fate. The crowd roared its approval.

Edouard looked more lively than he has done in his brief cameo appearance. He would have scored had Hanus not half-blocked his effort, but Forrest capitalised on the loose ball to ram home the third.

It was the cue for Albian Ajeti, Ismaila Soro, Adam Montgomery and Nir Bitton to get a taste of the action. Postecoglou now had more headaches of the right kind.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel's superb start to life at Chelsea continued with their UEFA Super Cup success on Wednesday night, and his squad were determined to savour every moment.

Chelsea lifted the trophy just a matter of months after their Champions League triumph, after beating Villarreal on penalties in Belfast.

And after the full-time whistle sounded, and the cup was hoisted into the air, the players then headed to their dressing room to continue the celebrations.

Chelsea followed up their Champions League triumph with success in the UEFA Super Cup

Kepa Arrizabalaga (left) was the hero by saving two penalties in the shootout against Villarreal

Mason Mount, fortunately for the club's supporters, was on hand to give a behind the scenes look into the party, which saw team-mates dancing and posing for photos.

First up in a series of posts on Mount's Instagram story was 22-year-old Trevoh Chalobah, the young defender who has starred in pre-season and impressed once again in Northern Ireland.

Encouraged by Mount in comical fashion, Chalobah was caught on camera silkily moving along to the music, with Tammy Abraham watching and cheering him on.

Trevoh Chalobah impressed on the pitch and also dazzled off it with his silky dance moves

Mount posed for lots of photos in the dressing room, including one with Callum Hudson-Odoi

In the background, the captain for the night, N'Golo Kante, could be seen grabbing a slice of pizza, while other players took to the makeshift dance floor to join Chalobah.

Kurt Zouma and Antonio Rudiger also showcased their quick feet while bopping along to another song, with both defenders watching on while the other took their turn.

There was a special moment for goalkeeper Marcus Bettinelli, who only recently joined the club from Fulham and has already tasted silverware success.

He posed for a photo along with Mount, who took their victorious snap, and Ben Chilwell, as the celebrations continued around them.

Antonio Rudiger and Kurt Zouma also took to the makeshift dance floor to continue the party

Mount also captured a moment with Ben Chilwell and newly-arrived stopper Marcus Bettinelli

Abraham was next in Mount's sights, with the striker posing with his medal for a professional picture from a club photographer while his team-mate mocked him.

Accompanied with the caption 'loves the camera', Mount filmed himself trying to throw Abraham off while he looked to smile with his newest gong.

The mood was undoubtedly euphoric, and Chelsea's hard-fought victory was the perfect way to begin boss Tuchel's first full season at the helm.

The tie finished 1-1 after extra time, after Hakim Ziyech - who was forced off with a serious-looking injury - netted the opener before Gerard Moreno levelled.

Abraham was mocked by Mount in comical fashion as he tried to pose with his winner's medal

Kepa Arrizabalaga made himself the hero after being brought on for the shootout, and Tuchel's brave call to replace Edouard Mendy deep into the evening paid off spectacularly.

The second-choice stopper kept out Villarreal's second attempt with his first meaningful touch and then also denied Raul Albiol's spot-kick to seal the 6-5 win.

'It’s not a normal situation but I was ready because I knew that this can happen and I tried to be ready mentally and physically,' Kepa admitted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

And the best thing? It wasn’t even a shock. This has been coming, for Brentford, and Arsenal. One club knows where it is going, the other lost its way long ago. In essence, this was the night that showed how far Brentford have come, and how far Arsenal have fallen.

Here was a club playing its first game in England’s top division in 74 years, and another with pretensions to form a Super League with Real Madrid, and it was impossible to tell them apart. If anything, the XI in stripes were most comfortable at this level.

It was embarrassing for Mikel Arteta and everyone connected with the current Arsenal regime that they should arrive at the first game of the season so totally unprepared. Alexandre Lacazette and Pierrre-Emerick Aubameyang were missing, stricken with illness, but even that news raised more questions than answers given the state of Arsenal’s recruitment policy and the supposed clear-out that is intended to finance it.

Brentford fans almost took the roof off their new stadium at the final whistle as they club stunned Arsenal 2-0 on Friday night

A full capacity crowd showed-up for the Bees first game in the top-flight in 74 years, and their first ever in the Premier League

It was a very familiar scene for Arsenal after being beaten by a newly promoted side, this time on the first day of the season

MATCH FACTS Brentford (3-5-2): Raya; Ajer, Jansson, Pinnock; Canos, Onyenka, Norgaard, Janelt, Henry; Mbeumo, Toney Subs: Forss, Bidstrup, Sorensen. Manager: Thomas Frank Goals: Canos (22), Norgaard (73) Booked: None Arsenal (4-2-3-1): Leno, Chambers, White, Mari, Tierney; Lokonga, Xhaka; Pepe, Smith-Rowe, Martinelli; Balogun. Subs: Saka, Tavares, Nelson. Manager: Mikel Arteta Goals: None Booked: None Advertisement

Arsenal looked a shambles in a way Brentford are not. They know what they are about on the field, and off it too, with a strategy and vision Arsenal no longer possess. They thought they could take Pep Guardiola’s right-hand man and become Manchester City lite. It was the epitome of shallowness.

So Brentford deserved this. On the night, and for the hard yards getting here. Arsenal only came into the game at the start of the second-half and any momentum they built ended when Brentford scored their second goal on 73 minutes. It was a very Brentford goal to score, forged at a training ground beneath Heathrow’s flight path, and a terribly Arsenal goal to concede, a comedy of soft, defensive errors from players who should have learnt by now.

Forget corners, Arsenal can’t even defend throw-ins. How long have we been saying that now? Since long before the end of Arsene Wenger’s time. Since the days of Tony Pulis and Rory Delap at Stoke. And what was true then is true now.

Brentford substitute Mads Bech Sorensen launched one, Ivan Tomey rose with Callum Chambers and Pablo Mari, neither of whom showed the necessary conviction, and the ball bounced – actually bounced, like in a kids’ game – in the six yard box. Ben White failed to deal with it and Christian Norgaard arrived with more intent than Arsenal’s defence combined to power it past Bernd Leno, who seemed as bemused by events as anybody.

And that was Arsenal done. Brentford, it must be said, were magnificent. Better in the first-half and resilient under pressure in the second when Arsenal tried to mount a revival. It was May 26, 1947, when Brentford last played a game in the top division of English football. A time when England could play Portugal and win 10-0, as they had a day earlier. Brentford had already been relegated; Arsenal won. Friday night’s encounter could not have been more different.

This is Brentford in the ascendancy. Brentford with a philosophy and a self-belief that Arsenal simply do not have anymore. What are Arsenal under Arteta? A team in transition? Seriously, again? Arsenal appear to have been transitioning for a decade or more now, under three managers.

Sergi Canos opened the scoring for the season, cutting inside and firing the ball in by beating Bernd Leno at his near post

The winger celebrated wildly as the crowd responded accordingly, on a special night for the newly-promoted Londoners

Midfielder Emile Smith-Rowe was a driving force for Arsenal but couldn't drag his side to a goal as familiar problems persisted

They are rebuilding a squad but that involves moving on many of the current personnel. And who wants players who failed to get Arsenal into Europe last season? Who wants the team that lost 2-0 at Brentford? There was a world of difference in Premier League experience between these sides, but that did not show. If anything, one could have been forgiven for thinking Brentford’s players knew more about the course and distance.

There was 19 minutes of Premier League football between these Brentford players before kick-off; nine of the starters were making their debuts in this division. Tomey played five minutes of football, twice, as a substitute for Newcastle in the 2015-16 season; in the same campaign Sergi Canos got on for nine minutes for Liverpool at West Brom, on the final day of the season.

And yet, after ten minutes of acclimatisation, it was Brentford who looked more comfortable with their surroundings, Brentford who were braver and bolder. Arsenal were a makeshift team without Lacazette and Aubameyang upfront, but that is no excuse. Kieran Tierney and Emile Smith Rowe aside there wasn’t an Arsenal player who went at the game like Brentford’s newbies.

Backed by home support high on the occasion, the history and football’s joyous return to those who love it most, they were superb. Everything one would hope for from a newly promoted team, they delivered. Brentford were the least experienced Premier League arrivals since Reading in 2006. Yet Reading, you may remember, not only stayed up that season but finished in the top half of the table. Thomas Frank will not be thinking small after this.

Ben White (right) had a dreadful Premier League debut for Arsenal after his £50m move, being dominated by Ivan Toney

Mikel Arteta has one of the toughest jobs in football but pressure will be piling onto the Spaniard from day one this season

Norwegian star Christian Norgaard bagged the second, profiting from weak Arsenal defending to head in from close-range

Let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Brentford were always going to be bouncing off the walls for this, their opening game as the 50th team to taste Premier League football, and there is a marathon stretch of 37 fixtures to come. But they were better than just lively.

If anything their enthusiasm got the better of them at times, with players so keen to get at Arsenal’s stuttering defence they sometimes forgot to carry the ball with them. This wasn’t just a win propelled by adrenalin. Frank is a smart coach and his players carried out his game-plan with intelligence. Arsenal did not have Brentford’s wit, let alone their resolve.

In the 11th minute, a looping header from Frank Onyeka brought Leno into the game. A minute later, Tomey sent Bryan Mbuemo away and his shot hit the outside of the near post. But pressure was building and, after 22 minutes, Arsenal cracked. It was Callum Chambers at fault, twice, and Leno once – a fatal combination of defensive errors. Chambers’ clearance from deep was poor and cut out by Ethan Piddock, and he then charged out to meet Canos, who easily cut inside and struck a low shot.

Norgaard sent the Brentford fans wild, who are finally able to enjoy top-flight joy after years battling in the Championship

Thomas Frank celebrated with his fans after the final whistle, and a special atmosphere seems to be building in Brentford

Should it have defeated Leno so soundly at the near post? Probably not. But Arteta’s side is full of players who probably wouldn’t make the grade at any other major club. To think, if the elite had got their way, this opening game could have been against Bayern Munich, with far better English clubs looking on from outside.

Half-time was needed and Arsenal came out with greater impetus after it. Smith Rowe looked a handful and in the 51st minute a fabulous turn and direct run ended with a shot that forced the first save, proper, from Raya. Brentford will come to expect storms like this in the Premier League – and substitutions of the quality of Bukayo Saka, given a touching ovation onto the field by home fans, and away fans, alike. It is to their credit that they rode it out, and finished with a clean sheet.

One final point: in plain red and white stripes, black shorts, black socks, Brentford looked like Brentford. In jazzy, busy blue Arteta’s team do not look like Arsenal, and certainly do not play like them. Indeed, what are Arsenal these days? Who knows?

Re-live Sportsmail's live coverage of Brentford 2-0 Arsenal brought to you by TOBY MILES.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Virgil van Dijk has handed Liverpool a huge boost on the eve of the season by becoming the latest player to sign a new contract extension.

The Holland international has been an outstanding success since he joined Liverpool in January 2018 and his performances led to him becoming the best defender in the world, the mainstay of a team that went on to win the Champions League and Premier League.

He signed a five-and-a-half-year deal when he left Southampton for what was then a world record fee of £75million for a defender but Liverpool have revamped his terms and the contract will run to June 2025.

Virgil van Dijk has committed his future to Liverpool by signing a contract extension to 2025

The defender missed most of last season with a serious ligament injury but is fit again

Van Dijk worked tirelessly to come back from his ligament injury suffered against Everton

Van Dijk, who is expected to start Saturday's opening Premier League clash at Norwich – potentially alongside new signing Ibrahima Konate – after making a successful comeback from cruciate ligament surgery, is the latest player to commit his future to the club.

Liverpool have so far successfully renegotiated deals for Fabinho, Alisson Becker, Trent Alexander-Arnold, as well as promising youngster Harvey Elliott.

The club will continue with their policy of tying down those men who have been instrumental in bringing success.

The onus will be on doing deals with Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mane and Roberto Firmino, all of whom have two years left.

The Dutch central defender is in line to start for Liverpool against Norwich on Saturday

There is also an issue to resolve with captain Jordan Henderson, who has attracted interest from Paris Saint-Germain and Atletico Madrid.

But securing Van Dijk's future is huge for Jurgen Klopp, who convinced the Dutchman to join his project at a time when he was also wanted by Manchester City, Arsenal and Manchester United.

Asked how it felt to have inked the fresh terms, Van Dijk told the club website: 'Amazing. It is something to be very proud of, that I am very proud of, that my wife and my kids are very proud of and obviously my agency.

'All the hard work we've put in so far continues and I am looking forward to what the future brings together with Liverpool. I'm delighted, very happy and proud.

Fabinho (left) and Trent Alexander-Arnold (right) signed contract extensions along with Alisson prior to Van Dijk's new terms being announced

Van Dijk spoke about how much he has enjoyed his time at Liverpool so far as he renews

'Since day one when I joined the club, I felt so much appreciation from the fans and from my team-mates and the staff, that I could be a very important member of this football club,' Van Dijk continued.

'It has been going well; unfortunately last season for me personally has been a season to forget, to learn from and take with me, but I have enjoyed my time here and will keep enjoying it in the next couple of years altogether with all of you.'

On his potential inclusion against Norwich, he added: 'I feel good. Obviously [they were] friendlies, you get your match fitness up, get into repetitions of doing things again and again.

'I feel like I am ready for the weekend, so we’ll see what the manager decides. It is going to be a totally different atmosphere and mindset for me personally as well. It is something we fight for, for the points, and hopefully we can get a positive result out of it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Graeme Souness believes Mason Greewnood was the star man in Manchester United's brilliant victory over Leeds and not Paul Pogba, who recorded four assists at Old Trafford.

The Red Devils began their 2021-22 season with a convincing win against their old rivals, with Greenwood's strike accompanied by a hat-trick from Bruno Fernandes and a goal from Fred.

Pogba had a hand in all but one of the goals but Souness thinks Greenwood was the standout player.

Mason Greenwood (L) was Man United's star against Leeds, not Paul Pogba (R), according to Graeme Souness

Souness (above) says the England international was sensational at Old Trafford on Saturday

'We expect that from a £100million player,' Souness said when responding to fellow pundit and Sportsmail columnist Micah Richards, who had pointed out the Frenchman's four assists.

'For me the star of the show was Greenwood, for a young man that's sensational. That boy is a finisher and he's going to be a top player.'

Souness also talked up a title challenge from Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's men because the 'excitement' has returned to his squad, adding: 'I think you have to include United [in the race].

'I feel excitement this time around is greater than normal. Chelsea, Liverpool and City are in contention.'

Last season, Pogba finally responded to Souness' constant criticism by saying: 'I didn't even know who [Souness] was. I heard he was a great player and stuff like that. I don't know the face but the name [I do].

'Like I said I'm not someone that watches a lot of [punditry], I watch a lot of football but I don't stay after the game to listen to what they say about ''Why they did this'' or 'why they did that''.'

Greenwood meanwhile scored 12 goals for United last season from 52 appearances across all competitions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@German football legend Gerd Muller has passed away at the age of 75, his former club Bayern Munich announced on Sunday.

The former striker, who held the nickname 'Der Bomber' during his career, was regarded as one of the greatest ever forwards to play the game and helped his country to the 1974 FIFA World Cup and 1972 Euros title.

Muller was also Bayern Munich's all-time record goalscorer with 552 goals in 607 appearances, while his career total stood at 711 goals in 780 games for club and country.

The former footballer was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in 2015 when he was a coach of Bayern's second team, while he also suffered from alcoholism when his playing days ended in 1982. Muller leaves behind his wife Uschi of more than 50 years and his daughter Nicole.

In an emotional Twitter post, Bayern Munich said: 'Today the world of FC Bayern stands still. The all-time record German champions and its entire fan base mourn Gerd Muller, who died early on Sunday morning at the age of 75.'

German football legend Gerd Muller passed away at the age of 75 on Sunday morning

Bayern Munich and Germany legend Muller was diagnosed with Alzheimer's in 2015

Born in Bavaria in November 1945, Muller began his career at his local side 1861 Nordlingen where he scored a remarkable 51 goals in 31 games between 1962 and 1964.

He then joined Bayern Munich for £2,300 and was part of one the German club's greatest ever sides alongside fellow international legend Franz Beckenbauer.

Muller helped fire Bayern to promotion to the German top-flight in his first season with 33 goals in the second tier - and top-flight success would follow.

The striker would guide his side to four Bundesliga trophies and three European titles. His best season was the 1972-73 season when he netted an astonishing 66 times in all competitions.

He scored 85 goals in the 1972 calendar year. For Bayern, his tally of 552 is nearly double any other player in their history.

1974 World Cup winner Muller ended his career as Germany's record goalscorer with 68

Muller also reached the top of the game at international level and ended his career as Germany's all-time record goalscorer with 68 goals. By the time of his passing, Miroslav Klose overtook his Germany goal tally with 71 strikes.

Speaking about his passing, Bayern president Herbert Hainer added: 'Today is a sad, black day for FC Bayern and all of its fans. Gerd Muller was the greatest striker there has ever been - and a fine person, a personality in world football.

'We are united in deep sorrow with his wife Uschi and his family. Without Gerd Müller, FC Bayern would not be the club we all love today. His name and the memory of him will live on forever.'

His former team-mate and close friend Beckenbauer said: 'Everything that Bayern has become is due to Gerd Mueller and his goals.'

For Bayern Munich, his tally of 552 is nearly double any other player in their history

Bayern's chief executive Oliver Kahn said in a statement: 'The news of Gerd Müller's death affects us all deeply.

'He is one of the greatest legends in the history of FC Bayern, his achievements are unmatched to this day and will forever be part of the great history of FC Bayern and all of German football.

'As a player and as a person, Gerd Müller stands like no other for FC Bayern and its development into one of the largest clubs in the world. Gerd will be in our hearts forever.'

After leaving Bayern in 1979, Muller had a spell at former Miami side Fort Lauderdale Strikers, where he played alongside Manchester United legend George Best, before bringing his career to an end after three years in the United States.

Muller was a star for Fort Lauderdale along with the world's best talents like George Best

By the time his career ended, the German had already started suffering from alcoholism which plunged him into financial trouble. He was helped by Bayern Munich legends Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, Uli Hoeness and Beckenbauer in getting into rehabilitation and became a youth coach at the German giants in 1991.

Muller was then diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease six years ago and was cared for by his wife Uschi, who looked after him at a Bavarian nursing home.

'He eats next to nothing, can hardly swallow, lies in bed for almost 24 hours, and has only a few waking moments,' Muller's wife told German outlet BILD last November.

Muller (left)'s wife Uschi (right), revealed the heartbreaking details of his dementia decline

'It is so nice when he opens his eyes for a moment. He can sometimes signal yes and no with the blink of an eye.

'He has always been a fighter, has always been brave, all his life. He is now too. Gerd sleeps towards its end. He has closed his eyes, is dozing, only rarely opens his mouth, and is given pureed food.

'He is calm and peaceful, and I don't think he has to suffer either. He's slowly sleeping over.'

Several former professional players, including Sir Bobby Charlton, Gordon McQueen and Nobby Stiles, have been diagnosed with the illness, including five members of England's 1966 World Cup winning squad.

Muller (left) is one of several former footballers to be diagnosed with dementia after retiring

Many parts of football industry - including Sportsmail - have implored the Government to analyse the link between football and long-term brain illness - with one potential reason for dementia being the heading of a football.

In conjunction with Alzheimer’s Society’s Sport United Against Dementia, Sportsmail launched a campaign for football to finally tackle its dementia scandal in November 2020.

Earlier this summer, English football announced restrictions on heading among adults for the first time, with professional players now limited to 10 'higher-force' headers per training week.

Tributes to Muller have poured in from the football community, including from the German football association.

The DFB Twitter account posted: 'The DFB is mourning the passing of one of the greatest German footballers of all time.

'Rest in peace, Gerd Müller. Our thoughts are with his wife and family at this time.'

The football community has come together to pay tribute to one of the game's greatest players

The Australian national football team posted on Twitter: 'We’re saddened to hear of the passing of footballing legend, Gerd Muller. It was an honour to come up against him and the incredible West Germany squad of 1974. Rest In Peace.'

FC Barcelona tweeted: 'From FC Barcelona, our most sincere condolences to the family and friends of Gerd Müller, one of the most emblematic figures in the history of football.'

The twitter account for former Bayern Munich manager Pep Guardiola, now at Manchester City, said: 'A true Legend not only for @FCBayern and Germany but also for football.

'The best striker in history. My condolences to his family and friends and Bayern fans. RIP Gerd Muller.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Inter Milan fans were left scratching their heads when Edin Dzeko scored his first goal for the Italian champions - despite not being announced by the club until hours after the friendly.

With his move from Roma still to be ratified it came as a shock to see the Bosnian striker leading the line for Inter in a friendly against Dynamo Kiev.

Dzeko, who has signed a deal until June 2023, resolved outstanding salary issues with Roma and was said to be given dispensation to play for Inter despite the transfer still being ratified.

Edin Dzeko (right) opened his scoring account with Inter Milan in a friendly on Saturday

Curiously confirmation of his move arrived hours after he had scored in Saturday's friendly

Fans had little inkling that Dzeko was to turn out for Simone Inzaghi's side in Saturday's friendly with the champions deliberately coy across social media.

Playing behind closed doors in Monza, Inter did not release their starting XI on social media prior to kick-off.

Inter did share a photo of their dressing room but Dzeko's shirt was nowhere to be seen.

Euro 2020 winner Nicolo Barella opened the scoring for Inter by finishing off a brilliant build-up between Dzeko and Stefano Sensi.

It was Barella's turn to become provider for 2-0 as he played in Dzeko and he made no mistake in converting his chance to open his Inter account.

Dzeko was said to have been given dispensation by Roma to play while the deal was finalised

The Bosnian linked up impressively with Nico Barella, who teed him up to get his first Inter goal

The former Manchester City striker initially moved to join Roma on loan in 2015 but he impressed and made the switch permanent 12 months later.

Dzeko has scored 119 times in 260 appearances and has proven to be a revelation in Italy. He was the league's top scorer 2016-17 with 29 goals.

He will have big shoes to fill in replacing Romelu Lukaku, who left last week to re-join Chelsea for £98m.

Inter also confirmed a deal for rising Dutch star Denzel Dumfries on Saturday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Five months on from his heavyweight title triumph, it has been a fairly uncertain time for UFC superstar Francis Ngannou.

The Cameroonian knockout artist's sensational victory over Stipe Miocic did not only see him avenge his 2018 defeat to the former heavyweight king, but also appeared to be the beginnings of an exciting new era in the division.

However, things have stagnated for the 34-year-old, just when he was hoping for lift off.

It has been a fairly uncertain time for UFC heavyweight king Francis Ngannou this year

A fight between Ngannou (left) and Jon Jones (right) has failed to materialise in recent months





A super-fight with Jon Jones has failed to materialise, much to the Predator's frustration. News of the UFC creating an interim heavyweight title this month has served as another crippling blow to Ngannou.

'That was very surprising because in the past we didn't get an interim title, because Stipe wasn't active and they didn't even consider that at all,' a despondent Ngannou said last week. 'They didn't want to talk about it.

'I'm at the point where, when it comes to me, nothing good is coming my way, it looks like. They aren't making anything good to come my way.

'It's OK, but I think at this point regarding my last run, I deserve at least some respect as a UFC champion. I've been down, I know my low time, and I face it.'

Just when Ngannou appeared on the precipice of a huge rivalry with former light heavyweight king Jones, a new foe has emerged from left field - a rival that the 34-year-old will be all too familiar with.

In the meantime, a new foe has emerged - one that Ngannou is all too familiar with

Ciryl Gane has just 10 professional fights to his name but is on the cusp of a shot at the title

Ciryl Gane, like Ngannou, has been forged in Paris and unleashed on the UFC. In just 10 professional mixed martial arts bouts, the 31-year-old has scaled the dizzy heights of the heavyweight ranks, with his victory over Derrick Lewis placing him in pole position for a tilt at old team-mate Ngannou's belt.

The team-mates-turned-foe narrative has been at the heart of some of the UFC's best rivalries. Cody Garbrandt and TJ Dillashaw endured a bitter rivalry following the latter's exit from Team Alpha Male, while Colby Covington and Jorge Masvidal have exchanged terse words following Chaos's departure from American Top Team.

Yet you won't find such ferocity between Ngannou and Gane. The former sparring partners have kept things civil, despite being inextricably linked to a heavyweight dust up.

'No, for me, it's just a sport, it's just a sport,' Gane said during the post-fight press at the Toyota Center. 'I just want to make a show, I just want to do a performance, this is my job, and I just want to make money every time.'

Ngannou and Gane used to train together at the MMA Factory in Paris, before he left in 2018

The reality is, though, that Ngannou and Gane's inevitable collision course is likely to reopen old wounds, but not between the two parties you would expect.

Gane holds no ill will towards his former team-mate, but it is Ngannou's former long-term coach that will seek to get one over the Cameroonian and earn vindication for what he feels are past wrongs inflicted upon him.

Fernand Lopez was the mastermind behind Ngannou's first rise to title contention , with the head coach of MMA Factory in Paris fine-tuning the Predator into the sensational knockout artist that tore through the heavyweight ranks.

However, when all expected Ngannou to lay his hands on UFC gold in 2018, things went off course. The 34-year-old was outclassed by Miocic in Boston, leading to queries regarding his attitude and his preparations heading into UFC 220.

It was Ngannou's failure to, first, credit his coach for his ascension to the summit of the UFC and, second, to defend his coach when things went awry, that left Lopez heartbroken as Ngannou decided to change gyms and move to Team Xtreme Couture MMA in the States.

Gane, 31, maintains that there is no personal grudge with Ngannou following his gym exit

However, Gane's coach and Ngannou's former mentor Fernand Lopez (L) is still hurt by his exit

'I don't have any problem with my guy moving in another gym,' Lopez told MMA Fighting. 'People are really misunderstanding my point of view. I don't have any beef on that. The problem that I had with Francis, which is over my head now, about recognizing people that helped you to grow a little bit.

'I was wondering is there any problem? We spent five years together in my gym. You never pay anything, everything is free for you. I took you under my wing, took care of you, everything.

'What's so bad for you? What is so hard for you to say that "Fernand Lopez brought me the UFC contract." Why would you say to a journalist, they ask you how you got to to the UFC and you're like "I was just fighting, I was winning fights and I got the call from the UFC."

'Do you [Ngannou] remember me fighting to get you in the UFC when you was 3-1? Then Joe Silva said no. When you was 4-1, when you were 5-1 and I eventually called a friend of mine and [work] with him in order to get you into the UFC.

'Do you remember that? I called to you and said "hey Francis, happy birthday" and I said "I have a present for you. I have your UFC contract".'

Lopez (right) helped nurture Ngannou's talent as an MMA hopeful when he first arrived in Paris

The coach (right) claims he played an integral role in getting Ngannou signed by the UFC

Lopez detailed how he came to blows with Ngannou over his lack of recognition for his coach's work, and their relationship soured completely following his defeat to Miocic.

'The fight came with Stipe [Miocic] and we had the fight and then after the fight the same thing goes again,' Lopez said. 'I heard him in the press conference tell the journalists "congratulations to Stipe, he had a very good game plan."

'I was like f***, are you kidding me? I give you the game plan. I was backing you when I found out you didn’t follow the game plan. I called the other coach, we had a meeting, they begged you to follow the game plan and you said no, you don’t need to go to school to beat someone. That’s what you said with your words. You said with the reflex [power], I will take him out.

However, Ngannou's failure to defend Lopez after his loss to Stipe Miocic still rankles with him

The Cameroonian also did not move to credit Lopez (right) for his sharp rise in the UFC

'So when this started to touch me, you could have said "well, this is my fault. Sorry guys, don’t blame only my coach, cause this is my camp. I’m the boss of the camp."

'If my fighter loses a fight, I lose right with him. I need to stick with him. But in that case, there’s so many fighters, they apologize to their cornermen. So many guys apologize to their coach like ‘I didn’t follow the game plan.’

'So I was like why don’t you say something? I’m bringing that up just because to let you know, there was no actual beef before leaving the gym.'

Clearly, the events surrounding Ngannou's loss to Miocic and his subsequent departure still rankles with Lopez, and now he has the opportunity to get one over his old student through his new prodigy, Gane.

Yet Lopez claims his grudge is not 'personal' and that a fight between Ngannou (left) and Gane (right) will be like watching his two 'kids' fighting

Yet Lopez insists that his grudge with Ngannou is not personal, despite his lack of recognition for his role in the Cameroonian's sharp rise, and he admits it will be a strange feeling watching his two 'kids' fighting each other in the UFC.

'It will not be personal for me,' Lopez said. 'Not at all personal for Ciryl Gane, which I was always begging to not get involved in that sort of beef. Because I want to be clear in his mind, there’s nothing there.

'I think the fight will be a good fight,. You cannot get a better fight at this point than this one. If people were doubting Ciryl Gane, after the massacre that they just saw two days ago, you can’t keep doubting on Ciryl Gane.

'This is the fight to make. I will be sad to have my two kids, they were born in the MMA Factory, facing each other.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jose Fonte has joked that he is trying everything in his power to get Cristiano Ronaldo to join Lille this summer, in order to take on his nemesis Lionel Messi in Ligue 1.

The football world is still reeling from Paris Saint-Germain's move for Messi out of the blue, and now Fonte has been left fearing for what dominance could be to come.

The former Southampton man became a title winner last season after Lille produced a sublime campaign and wrestled the title away from PSG, despite the Parisians boasting a star-studded squad led by Neymar and Kylian Mbappe.

Jose Fonte says he is urging Cristiano Ronaldo to join Lille after Lionel Messi's PSG move

Speaking this week about the impact of Messi's transfer to French football, Fonte weighed up several different elements.

'It will be even more difficult for us [now that Messi is in France], but we are up to the challenge,' Fonte told talkSPORT.

'I'm texting Cristiano Ronaldo to come to Lille every day. He just answers: "ha ha ha".

'We'll try to use our weapons and I'll try to bring Cristiano somehow, I'll come up with a plan! He's only missing the French title…'

The football world struggled to take in Messi (left) sat with PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi (right) and signing his mega-money deal to make him French football's latest star signing

Ronaldo apparently only laughs each time Fonte asks him to make the move across to Ligue 1

The Portuguese defender also added that taking points from PSG now takes on even greater prestige, given the club arguably have the finest squad in world football.

He added: 'Imagine if we keep a clean sheet against them [Messi, Neymar and Mbappe]! It will just value us even more even if we do it.

'Incredible front three. Are they going to defend? I don't know. It will be interesting to see the competitiveness of the league this year.'

One thing that does not sit right with Fonte however is the manner in which PSG were able to easily acquire Messi and add him onto the books.

Fonte's Lille side rocked PSG last season by beating them to the title, and Fonte has now questioned how financial fair play ruling allows the Messi rule to go through

As reported by Sportsmail, the Argentine star will be earning in the region of £1million-per-week over the course of his two-year deal, and Fonte feels that something is going amiss.

He added: 'I want to touch on another aspect though. I just want to understand the Financial Fair Play in France.

'Every single club is restricting their spending. They can't buy a lot, they can't get players on big wages but then PSG comes and it looks like there's no law.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain look as though they are building a frankly terrifying dynasty. Their business this summer until the incredible events over recent days has been shrewd, within their means and sent out a statement.

In came Georginio Wijnaldum, Sergio Ramos and Gianluigi Donnarumma, all on free transfers. Achraf Hakimi also joined, albeit for a £60million fee from Inter Milan. Each of the new arrivals improved the spine of the team.

With just these big names, PSG's title challenge in Ligue 1 was handed a significant boost, and suddenly their Champions League aspirations looked serious once again. But, of course, they didn't stop there.

Lionel Messi has been officially unveiled at PSG and will now slot into their star-studded team

Messi, who left Barcelona as a free agent, is perhaps Nasser Al-Khelaifi's (left) best ever deal

Cue the dizzy sickness induced from their unveiling of perhaps the greatest ever football player. As their flashy drone footage weaved its away through the Parc des Princes to reveal Lionel Messi, all of their rivals were left cowering.

It is a transfer that has sent shockwaves around the world. Messi leaving Barcelona was enough to leave the everyone involved in football open-mouthed, and there was still an element of disbelief until his official unveiling.

Now, there is no going back. The contracts have been signed, the shirt has been held up and the photos have been taken. Messi, outrageously, has officially joined PSG, and this season they will have every trophy in their sights.

This leaves Mauricio Pochettino with perhaps the most enviable conundrum of them all. Who does he choose, and where do they fit in? Here, Sportsmail has taken a look.

Mauricio Pochettino has been handed a welcome selection headache in every area of the pitch

GOALKEEPER - GIANLUIGI DONNARUMMA

Spare a brief thought for Keylor Navas. He was ousted at Real Madrid by Thibaut Courtois despite being a reliable performer, and has now been dethroned in Paris after Gianluigi Donnarumma signed.

Having decided to leave AC Milan on a free, PSG raced to the front of the queue to snap up the towering shot-stopper for absolutely nothing. At just 22 years of age, Donnarumma will be first-choice for many years to come.

Blessed with good distribution, a commanding nature and lightning-fast reflexes, Donnarumma is certainly another piece to add to the jigsaw as the club look to conquer everything over the coming season.

Gianluigi Donnarumma will now be PSG's first-choice goalkeeper after arriving from AC Milan

RIGHT BACK - ACHRAF HAKIMI

Renowned for his marauding runs and penchant for a goal, it didn't take long for Achraf Hakimi to make himself at home in his new surrounds. After racing in from the right against Troyes, his crackling strike found the net.

With that, his career at PSG began, literally, with a bang. It is clear to see why the club splashed out the £60m figure to bring him in. He is everything a player at the Parc des Princes should be - daring, assured and a household name.

Hakimi is also versatile and can play anywhere down the right-hand flank with ease. It is at right wing back that he caught the eye for Borussia Dortmund and Inter Milan, but Pochettino looks likely to keep him further back in a flat back four.

Achraf Hakimi is renowned for his attacking contributions and even scored on his PSG debut

CENTRE BACK - MARQUINHOS

Adorned with the captain's armband after his long-term defensive partner Thiago Silva left for Chelsea, Marquinhos has been forced to step up. He has done so superbly, marshalling his team-mates and leading from the fore.

The numbers say everything. PSG won 72.6 per cent of the games in which Marquinhos played last season, and they conceded 0.7 goals on average. Without their skipper, their win percentage dropped down to 52.9 per cent.

Sergio Ramos arrived on a freebie may cast doubt over whether or not he remains captain, but there is no doubting that stalwart Marquinhos has blossomed into one of the world's finest defenders over recent years.

Marquinhos has stepped up after Thiago Silva left and wears the captain's armband superbly

CENTRE BACK - SERGIO RAMOS

This is another transfer that appeared unlikely to happen. Admittedly, football always finds ways to surprise time and time again, but Sergio Ramos was Mr Real Madrid. Despite the contract impasse, the expectation is that he would stay.

It quickly turned out, however, that the breakdown in talks was real. Soon after, at a tearful press conference of his own, Ramos left the club, riding on the back of a slew of glistening trophies. PSG then swooped in to tie down his services.

Any doubts that they would struggle to replace the seemingly irreplaceable Silva vanished when Ramos was announced. And who better to lead the club to that elusive Champions League success than the grizzled veteran himself?

Sergio Ramos is another of the free agents PSG snapped up and he will be a first-choice option

LEFT BACK - ABDOU DIALLO

It is strange to admit this in a team laden with star-studded names, but this is the one position in PSG's team that simply cannot be labelled world class. Currently, the former Borussia Dortmund defender Abdou Diallo is the favourite to start.

Flexible boss Pochettino would be able to shift his formation to a three-man defence to make up for his lack of options here, but even then there is no player clearly at the top of the pecking order at wing back either.

Diallo is not known for his talents attacking, but provides relatively safety at the back. He is, in effect, a defensive full back in a team built around the attack, and is likely to get the nod ahead of Layvin Kurzawa.

Abdou Diallo is likely to get the nod at left back, although PSG aren't blessed with options here

CENTRE MID - GEORGINIO WIJNALDUM

Liverpool may be hit hard by the loss of Georginio Wijnaldum's dependability and versatility this season, but this is very much PSG's gain. He may not be the most stylish player on the planet, but he is perfect for this team.

Wijnaldum provides good balance across the midfield at the Parc des Princes, and is adept at both ends of the pitch. Across his Premier League career, he also led the way at Liverpool for recoveries and duels won.

With Marco Verratti looking to push on into advanced positions and help the team progress around the final third, it will fall to Wijnaldum to stay disciplined. He will likely have to repeat the heavy-lifting role he made his own on Merseyside.

Georginio Wijnaldum will help to provide balance to a PSG team built heavily on their attack

CENTRE MID - MARCO VERRATTI

Marco Verratti endured a frustrating season last term, having been restricted to just 16 starts in Ligue 1. However, he underlined his world-class talent at Euro 2020, and will remain an integral performer for PSG this time around.

Equipped with a jaw-dropping range of passing, Verratti is more than just a vessel to shepherd the ball to the front four. He can link up sharply around the edge of the box, thump in from distance, and also thunder into a tackle.

In his likely partnership with Wijnaldum, Verratti is likely to handle the technical aspects of how PSG build up from the middle, while his team-mate will be alongside him to sweep up and also help dictate the tempo.

Marco Verratti endured a frustrating season last term but remains key to dictating the tempo

RIGHT WING - ANGEL DI MARIA

This is where the selection gets difficult for Pochettino, because Messi is capable of playing in any of these final four positions. However, for this team, we have opted for his international compatriot, Angel Di Maria.

Since joining the club after his difficult spell with Manchester United, Di Maria has flourished in France, dazzling with his magic on the ball and scoring several goals that made their way straight into the highlight reels.

And that is why it would be harsh to leave him out. A slight reshuffle of the strike force sees every player fielded in a position they can shine in, and also affords Di Maria the space down the right to cause havoc.

Angel Di Maria may line up on the right-hand side of PSG's attack, depending on their system

ATTACKING MIDFIELDER - LIONEL MESSI

Slotting neatly into the No 10 slot is Lionel Messi. The drama surrounding his sudden, and emotional, departure from Barcelona, his boyhood club, has quickly given way to the beginning of an exciting new adventure.

In it, he will rekindle his combination with Neymar, and Kylian Mbappe has also been thrown into the mix. These three put together are easily the finest attacking unit in world football, and promises to score countless goals.

As for Messi, it won't take him long to adapt to the action in France. After all, he has been there and done it with his all-conquering former team, expect now his mercurial talent is in Paris to stay. There is plenty to look forward to.

Messi is capable of playing anywhere across the frontline but may flourish in the No 10 position

LEFT WING - NEYMAR

Speaking in his first press conference as a PSG player, Messi openly admitted that Neymar was one of the main factors behind his decision to join the club. They wreaked havoc in their Barcelona days, and will now do so again.

'I know him well,' Messi said. 'We were apart before but I think we are better together. Neymar was one of the reasons I came here.' It is difficult to disagree. With the duo linking up sharply and at the top of their game, they are untouchable.

There is, of course, now the slight issue that Neymar is no longer the poster boy at the club. Messi has almost certainly taken that mantle. But if PSG were to win everything on offer next season, there will be no complaints.

Neymar has been partnered with Messi once more and is expected to cause havoc next season

STRIKER - KYLIAN MBAPPE

If there is one negative to take from PSG's summer, it is their failure to tie down Kylian Mbappe to a new contract. Speculation currently shrouds his future, and Real Madrid hold a strong interest in luring him to LaLiga.

Without the arrival of Messi, this looked as though it was firmly on the cards, perhaps even in this window. But now, with the superstar alongside him, Mbappe would be foolish to leave. PSG are on the up, and there is a role for him as their leading No 9.

Mauro Icardi is unfortunate to miss out, especially in light of his opening day goal at Troyes, but there is solely a reflection of the squad depth now available to Pochettino, rather than a criticism of his individual qualities.

Kylian Mbappe's future is uncertain but he would be foolish to leave now after Messi's arrival

Sportsmail has predicted this is how PSG might line up next season in their quest for trophies...

OTHER OPTIONS:

4-3-3: Donnarumma, Hakimi, Marquinhos, Ramos, Diallo, Wijnaldum, Verratti, Gueye, Messi, Mbappe, Neymar

Pochettino has begun the season with a rough 4-2-3-1 shape, which he typically also favoured at Tottenham, but it would be of little surprise to see him re-jig the set-up to put together Messi, Mbappe and Neymar as a three.

That would leave the back five the same, while Idrissa Gueye may come into midfield to form a trio with Wijnaldum and Verratti. Those in the centre would be tasked with ball retention, and feeding the ball toward into their attackers.

At the top, Messi might start out on the right, with Mbappe leading the way down the centre and Neymar on the left. The beauty of this is its unpredictability, with each of the players capable of switching roles with each other.

PSG could also opt for a 4-3-3 system, which would see Messi, Mbappe and Neymar as a three

3-4-3: Donnarumma, Marquinhos, Ramos, Kimpembe, Hakimi, Kurzawa, Wijnaldum, Verratti, Messi, Neymar, Mbappe

Also a potential option for PSG this season is a 3-4-3 formation, providing plenty of width, defensive support and the freedom for the front three to work off each other. It could very well prove to be a lethal concept.

Presnel Kimpembe would be recalled as one of the three centre backs, while Hakimi, in his favoured position, would start at right wing back. Kurzawa, perhaps a better choice than Diallo here, may play on the other flank.

The usual partnership of Verratti and Wijnaldum are dynamic and imaginative enough to make this work, and in front of them, Messi drifting in from the right and Neymar from the left is one of the finest sights in the sport.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The investment firm who bid more than £400million to buy West Ham have told the club’s owners they must consider selling up for the sake of the fans.

Sportsmail revealed last month that UK-based group PAI Capital had seen their takeover bid rejected by West Ham majority shareholder David Sullivan.

Sullivan claimed PAI had failed to provide proof of funds, but PAI refute this and remain determined to strike a deal.

PAI Captial have urged co-owners David Gold (L) and David Sullivan (R) to sell West Ham

PAI managing partner Nasib Piriyev claims Sullivan owes it to West Ham’s fanbase to sell his controlling stake in the club.

‘If Mr Sullivan does not agree to our offer, he has the full right to do so,’ said Piriyev, a West Ham fan.

‘Although I do believe any owner of a brand of West Ham’s calibre must also feel a duty to the community and fans.

Nasib Piriyev claims Sullivan owes it to West Ham’s fanbase to sell his controlling stake

‘Our business model will change the way the club operates. It will become part of a larger set-up which guarantees more sustainable development so we can compete for the top six every season.

‘What (Sullivan) can’t do is say that we are not serious. We will continue pursuing this opportunity and make our best efforts to get him to agree to our offer.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Premier League clubs have been blocked from using player lounges this season despite the re-opening of stadiums.

Friends and family gather in the boxes to spend time with their loved ones after games, in what is seen as a matchday staple.

The move to keep them closed has been made to reduce the potential of Covid outbreaks among squads as the League look to prevent postponements as a result of the virus.

Premier League clubs have been blocked from using player lounges this season

The majority of lounges in the top flight are in the ‘red zone’ areas of stadiums, which are to remain socially distanced until a review in October.

Stadiums can operate at full capacity, but some managers have told their stars to be careful when interacting with fans for fear of catching Covid.

Supporters could be subject to spot checks of their Covid status and will need to show proof of full vaccination or a negative lateral flow test.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is off the mark for Inter Milan as he nets his first goal in a friendly... but fans are left baffled by his strike coming hours BEFORE the club officially announced him
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ollie Robinson has urged England to capitalise on his late dismissal of Virat Kohli and fight back on the second morning of the second Test at Lord’s.

Robinson had India’s captain caught by Joe Root at first slip for 42, shortly before the tourists closed on 276 for three, thanks to a superb unbeaten 127 from KL Rahul.

Robinson said: ‘The plan for Kohli is to bowl a fourth or fifth-stump line, back of a length, and luckily it worked. They played well but to get that wicket at the end was huge and gives us momentum for the morning.

Ollie Robinson has called on England to capitalise on his dismissal of Virat Kohli on Day One

Virat is probably my biggest wicket to date, so I was happy with that.

‘It was one of those days where they didn’t nick it. There must have been 10 to 15 plays or misses, and we could have had them two or three down early. But if we get a couple of wickets in the morning we’re right in the game. They have quite a long tail and we’d still be in the game.’

In his third Test, and with Stuart Broad injured, Robinson opened the bowling for the first time and said he was undaunted by a long spell in the field. ‘In county cricket, you get two or three good batters,’ he said.

The tourists closed on 276-3 in a chastening opening day at Lord's for the second Test

Robinson will hope to lead the fight back for England on day two of the second Test

‘Here, it’s six or seven, but that’s international cricket. I’ve shown I’m ready for the toil when it comes. But credit to the Indians — they played well.’

Reflecting on the decision by captain Root to bowl after winning the toss, Robinson added: ‘Everybody saw how green the pitch was this morning and everybody here thought “win the toss and bowl”.’

Fellow paceman Jimmy Anderson, who passed a fitness test on a thigh problem, took the only other two wickets to fall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is off the mark for Inter Milan as he nets his first goal in a friendly... but fans are left baffled by his strike coming hours BEFORE the club officially announced him
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi will not feature against Strasbourg in PSG's first Ligue 1 game of the season but he will be 'presented' to the fans at half-time.

PSG manager Mauricio Pochettino said he would not rush Messi into action following his signing from Barcelona earlier this week.

As a result, the Argentine will be forced to watch on from the sidelines despite having completed training alongside his team-mates this week.

Lionel Messi will not feature against Strasbourg in PSG's first Ligue 1 game of the season

However, he will be 'presented' to the fans at half-time of their clash at the Parc des Princes

Pochettino said in his press conference: 'As for when we might see Leo Messi, it is his second day of training after a month since he played the last game at the Copa America.

'We will take it step by step, get to know each other and have him feel fit and comfortable so that he is able to make his debut when he is fully fit.'

Messi trained with his PSG team-mates throughout the week as they prepared for their first home game of the season.

However, the 34-year-old has not played a competitive fixture since winning the Copa America, his first international trophy with Argentina, in July.

Messi has been training with his new Paris Saint-Germain team-mates this week (above)

But, PSG manager Mauricio Pochettino (above) said he would not rush Messi into action

Therefore, Pochettino will not risk introducing Messi into the squad too soon as he will want to avoid any unwanted injuries.

So, for that reason Messi will sit patiently on the sidelines as he wait his turn to make his Ligue 1 debut.

However, according Sport, Messi and PSG's other new signing will be invited onto the pitch at half-tine to receive their first ovation at Parc des Princes.

Others including injured Sergio Ramos will be invited to join the Argentine out on the pitch.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Neville launched into scathing criticism of Arsenal's limp defeat by Brentford on the first day of the Premier League season, saying they were 'bullied'.

Mikel Arteta's team endured a nightmare start to the campaign in west London, having seen their defence horribly exposed against the top-flight new boys.

Sergi Canos pounced on slack work from Calum Chambers for the opening goal, before Brentford's second arrived when a long throw into the box sparked mayhem.

Gary Neville savaged Arsenal's display in their defeat by Brentford and said they were 'bullied'

The limp opening day loss to Premier League new boys Brentford saw the visitors criticised

And with Arsenal reeling from the early blow, Neville ripped into their players, highlighting their vulnerability and lack of fight at the back.

'They've been messed around,' Neville told Sky Sports. 'A game of football is really difficult if your centre-backs are getting messed around by the opposition forwards and that's happened from minute one tonight.

'There's nothing worse than thinking your team are a little bit soft. Brentford have looked at them and thought, "yeah, we'll have you", and that's the worst feeling.

Sergi Canos fired in to open the scoring and spark wild scenes of celebration in west London

Canos was afforded too much time and space by Calum Chambers and rifled in the near post

'Arsenal fans will go away from here tonight thinking "we've been bullied".'

Jamie Carragher, who was on co-commentary duties for the clash, was equally as critical of their performance.

'If you're taking the shirts off Arsenal and you were asking me "who will concede a goal like that?", the first team which would come to mind would be Arsenal,' he said.

During the coverage, Carragher had torn into the sloppy marking and weak nature of the visitors' defenders when Brentford doubled their lead to spark wild scenes.

Christian Norgaard arrived at the far post to meet a long throw and nod Brentford two in front

The long throw was allowed to drop towards the far post with Bernd Leno unable to race off his line, and Christian Norgaard arrived quickest to head into the empty net.

'How would you describe Arsenal's defending here? It's just Arsenal,' Carragher said after the goal. 'Weak, bullied. It's men against boys. New season, same old story.'

Arteta made no excuses post-match, having admitted that his side were 'not good enough' and were limp in front of goal

'I'm disappointed. It's not the way we wanted to start the season,' he said. 'We didn't start well, conceding a goal in an isolated incident.

Arsenal were outmuscled from the delivery into the box and Norgaard had capitalised to score

Jamie Carragher described Norgaard's goal as though it was like watching 'men against boys'

'We didn't cope well with the second balls or long balls. And that's all they needed to create problems for us. Then we conceded from a long throw.

'The biggest worry was our threat in front of goal. The amount of times we got around the box and got in great situations but it wasn't enough threat or shots on target. If you don't do that in the Premier League then you won't win.'

He went on to add: 'I don't want excuses - we missed players but I don't like to hide. We were not good enough to beat them. We did not do the basics.

Mikel Arteta refused to make excuses after the game and said Arsenal were 'not good enough'

'We have started in a disappointing way but we will review and speak with cool heads and try to put it right as soon as possible.'

'First of all, thank you because of the support that they are giving to the team, the travelling fans that were here. And after that, I apologise for the result and we know that we have to improve.

'We have two big games coming up right now and we need a different performance to get a different result.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Saints boss insists hard work is the foundation for everything he's achieved

The Saints became the first side outside of Glasgow to win both cups since 1990

Like most sports he turns his hand to, Callum Davidson perfected the art of topless belly sliding with effortless ease.

St Johnstone's Scottish Cup triumph over Hibs ended with the winning manager sliding shirtless through a lake of lager on the dressing room floor of Hampden, egged on by players and staff.

His teenage daughter Eilidh was more impressed by the hits the video attracted on social media than she was by her old man leading a football team from Perth to two major trophies in a season of historic significance.

Callum Davidson's celebration after his side won the Scottish Cup became a social media hit

St. Johnstone slip-and-slide They really should've opened the second door for Callum Davidson 😅 Posted by Match of the Day on Saturday, May 22, 2021

'I hadn't even had a drink,' Davidson laughs now. 'Not even a can of lager.

'A couple of boys were doing belly slides in the dressing room and they weren't very good.

'Steven MacLean said to me: 'Go on gaffer, show them how it's done'.

'So I told them to soak the floor a little bit so I could slide properly. I didn't want to stick on the floor and lose a layer of skin as I landed.

'So I went flying across the floor and straight into a door, which caused a bit of hilarity for everybody else. Not so much me.'

Davidson with the Scottish Cup after St Johnstone's 1-0 win over Hibernian last season

The floor was mopped up and players trudged up the steps of Hampden to pose for pictures with the trophy on the pitch. Trapped in a never-ending round of media interviews, the manager ran out of time to do the same. The moment was lost.

That's why he's now under pressure to cram the League and Scottish Cups into the car and grab some portraits before St Johnstone are finally forced to hand them back. The defence of the League Cup begins in Arbroath on Saturday.

'I've had a bit of stick from my family for not bringing the two trophies down to the house to get pictures done. I will have to do it soon or I'll never hear the end of it.'

The family struggle by for now with YouTube re-runs and grainy footage of the day dad went viral by sliding head first along the dressing room floor of the National Stadium like a Poundland Superman.

Davidson also won the Scottish League Cup after his side beat Livingston in the final

'I'm not a social media user at all,' he admits. 'But my daughter said to me: 'Dad you had 1.3million viewers'.

'It's the one and only time she has ever been impressed by me.

'Because I don't use social media, I didn't really know what that meant.

'So she had to explain to me: 'Basically loads of people have watched it'.

'And I'm thinking: 'Aw, great...'.'

Had he climbed back to his feet and fished a couple of salmon from the pockets of his sodden club suit, it would have surprised no one. 2021 has been that kind of year.

Davidson met his wife whilst baby sitting former Wimbledon champion Andy Murray

He scoffs at the idea that he comes up smelling of roses, whatever he turns his mind to. Yet the evidence is compelling.

A teenage tennis protégé in Dunblane, he was coached by Judy Murray, and met his wife while baby-sitting Wimbledon champions Andy and Jamie.

He played squash in a local league while passing his exams with flying colours. A Scotland youth international at golf, he agonised over the pursuit of a tour card or a career in professional football.

'I think out of eight players from my Scotland boys' team, seven turned pro,' he reveals. 'I was the only one who turned pro at football. And it was close, very close.'

Callum Booth and David Wotherspoon celebrate after clinching the Scottish League Cup

Weeks after he led the Perth side to their second Scottish Cup win in an epic first season in management, his irritating excellence peaked when he strolled on to the first tee at the Dunblane New Golf Club in June and started tearing the place up.

He smashed six birdies and an eagle. Seven under par after 10 holes, he carded a 62 in the qualifying round for the club championship. A bogey at the 15th — 'the easiest hole on the course' — rankled for a bit, but couldn't remove the sheen from a course record he'd finally pinched from his own uncle, Alec Wilson.

'I'd been trying for 25 years to do that,' he says. 'It was my best achievement of the year.'

There's laughter as he says it, but he might not be joking. In February, Saints won the Betfred (now Premier Sports) Cup for the first time in their history when they beat Livingston in the final.

Davidson celebrated St Johnstone's unlikely cup double at Dunblane New Golf Club

In May, they became the first club from outside Glasgow to win both domestic trophies in the same season since Aberdeen in 1990.

Both finals were edgy affairs played out before Hampden stands emptied of fans by a Covid-19 pandemic. When he stepped on to the course in Dunblane after an opening round of 70 in June, everything felt precisely the way it should.

'I probably enjoyed that more than either of the cup finals when it was going on because I knew I was playing well,' he says.

'Football is all about opinions and everyone trying to tell you how you played and how you should play.

St Johnstone became the first side outside of Glasgow to win a couple double since 1990

'With golf, it's basically just you against the course. And it was just one of those days when I was seven under par after 10 holes.

'It was the club championship qualifiers, a stroke play championship. I managed to beat the course record and break my uncle Alec's record. It was one of those things in the back of my mind that I always wanted to achieve.'

History shows that when the former Scotland left-back sets his sights on a sporting target he tends to reach it.

Despite a season of rampant over-achievement last time out, he still has ambitions he prefers to keep to himself for now. The relentless drive comes from his mother Maggie, the PE teacher who pushed him to win a place at Edinburgh University to study Civil Engineering in case his sporting ambitions came to nothing.

The Saints boss insists hard work is foundation of his success both on and off the pitch

She needn't have worried. If he hadn't won 19 caps as a Scotland left-back, you suspect he'd have found a way to lift the Claret Jug instead.

'People always said to me: 'You're good at stuff'. But I did practise hard. It didn't matter if it was table tennis, squash, tennis, golf or badminton. It wasn't just a case of turning up and playing.

'I practised the golf really hard. Football, I practised really hard.

'I had to work at it. I worked hard at school as well to get my results because that didn't really come naturally to me at all. I suppose I always thought to myself that I had a talent and I would be really disappointed with myself if I didn't use that talent to the best of my ability.

Galatasaray knocked St Johnstone out of the Europa League after a 4-2 win at McDiarmid Park

'My pals were going out for a drinking session and I would be practising golf until 9 o'clock at night, sometimes 10. I would go and meet them after. Most sports people who play at a good level have that, I think.'

The restless commitment to being the best he could be made it hard at times to switch off and watch TV. And the trophy-snaffling success of last season made it harder than ever over the summer.

Like everyone else he found himself asking a question in his head. Despite a decent show over two legs against Galatasaray, how on earth do St Johnstone maintain the standards of last season?

'When I was an assistant manager, I remember times when I would finish for the summer and switch off,' he says. 'This year was different. Being a manager with Covid issues and all other kinds of issues I probably didn't get any time to think.

St Johnstone started the new league season with a 0-0 draw against Ross County

'It was always about the next thing. Signing players, holding on to players, looking at potential players, training facilities, personnel problems.

'I was talking about this with my wife the other day. I probably haven't had a moment yet to sit down and consider what we did.

'When you go away on holiday you get away, you sit and do nothing. You read your book on your sun lounger and consider where you are.

'But with the pandemic and so on that became difficult and I don't know when I will get the chance to look back and reflect.

'Maybe when I'm sacked or in between jobs I'll take a bit of time and look back on what we did last season and decide it wasn't too bad...'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is off the mark for Inter Milan as he nets his first goal in a friendly... but fans are left baffled by his strike coming hours BEFORE the club officially announced him
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Having long complained about Steve Bruce's defensive style of play, Newcastle fans were left wishing for more caution after capitulating in spectacular style at St James' Park.

In an unexpected thriller, Newcastle raced into a 2-1 half-time lead with Miguel Almiron, Allan Saint-Maximin and Callum Wilson in fantastic form.

Wilson took just five minutes to celebrate wearing the club's famed No 9 shirt with a headed goal.

West Ham have got their season off to a strong start after beating Newcastle in a thriller

West Ham striker Michail Antonio lets out a roar of celebration after putting the game beyond doubt

Antonio had missed a spot kick for the Hammers in a back-and-forth contest on Sunday

However, Tomas Soucek was on hand to put the ball in the back of the net for the visitors

MATCH FACTS AND PLAYER RATINGS Newcastle (3-4-3): Woodman 6: Fernandez 5, Hayden 5, Clark 5.5; Krafth 5 (Longstaff 84), Shelvey 5.5 (Fraser 70 6), Almiron 7, Ritchie 7; Murphy 7, Wilson 7.5 (Joelinton 84), Saint-Maximin 7.5 Subs unused: Gillespie (Gk), Schar, Lascelles, Joelinton, Lewis, Hendrick, Gayle, Longstaff Goals: Wilson 5, Murphy 40 Booked: Almiron West Ham: Fabianski 6: Coufal 5, Ogbonna 6, Dawson 6, Cresswell 7; Rice 6.5, Soucek 8; Bowen 7 (yarmolenko 90), Benrahma 8.5 (Fredericks 88), Fornals 7; Antonio 7 (Johnson 90) Goals: Cresswell 18, Behrahma 53, Soucek 63, Antonio 66 Subs unused: Areola (Gk), Lanzini, Noble, Diop, Coventry, Baptiste Referee: Martin Atkinson 7 Advertisement

But West Ham, who qualified for Europe last season, are too good to be given the time and space Newcastle gave them in the second half, particularly in midfield.

Once Said Benrahma had levelled after 53 minutes — the diminutive forward somehow given room by three towering central defenders to head in — there was only one winner.

Michail Antonio had a penalty saved by Newcastle's debut goalkeeper Freddie Woodman but Tomas Soucek rattled home the rebound.

Antonio then got any personal frustration out of his system by belting in a fourth goal with real venom.

What had started as a party atmosphere on Tyneside, with £25million signing Joe Willock unveiled before kick-off, ended in muted fashion with a few isolated boos.

It was breathless stuff, with 35 shots produced by two teams who aren't regarded as great entertainers and haven't been busy in the transfer market.

The rich entertainment began after five minutes when Newcastle fans let out a roar that would have been heard down the A1. The creator was Saint-Maximin, who tormented Declan Rice on the edge of the area before dinking a cross into the six-yard box which Wilson headed in.

Wilson wore No 13 last season but took the centre-forward's jersey from Joelinton for this campaign, and his goal was one that past recipients Jackie Milburn and Alan Shearer would have been proud of.

West Ham soon levelled in confusing circumstances. Aaron Cresswell's low cross was intended for Soucek and Jarrod Bowen but ended up in the bottom corner. It was initially ruled out for offside, until replays showed Soucek hadn't managed a touch and Bowen's contact had come after the ball had crossed the line.

Callum Wilson got Newcastle off to a great start after heading past Lukasz Fabianski

The former Bournemouth man celebrates in front of Newcastle fans after taking the lead

West Ham levelled after Aaron Cresswell's cross crept into the bottom corner of the net

Jarrod Bowen appeared to make contact with the ball and the offside flag went up

However, VAR allowed the goal to stand as the ball crossed the line before Bowen took a touch

Bowen was denied putting West Ham ahead by a brave block from Woodman. At the other end, Lukasz Fabianski stopped a Wilson backheel with his legs and Almiron's deflected shot hit the crossbar.

It felt as if more goals had to come and Newcastle regained the lead after 41 minutes. Almiron fed Matt Ritchie and the Scotland winger chipped the ball across for Jacob Murphy to send a towering header into the corner.

To say he was a surprising scorer would be an understatement, having netted just once in his last 26 matches last season.

If the first half took some pressure off Bruce, the second period piled more on.

West Ham levelled when Antonio delivered a brilliant ball into the danger zone and Benrahma's peroxide blond connected from close range.

Newcastle went into the break in front as Jacob Murphy scored with a clinical header

The Englishman celebrates as St James' Park was sent into jubilation before the break

Said Benrahma was instrumental in the second half for the Hammers with a goal and assist

There was worse to come for the Gallowgate fans. Antonio thundered a header against the crossbar and from the rebound Murphy slid in and brought down Pablo Fornals. It was a disputed penalty award with Micah Richards declaring on television: 'That was never a penalty in a million years.'

VAR decided it wasn't a clear and obvious error by referee Martin Atkinson. Antonio stepped up to take the penalty and though Woodman almost made himself a hero by stopping his well-struck shot, Soucek reacted quickest to slam home.

West Ham's victory was then sealed with Newcastle in collapse. Benrahma ran deep into enemy territory and released Antonio. Though the striker's first touch wasn't great, his second was a thunderous shot past Woodman as if exacting revenge.

Belatedly, Bruce tried to change things. With six minutes left, he switched to a back four by sending on Sean Longstaff for a defender and adding the physical presence of Joelinton. But the damage had already been done.

The Algerian met Michail Antonio's cross to level the scores at 2-2 on Sunday afternoon

Steve Bruce cuts a dejected figure as his side failed to hold onto their lead in their opener

'Defensively we've got to be better. I don't think there was much wrong offensively but it is getting the balance right,' said Bruce. 'As soon as we had to chase the game, we left ourselves exposed and we can't afford to do that at this level. We gave away soft goals.'

Moyes was delighted by the contribution of the excellent Benrahma after an underwhelming first season with the Hammers.

'You can see his style changing. It can't always be the Said Benrahma show, it is helping the team that we are interested in.

'Sometimes it takes players time to settle. We are beginning to see more from him. I liked his goal but his pass for one of the goals was even better.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is off the mark for Inter Milan as he nets his first goal in a friendly... but fans are left baffled by his strike coming hours BEFORE the club officially announced him
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal and Sheffield United have held fresh talks over a deal for Aaron Ramsdale.

England stopper Ramsdale has emerged as Arsenal’s No 1 goalkeeper target this summer and the two clubs met on Wednesday for more discussions.

Talks are considered to be at an early stage with the two clubs understood to still be some way apart on their valuations for the 23-year-old.

Arsenal are in talks to sign England and Sheffield United goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale (left)

Ramsdale played against Birmingham in the league last weekend but not in Carabao Cup

Sheffield United want a fee in the region of £30m for Ramsdale who they signed from Bournemouth last summer for an initial £18.5m.

Arsenal are keen to keep their initial outlay down to fee in the region of £20m with add-ons pushing the deal closer to the Blades’ price tag.

Bernd Leno is Arsenal’s current No 1 after getting the nod over Emiliano Martinez last summer before the latter was sold to Aston Villa for £20m.

Leno has two years left on his current Arsenal deal and the Gunners have targeted Ramsdale as they look for a long-term replacement.

Sheffield United initially refused to consider anything less than £30million for Ramsdale

Arteta missed out on signing Ajax goalkeeper Andre Onana, who moved to Lyon instead

Arteta has made signing a new goalkeeper a top priority and were dealt a blow when Ajax stopper Andre Onana moved to Lyon ahead of north London for just £6.8m.

Arsenal were said to be considering a double-transfer from the Blades, buying both Ramsdale and midfielder Sander Berge, but it appears Arteta is focused solely on the England goalkeeper for now.

Arsenal's interest in the availability of France and Bayern Munich midfielder Corentin Tolisso may also be a contributing factor in Arteta's cooling off regarding Berge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@FIFA and UEFA have informed national associations that visiting fans will not be allowed to travel to next month's international matches due to coronavirus concerns.

European World Cup qualifiers will get underway in early September, less than two months after Italy beat England to win Euro 2020.

England are heading to Hungary and Poland as part of their Group I triple-header, with thousands of fans registering their interest in attending the matches in Budapest and Warsaw.

England fans will not be able to travel to watch the Three Lions play next month

But the Football Association has confirmed that there will be no visiting supporters following notice from FIFA and UEFA.

The FA said in a statement to fans: 'After extensive discussions with the relevant stakeholders we have received clarity from FIFA and UEFA regarding visiting supporters for our upcoming away fixtures against Hungary and Poland.

'Unfortunately, we regret to inform you that no visiting supporters will be allowed to attend either of these matches. As a result, the FA will not receive an allocation of tickets to sell to members.

'This decision relates to all the international fixtures taking place in September and will be reviewed again for the games that are to be held in October and November.'

Scotland also head on the road twice in September for World Cup qualifiers against Denmark and Austria, with Northern Ireland heading to Lithuania for a qualifier before a friendly in Estonia.

Less than two months after the Euro 2020 defeat, the national team will be back in action

Gareth Southgate's side will get back to work without the support of travelling fans

Wales have a qualifier in Belarus after a friendly against Finland, while Portugal host the Republic of Ireland in a qualifier.

In a letter sent to national associations released by the FA, football's world and European governing bodies outlined: 'FIFA and UEFA have been closely monitoring the evolution of the pandemic in Europe ahead of the UEFA preliminary competition matches for the FIFA World Cup 2022, taking place in the upcoming September international window.

'Due to the recent Covid-19 spikes in Europe, combined with the large number of matches to be played during the September international window, it has been agreed to apply the same approach as decided by the UEFA executive committee on 14 June 2021 to all matches (i.e. three match-days) of the UEFA preliminary competition for the FIFA World Cup 2022 as well as to friendly matches taking place during said international window, thus putting the safety of all those involved as its highest priority in these uncertain times.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Anthony Martial has revealed he remains 'a few weeks away' from full fitness but was delighted to get back on the pitch in Manchester United's 4-0 friendly win over Everton.

The 25-year-old has spent five months on the sidelines after picking up a knee injury while on World Cup qualification duty for France, which forced him to miss the end of the Premier League season and Euro 2020.

'I am feeling a lot better after five long months,' Martial told Manchester United's club website.

Anthony Martial has admitted he is still 'a few weeks away' from full fitness after his lay-off

Martial played his first football since March in Manchester United's friendly win over Everton

'Getting back together with the team and training with them again, I really feel a great improvement.

'I am going to need a few more weeks to reach my top fitness levels, and I'm really happy just now to have made my return to training.'

Martial finally got some much-needed minutes under his belt after starting the friendly and completing the entire first half, before being substituted for Juan Mata at the interval.

'To be honest, I was really happy to start (against Everton) after those long months without playing, it was tremendous to get back out there, especially with the fans and the win, brilliant,' he said.

Martial has been out for five months after getting a knee injury on international duty for France

'With the season I had last year, and the niggling injuries I had which prevented me from being at 100 per cent, I've since put in my best prep work, so as to be sure of coming back in the best form I can.'

Questions have been raised over Martial's United future, with the Frenchman likely Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's third-choice centre-forward behind Edinson Cavani and Marcus Rashford.

Martial has struggled to live up to the £58million price tag he arrived with at Old Trafford as a teenager in 2015, showing periods of brilliance but never achieving the consistency expected of him.

Inter Milan were reportedly preparing a £50million bid for Martial as a replacement for Romelu Lukaku, but the Red Devils have no plans to sell him.

Martial is the third-choice forward behind Edinson Cavani (left) and Marcus Rashford (right)

The decision is a significant confidence boost for Martial, who is determined to repay the faith shown in him.

'I hope I can get to my full fitness level as quickly as possible now, to set me up for a great season this time round,' he said.

'I hope to avoid injury, of course, and to be really ready and in top shape fitness-wise, to be able to have a great season, and win some trophies.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United have finally sealed the signing of French World Cup-winning centre back Raphael Varane.

The 28-year-old arrives from Real Madrid for £42million in what is a statement signing from United as they look to mount a serious challenge for the Premier League title.

He has signed a four-year contract at Old Trafford and will wear No 19 for United.

Varane was unveiled on the pitch at Old Trafford ahead of United's opening Premier League match of the season against Leeds, receiving a rapturous reception.

The French defender walked to the centre circle as he received the applause of the crowd and took a selfie with the Stretford End in the background, promptly posted onto Instagram.

He then walked over to embrace former United centre-half and BT Sport pundit Rio Ferdinand before returning to the tunnel.

✍️ He's here. It's signed.



Welcome to Manchester United, welcome to Old Trafford, Raphaël Varane! 👋



Even a hug for @rioferdy5... pic.twitter.com/XCMlSLtvKl — Football on BT Sport (@btsportfootball) August 14, 2021

Raphael Varane was unveiled to the Old Trafford crowd after Manchester United confirmed his £42million signing from Real Madrid on Saturday

The French defender received a rapturous reception from the Old Trafford crowd

Varane, who has signed a four-year contract at United, will wear the No 19 shirt this season

Varane said: 'Manchester United is one of the most iconic clubs in world football and the chance to come here and play in the Premier League is something I couldn't turn down.

'There is a lot more that I want to achieve in my career and I know I'm joining a squad full of great players who will all have the same determination to win matches and trophies.

'Having spoken to the manager I can see how much progress has been made over the last few seasons and I now join a group ready to play at the highest level.

'I want to make an impact here and I will give everything to become part of this club's illustrious history.'

Varane walked out to the centre circle before the Leeds game and took a selfie for Instagram

Solskjaer added: 'I'm absolutely delighted that we have managed to secure one of the best defenders in the world over the last ten years.

'Raphael is a proven winner who we have tracked over a long period of time and we know just how much of a dedicated professional he is.

'We have great depth of international defenders and he will add his immense skill set and leadership to that group. He is a unique defender with a rare combination of top-level attributes that I know will rub off on our younger players.

'He has won everything there is to win but I know that he is still determined to succeed, I can't wait to welcome him into the squad.'

Varane punches the aim to whip up the Old Trafford crowd as he returns to the tunnel

Ferdinand, speaking on BT Sport, said: 'He's played in 14 finals and won 14, so he knows exactly what he's doing. It's a big thing for Man United getting into situations when they're under pressure, they can look to this type of leader.'

Solskjaer had been coy about when Varane's signing would be officially confirmed during Friday's preview press conference, saying that his Covid quarantine had delayed the move being finalised.

And Joe Cole, also on BT, said Solskjaer's little deception had been a cunning ploy: 'Unbelievable reception. This is very smart by Solskjaer, when you want to get the crowd going, unveil a star like Varane.

'It's going to be electric the first 15-20 minutes of this game.'

Varane, who saw the move delayed due to quarantine restrictions upon arriving in Manchester, becomes the club's third addition of the summer transfer window.

Boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has already brought in winger Jadon Sancho from Borussia Dortmund and goalkeeper Tom Heaton.

Varane - viewed as one of the best defenders in world football - should have fans brimming with confidence that they are now equipped to take on the heavyweights of the division.

Varane emerged as a top defensive target for Solskjaer and he is now set to slot into United's defence alongside skipper Harry Maguire.

Varane arrives for £42m and brings international pedigree and an impressive trophy record

His move had been all but confirmed after United agreed a fee with Real Madrid last month, with the player undergoing a period of quarantine before completing his medical - and now he has been officially unveiled.

The player had already posted his farewell message to Madrid after ending a trophy-laden 10-year spell at the Bernabeu that saw him land three LaLiga titles and four Champions League trophies - teasing 'a new chapter begins'.

He said: 'The last 10 years have been amazing not only on an emotional level, a human level, but also a professional one.

He becomes United's third major signing of the window after sealing a deal for Jadon Sancho

'After 10 incredible and wonderful years at Real Madrid, a club that I will always carry in my heart, the day has come to say goodbye.

'Since I arrived in 2011, together we have exceeded all expectations and achieved things that I could never have dreamed of.

'Many thanks also to all the Madridistas who always gave me a lot of affection and with their great demand they pushed me to give my best and fight for every success.

'I have had the honour of sharing a dressing room with the best players in the world. Countless victories that I will never forget, especially 'La Decima'.

'Finally, I want to thank all Spaniards and especially to the city of Madrid, where my two children were born. This country will always be special to me.

The ex-Real Madrid man updated fans last week on his solo training regime in Manchester

The 28-year-old had effectively confirmed the move by posting a farewell to Madrid fans

'It has been an incredible journey in every way. I leave with the feeling of having given everything and I will not change a single thing in this story of ours.

'A new chapter begins...'

Solskjaer spoke about Varane's impending arrival last week and admitted the club had been keeping tabs on the Frenchman for a number of years - with legendary boss Sir Alex Ferguson pursuing him when he was a youngster.

'Of course very happy that we've managed to get a deal with Real Madrid,' Solskjaer said.

'The medical should hopefully be OK and he's a proven winner. He's a player we've followed for many, many years.

'I know Sir Alex (Ferguson) was very, very close to signing him, so this time around we've got him at the other end of his career.

RAPHAEL VARANE CAREER STATS REAL MADRID Appearances: 360 Goals: 17 Silverware LaLiga: 2011-12, 2016-17, 2019-20 Copa Del Rey: 2013-14 Champions League: 2013-14, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 FRANCE Caps: 79 Goals: 5 World Cup: 2018 Advertisement

He clocked up 360 appearances for Los Blancos, winning 18 pieces of silverware

'He's proved over his whole career what a good person he is first of all, professional and he's won what there is to win.

'First of all, the club shows ambition with one of the most exciting young forwards in world football and one of the most respected centre-backs in the world and one of the most winning centre-backs in the world,' he added.

'With him in of course we've got different ways of playing as well. I can see different ways of playing with Raphael. I can't wait to get him in. Hopefully we can get that sorted as soon as.'

'Raphael is into his prime as a centre-back. He's the same age as Harry (Maguire), a year older than Eric (Bailly) and a couple years older than Victor (Lindelof) so there I've got a fantastic group of centre-backs.'

Varane has played 360 times for Real since signing from Lens in 2011 - going on to win 18 pieces of silverware in that time.

He lifted the World Cup with France in 2018 to add to a fabulous collection of winners' medals across his career.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea evidently believe that Romelu Lukaku has become a far superior striker to the one who left them in 2014 and even to the player who departed the Premier League two years ago.

It explains why they have paid Inter Milan a club record £98million - just shy of the British transfer record paid earlier this month by Manchester City for Jack Grealish - in what amounts to a significant statement of intent.

Yet so many who follow the English game remain wholly unconvinced by Lukaku. Whether he likes it or not, the Belgian will have something to prove as he returns to these shores.

Romelu Lukaku completed his £98million move back to Chelsea from Inter Milan as he stands pictured with Blues director Marina Granovskaia following the announcement

Lukaku was all smiles as he holds up a Chelsea shirt after completing his move on Thursday

Lukaku comes back to Chelsea after a successful season with Inter Milan as they won the title

Not many £98m footballers have an asterisk next to a career record of 251 goals in 508 club matches, not to mention 64 in 98 in the international arena. Lukaku's career seems cursed by caveats.

A lot of it is explained by the superiority complex that surrounds the self-styled 'best league in the world'. If a player hasn't impressed in the Premier League, they somehow can't be considered world class, as though Serie A and elsewhere are amateur competitions.

Lukaku's very good scoring returns of 17, 15, 10, 18, 25, 16 and 12 in consecutive seasons in the Premier League with West Brom, Everton and Manchester United between 2012 and 2019 are conveniently forgotten.

Or they're quashed by the suggestion Lukaku is a 'flat track bully' in English football, unable to score against the big teams when it really matters. This lingering perception about his game that does at least have some basis in truth.

It was in 2014 that Lukaku left Chelsea the first time after failing to crack their first team

The Belgian appeared only 15 times in Chelsea's first team, spending much time out on loan

Just this week, two of the game's most respected pundits, Gary Neville and Jamie Carragher, added fuel to the debate talking on Sky's The Overlap podcast.

'There's something about Lukaku though, even though his goal record is amazing each season,' said Carragher.

'When we talk about a Robert [Lewandowski] or a Harry Kane or other strikers, there's never a question about them.

'But with Lukaku there seems to be that slight "but" to me. Just something that he still has to prove.

'It's not like he's got a lot of honours in his career or been that man who's taken someone to something like he did last season with Inter Milan. He was at Man United, a huge signing, but he never got across the line.'

Jamie Carragher says Lukaku still has something to prove at Chelsea ahead of his £98m move

Lukaku moved on to Everton, where he scored regularly in the Premier League for the Toffees

After a £75m move, Lukaku's time as a Manchester United player was pretty underwhelming

It doesn't help that Lukaku has commanded such enormous transfer fees throughout his career. They're almost at the £300m mark now but Chelsea will see their £98m as money well spent if they add the Premier League title to Champions League success.

They believe a player who scored 64 goals in 95 appearances for Inter, helping them win their first Scudetto in 11 years last season, has improved from the underwhelming figure we saw at Jose Mourinho's United.

Thomas Tuchel sees Lukaku as an upgrade on Timo Werner, a good fit into his system and a key component as Chelsea look to push Manchester City all the way in the title race.

Lukaku is seen by Chelsea as the player who can now step up and make the different in every game, scoring the winner rather than the fourth goal in a rout.

As Neville opined, you can't imagine Jurgen Klopp signing Lukaku for Liverpool 'in a million years' and you can't picture him under Pep Guardiola at City either.

Lukaku credits ex-Chelsea manager Antonio Conte with improving his game at Inter Milan

Lukaku ran to Conte on the sidelines after scoring in the derby against AC Milan in February

But Chelsea, who love that robust and combative centre forward in the Diego Costa or Didier Drogba mould? Absolutely. Just don't mention they let him go.

Confidence won't be an issue. Lukaku made clear during Euro 2020 that he does consider himself in that top bracket of world class strikers.

'When they talk about Lewandowski, [Karim] Benzema, [Luis] Suarez, Kane, they would say it's world class level and with me it's always being in good form,' he said.

'In the last two years I think I have shown it's not just good form. I belong with that group, I am at that level.'

Lukaku is one of just six players to have scored 10 or more league goals in one of Europe's top five leagues each season since 2012-13.

Lukaku with the Serie A trophy after his 24 goals helped the club to a first title since 2010

Flat track bully? Who Lukaku has scored against in the Premier League for West Brom, Everton and Man United 9 goals - West Ham, Southampton 8 - Crystal Palace, Sunderland, Bournemouth 7 - Newcastle 6 - Stoke, Aston Villa 5 - Liverpool, Swansea, West Brom 4 - Man City, Leicester, Burnley, Hull 3 - Man United, Watford, Reading 2 - Arsenal, Norwich, Fulham 1 - Tottenham, Chelsea, Everton, Brighton, Middlesbrough, Huddersfield Advertisement

He's in esteemed company with Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi, Lewandowski, Suarez and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang.

By the way, seven of those seasons were in the Premier League yet some argue those goals were somehow not important enough.

It is true Lukaku has scored nine Premier League goals against each of West Ham and Southampton during his career and eight against all of Crystal Palace, Sunderland and Bournemouth.

But for the 'flat track bully' tag he has also netted five against Liverpool, four against City and three against Man United. He has just the one against Chelsea and one against Tottenham.

It's only when you add in the number of games he's played against these leading teams you properly understand the accusation. Five in 15 against Liverpool, four in 14 against City, one in 12 against Spurs.

At the end of the day, it is in matches against these opponents that will decide if Chelsea win the title or not so there is certainly room for improvement on his record.

But more encouraging is how Lukaku scored big goals in important games as Inter won the title last season.

He scored twice and created the other two in a 4-2 win over Torino in November, netted the winner against Napoli in December, dominated Lazio with two goals and an assist in February and during the title run-in scored crucial goals in slender wins over Torino, Bologna and Sassuolo.

Lukaku also scored against Juventus, AC Milan and Roma during the course of the Serie A campaign.

Lukaku still has plenty to prove to an English audience and now has the opportunity to do so

Lukaku stepped up with a number of important goals during Inter's Scudetto-winning season

As it happens, Lukaku credits ex-Chelsea boss Antonio Conte for 'changing' him as a player, writing the now ex-Inter boss a heartfelt message on Instagram when the manager left in May.

It's also important to note that Inter's Scudetto was the first silverware Lukaku has won since the 2009-10 Belgian League with his first club Anderlecht.

Chelsea will hope the success has only whetted Lukaku's appetite and that Conte's work with him has sharpened an attacking edge and a sense of responsibility in the big games.

You sense it will take two or three 30-goal seasons and the Premier League trophy back behind glass at Stamford Bridge fur Lukaku to finally win everyone over.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chris Wilder is sitting on a bench by the practice putting green at Sheffield's Hallamshire Golf Club. The 53-year-old has the sun on his face and home turf beneath his feet. But what he does not have is a job and that is already making him restless.

'I wanted to be back in work by now and I am not and that's frustrating,' the former Sheffield United manager told Sportsmail.

'Right now I would normally be worrying about something — training or players or opposition. I am not and it feels wrong. I have done this job for 20 years and am full on in love with it.'

Chris Wilder is itching to get back into management after his Sheffield United heartache

Some managers leave a football club and look as though they need to lie down in a dark room. Others tend to bounce straight back up again.

'No, I certainly don't feel like a lie down,' laughed Wilder. 'My mind is busy. I enjoyed watching the football at the Euros and picking stuff up from that.

'And through working in the Premier League for two years I established good relationships with some top operators. They have all been in touch.

'I think they appreciated the job we did at Sheffield United so I appreciate those friendships and contact I have had from people like Jose Mourinho, Brendan Rodgers, Gareth Southgate, Pep Guardiola or Sean Dyche. It's helpful and lovely.

The 53-year-old left his boyhood club back in March, with the Blades bottom of the league

Wilder (left) says the likes of Pep Guardiola (right) have offered their support, with the Man City boss believed to have backed Wilder for a managerial vacancy this summer

'I have invites waiting to go and watch teams like Manchester City train and will do that. Ultimately, though, I just want to get back to work.'

Wilder held conversations with Fulham and West Brom over the summer and there was also a sniff from Crystal Palace. Guardiola spoke to at least one of those clubs, championing Wilder's merit as a manager.

Those positions were eventually filled by Marco Silva (once of Hull, Watford and Everton), Valerien Ismael (taken from Barnsley) and Patrick Vieira (previously sacked by Nice). It is hard not to wonder how such decisions are made.

'I think my CV stacks up OK, even though it has taken a bit of a hit this last year,' Wilder shrugged. 'Should applications for jobs be judged on what people have achieved? Yes, probably. If so, then I think I have a decent chance of getting a good job.

'But life isn't like that all the time, is it? So you have to get on with it and move on.'

Wilder is self-assured enough to be confident of his worth but sometimes it helps to hear it from someone else too.

Wilder held conversations with Fulham, West Brom and Crystal Palace over their vacancies

One of the first people in touch when he left Bramall Lane was Sir Alex Ferguson. The text the former Manchester United manager sent was long and has been shared only with Wilder's wife Francesca. But the gist was clear: be yourself and don't change. Guardiola has said the same to him in person.

Wilder will not shift from his core values but is keen to address suggestions he is stubborn and, in particular, that he would never work with a director of football.

'I don't survive for 20 years by putting guns to people's heads and demanding stuff,' he said, bluntly.

'I like to think I have had the finger on the pulse of my football clubs. That's a good thing, isn't it? I care. But it's never been my way or the highway.

'I am vociferous. I am full on and all in. But I work within a group and a structure. Ultimately, I have to be comfortable with players I am working with. Every manager will say that.

'But I am flexible, too. As long as we have a shared plan and strategy I am totally fine with it.'

The 53-year-old refuses to believe that United's unique playing system had been 'sussed'

Wilder also denies claims he is 'stubborn', but will not shift from his core values as a coach

Sheffield United will always be Wilder's club. He supported them, played for them and then took them on a remarkable journey from League One to the top flight in 2018.

In Premier League season one, he almost took the club in to Europe and even introduced a hitherto unseen tactical innovation to the top flight. Never before had we seen overlapping central defenders. All of which meant the decline of 2020-21 was as surprising as it was painful.

When he left — officially by mutual consent — in March, the Blades were bottom of the table. This is the first time he has spoken about it.

'There is a ridiculous amount of fight in me and what happened last season really hurt,' he said. 'I was never intending to leave, regardless of what division the club was in.

'There was stuff I could control that I will do better on next time and then stuff I could not control. Injuries, big moments we didn't take, Sheffield United supporters not being in Bramall Lane.

The Englishman says he will always fight his corner on certain matters, like recruitment

'I will always fight my corner on some things that happened, such as recruitment.

'Last season, some people said our playing system had been sussed. But then it was amazing how many teams played that three at the back system in the Euros, wasn't it?'

What, then, has he learned from the one big season of failure of his managerial career? 'In the latter parts of my time at the club, there was maybe a lack of communication between me and the owner,' he said. 'Maybe I needed to deal with that better.'

Wilder's management career started at Alfreton two decades ago. Since then he has worked steadily upwards through the divisions with Halifax, Oxford, Northampton and Sheffield United. He has always been a hands-on type. 'I have changed but there is still stuff going back to my early days that I rely on,' he stressed.

'You have to get close to your players and understand what makes them tick.

Wilder has taken time to reflect that better communication could have improved matters

'Team, together, work ethic, competitive, want to win, do your best every day, no day off if you want to achieve. Every one can say the words but it's the core that you rely on to win.

'It's important to learn and watch but it's important to have a gut feeling and go your own way too.

'I want to be hands on and improve players — physically, tactically, mentally. If I am learning from the top guys then that's what they are doing.

'Do you think at Manchester City's training ground they are just playing eight v eight and going home? Course they aren't. They are working bloody hard.'

Wherever he goes, Wilder will always take a bit of Sheffield United with him. Having left the club on a Saturday morning five months ago, he sat down and watched the team on TV with Francesca the very next night. One day — when his career is done — he intends to buy a ticket and sit behind the goal.

Wilder hopes to one day go back to Bramall Lane as a supporter cheering on his local club

'That bloke in the bobble hat,' he laughed. 'That will be me.'

But for now it's all about the next step. He has enjoyed his golf this summer and had a quiet week's holiday in the Balearics. Now he just wants to work.

'The hunger is still there,' he stressed. 'I would love to work in the Premier League again, whether it's starting there or taking a club there. I am not automatically expecting to walk in to a Premier League job as they attract world-class operators.

'The big-name guys I have mentioned have all had downsides in their careers and I think they all wanted me to know that.

'This is a period they have told me to try and enjoy but also use to get the most out of and make sure I come roaring back. I intend to do that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Carlos Braithwaite and co knew London Spirit were there for the taking. One glance at the table reflects a picture of trauma, and this Manchester Originals side were keen to keep foot on throat.

The more successful sides in sport do this. Seizing upon clear weakness is nothing new.

Captain Brathwaite and Colin Ackermann nearly ensured that continued as they combined to power the home side to the final five balls but ultimately fell short by six runs.

London Spirit finally won their first game in The Hundred after seeing off Manchester Originals

The West Indian all-rounder came out with some vicious baseball-like swings reminiscent of his dismantling of Ben Stokes five years ago in the Twenty20 World Cup final to smash three sixes and put his team in the ascendency after Ackermann crafted a vital 53.

It left Originals needing nine off five balls after he was caught off Blake Cullen’s bowling. But debutant Brad Wheal finished off a sterling match at the death to get his side their first win as he bagged four wickets.

He had only found out yesterday he was going to be playing but looked as if he’d been ready for this moment for weeks.

After clean bowling Phil Salt, he then landed seven dot balls in a row. Pace, accuracy and nerve — it won’t be the last we see of him.

Brad Wheal held his nerve with fine death bowling to clinch a six-run victory at Old Trafford

This tournament will still be one Eoin Morgan will want to forget, and the first points for his Spirit side technically didn’t come under his guise. He watched from the sidelines with a knee injury succumbed when batting, so it was Adam Rossington captaining on the field.

Morgan’s credentials as a master captain for the shorter formats are unrivalled; England World Cup success in 2019 and lucrative IPL contracts are just two examples.

But he has looked a shadow of himself in the Hundred and leaves a trail of unwanted statistics in his wake. Least points in the competition? Spirit. The team with the least wins? Spirit.

This symptomatic decline however goes back further. In the recent IPL earlier this year, Morgan’s Kolkata Knight Riders side finished 7th out of eight sides. He managed two wins out of seven matches. It’s a worrying trend going into a Twenty20 World Cup in October, and it remains to be seen what damage he has done to his left knee.

Tuesday night was another battle of the spin bowlers on a fizzing Old Trafford pitch. The tired surfaces of late summer have certainly shown a penchant for spin, and that continued here.

Spirit started in a familiarly poor fashion, Luis Reece bowled by off-spinner Tom Hartley in the first five.

Though his batting partner Rossington had learned from the previous top order failures of late and was belligerent.

After dispatching the 90mph pace of New Zealand quick Lockie Ferguson to the boundary, Rossington treated the other parts of the bowling attack with equal contempt.

Eoin Morgan's woes continued, though, with the England T20 skipper picking up a knee injury

It was the battle against leg-spinner Matt Parkinson that was particularly apt. The Lancashire man had castled him in April with a delivery pitching outside leg stump to hit off, creating a viral moment of embarrassment for the batsman; a snapshot of brilliance for the bowler and comparisons to Shane Warne’s ‘ball of the century’.

Here was a shot at redemption. Rossington initially took it with both hands to dispatch Parkinson for six on his first delivery before powering on to 46 off just 29 balls.

But as Parkinson has shown this year, luck is very much on his side at present and that continued as he pulled off an extraordinary one-handed catch jumping in reverse at short third man to dismiss his antagonist.

Brathwaite tactically had Parkinson and Hartley bowl in sets of 10 as the ball gripped and turned regularly— the pair shared five of the six wickets.

Aside from the opener, the rest struggled to get the spin bowlers off the square. Morgan again writhed with the bat and made 22. The team’s second highest individual score but not enough to lead from the fore in a line-up shot of confidence.

Spirit’s stand-in captain Rossington had clearly seen the spin extrapolated from the surface and solely used his slower bowlers for the first three sets of five.

It worked a treat in combination with some fine fielding. Mohammad Nabi had Joe Clarke caught by Mason Crane teetering on the boundary rope, and Ravi Bopara sharply dismissed at deep extra cover.

Crane’s leg spin proved a menace too as he picked up Tom Lammonby’s wicket and conceded just six runs per over.

It was debutant Wheal though who shone brightest. It was a brave decision for him to replace the experienced Pakistan paceman Mohammad Amir — who has performed woefully in the last two games — but it paid off in spades. His four wickets demoralised the home side’s batters as he kept striking just as the momentum looked to be shifting.

Ackermann did his best to pick up the mantle for Originals after the early crumble of wickets to act as an adhesive in the middle order with 53 before being caught off Wheal’s bowling.

Brathwaite applied the fireworks at the end with three sixes to nearly edge his team over the line. But it was not enough as Brad had a Wheal good game indeed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@BT Sport are set to win the live rights for this winter’s Ashes series having seen off competition from main rivals Sky Sports.

The satellite broadcaster paid £80million to land all Cricket Australia’s UK rights for 2016 to 2021 — which included Australia’s home internationals and the Twenty20 Big Bash League — and are understood to be close to extending the deal.

While the contract has yet to be signed, ECB sources have been told to expect the Ashes to be televised by BT, assuming the tour goes ahead.

BT Sport are set to beat Sky Sports to live rights for this winter’s Ashes series in Australia

As revealed by Sportsmail last month, several England players have expressed reservations about touring because of the Australian government’s refusal to permit their families to visit.

The ECB are sympathetic to the players’ position and have engaged the help of the UK Government in trying to win exemptions to Australia’s tough policy.

A number of players have told the ECB they regard spending a fortnight with their families around the Melbourne and Sydney Test matches over Christmas and New Year as their minimum requirement, without which they would be unwilling to tour.

While the contract is yet to be signed, ECB sources expect BT to televise the Ashes

BT Sport’s successful Ashes bid is a continuation of their recent move into televising overseas cricket, after they bought the rights to all of New Zealand’s and West Indies’ home internationals earlier this week.

England’s women’s tour of New Zealand was broadcast live in February and March, while the men’s Test series in the West Indies next year will also be on BT.

Sky Sports are sanguine about failing to regain the Ashes tour, given modest viewing figures due to the time difference. The network remains the only place to watch home Tests and one-day matches, while they share coverage of the new Hundred competition with the BBC.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The ball reared up out of nowhere on a pitch that had been dying by the over and penetrated an Indian wall in the form of Cheteshwar Pujara that had held firm against everything England could muster.

The extra pace of Mark Wood had provided the desperately needed breakthrough and England were suddenly, thrillingly back in the hunt for what would be an extraordinary victory.

At that stage of a slow-burning fourth day of the second Test, England had become frustrated and flat in the face of an old-fashioned display of application and sheer bloody-mindedness from Pujara and Ajinkya Rahane.

England are in control of the second Test after taking six India wickets on day four

Cheteshwar Pujara and Ajinkya Rahane frustrated England on day four at Lord's

But once Wood, stretching every sinew to bowl at a rapid pace on a Lord's surface that did nothing to help him, found the splice of Pujara's bat to send the ball into the grateful hands of Joe Root the game was very much back on.

And when it was quickly followed by another two wickets with a very old ball from Moeen Ali, back where he belongs in the Test side, England were firm favourites for the first time in a classic Test.

What drama there was on Sunday to follow Root's mastery on Saturday, from a superb first session for England to a battle of attrition won by India in the second and then a potentially decisive burst of three wickets in the third.

What a worrying sight there was the over after Wood struck when England's fastest, most fragile bowler tumbled trying to stop a boundary in front of the pavilion and damaged his right shoulder.

Mark Wood got rid of both of India's openers as England started strong on day four at Lord's

He returned after treatment and was ready to take the second new ball before bad light intervened but England reported him feeling 'very sore' afterwards. They will be holding their breath.

When play ended — infuriatingly and self-defeatingly, 26 minutes early with floodlights shining brightly down and spin on from both ends — India were 154 ahead with four wickets in hand and just the longest tail in Test cricket to come.

A thrilling final day, with Rishabh Pant at the crease and capable of providing one last twist against the second new ball, awaits.

This has been some comeback from the chaos that swirled around England's woefully under-prepared side before the Test to a first day when Root put India into bat and then saw them ease towards what looked a decisive 276 for three by the close.

Rohit Sharma (left) and KL Rahul both fell to Wood's fast bowling in an exciting first session

Towards the end of that first day Ollie Robinson gave England what looked nothing more than a glimmer of hope by dismissing Virat Kohli. The dismissal of Kohli was crucial again on Sunday after the indefatigable Wood removed openers Rohit Sharma and KL Rahul.

Firstly Rahul edged Wood tentatively through to Jos Buttler before Rohit pulled Wood for six but then, three balls later and with three men on the boundary, repeated the shot and saw Moeen take a good low catch at deep square leg.

Much depended on Kohli, who was his usual bristling self, exchanging sharp words with Jimmy Anderson and surviving a loud lbw call from Sam Curran that Michael Gough rightfully adjudged to have been going over the stumps.

But the India captain's need for a big score is becoming acute and he was unable again to push on towards the century he has lacked for over 18 months.

Sam Curran (left) then claimed a vital wicket in dismissing Virat Kohli to set Lord's alight

India captain Kohli then walked for just 20 when he edged behind Curran's ball to Buttler

He pushed loosely outside off-stump and edged Curran, England's least effective bowler again, through to Buttler. Cue a galloping 'lap of honour', Imran Tahir-style, from a delighted, relieved Curran.

That brought two experienced but out-of-form batsmen in Pujara and Rahane together for the stand that almost took India to at least safety. So desperately short of runs has India's old-fashioned accumulator Pujara been that he was conceivably playing for his Test future. So he dug in like rarely before.

Pujara received roars of support when he got off the mark off his 35th ball and when his 100th ball arrived with him on 12 not out. Rahane was a little more adventurous, but just 49 runs came in a middle session of 28 overs.

Crucially, no wickets fell between lunch and tea. And when Rahane was dropped on 31 low to his right by Jonny Bairstow, England must have feared the chance had gone.

That brought Rahane and Pujara together, with the former going on to make a half century

But the game changed dramatically with those three wickets for 20 runs, the falling of the Pujara wall to Wood being followed by Moeen finding the thin edge of Rahane and then producing a beauty to bowl Ravindra Jadeja.

It was all too much for Kohli, who started gesticulating angrily from the balcony for Pant and Ishant Sharma to get in the ears of the umpires and get the batsmen off for light.

What Kohli wants Kohli usually gets but Moeen claimed afterwards England were just as happy to leave the field early, with Root denied that second new ball, to avert the risk of Pant getting after his spin and that of the captain.

It ended the tense drama for another near full-house but it leaves the Test tensely poised. And Root in with a great chance of one of his best and most satisfying wins as captain.

But the duo lost their wicket in the evening session before Moeen Ali bowled Ravindra Jadeja
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jake Paul has described Conor McGregor as the 'most underpaid fighter in history' as the YouTuber-turned-boxer continues his campaign for fairer fighter pay.

The 24-year-old has only three professional boxing fights to his name but is already unimpressed with the amount of money some of the biggest fighters in the world are being paid.

Paul has teamed up with Showtime Boxing chief Stephen Espinoza to start his own promotion company, Most Valuable Promotions, as part of his quest to help fighters pick up the money they deserve.

Jake Paul (left) has described Conor McGregor (right) as the most underpaid fighter in history

Paul was discussing why he teamed up with Stephen Espinoza for his production company

And while McGregor was named as the UFC's highest-paid fighter of all-time in 2019 after picking up nearly £7.5million in fees, the YouTuber does not think that is enough for one of UFC's biggest icons.

Paul tweeted on Saturday night:'I partnered with @stephenespinoza bc (because) he created the biggest PPVs in history & made sure fighters got majority of the revenue... not 10% like UFC does.

'McGregor is the most underpaid fighter in history what he gets paid to fight versus the value he has brought to UFC, ESPN and MMA.'

Paul has accused UFC president Dana White (left) of stealing money owed to his fighters

Paul has called out UFC president Dana White before over the amount of money his fighters have picked up.

The YouTuber told reporters in June: 'There's a movement moving forwards that is going to show that fighters should be getting paid more. It's unfair. The UFC fighter's don't have fair pay. Out of all the sports, the percentage that the owners get versus the athlete, they're the lowest.

'Francis Ngannou vs. Jon Jones, that fight should happen. Dana White, pay them the $10 million. He's taking their money. They're the ones making the content. They're the ones who get in the ring risking their life.

'Chris Weidman goes in, snaps his leg in half, what's that look like? He may never be able to fight again and provide for his family. These fighters are risking their lives.

Paul says fighters like him and McGregor (above) risk their life by taking part in fights

'You can quite literally die in the ring and they need to be compensated more. I'm a big proponent of that movement and being in control.

'It's just like music labels, same thing, these artists are getting owned and get locked up into these s***** contracts and they don't know what to do. So f*** that shit. F*** Dana White.'

Paul, meanwhile, has drawn up a 'hitlist' fighters he is looking to take on, which includes McGregor, as he plots his way to becoming a boxing world champion.

The American will be in action on August 29 when he takes on one of the ten fighters in former UFC welterweight champion Tyron Woodley in the main event of a pay-per-view card in Cleveland, Ohio.

Paul shared a 'hitlist' of ten fighters he is looking to take on, which includes McGregor

Other names to feature on the list written on a whiteboard, which he shared an image of on Twitter, include McGregor, Canelo Alvarez and his own brother Logan.

Tyson Fury's half-brother Tommy Fury also features, and with a feud currently simmering between Paul and Fury, the Brit's name is written on the board as 'Timmy.'

Fury is also on the same card as Paul for the event later in August as he takes on MMA veteran Anthony Taylor on the undercard.

Paul's list features 13 names in total, including three fighters he has already defeated and crossed out including AnEsonGib, Nate Robinson and Ben Askren.

The list also includes MMA brothers Nate and Nick Diaz, although Paul appeared to indicate he would only want to fight one of the pair.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nine of the teams who were part of the ill-fated launch of a breakaway Super League have been welcomed back into the decision-making organization overseeing the European club game.

Six English clubs - Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United and Tottenham - will be members of European Club Association again along with AC Milan, Inter Milan and Atletico Madrid.

But Real Madrid, Barcelona and Juventus are refusing to giving up on the largely-closed breakaway competition to launch a rival to the Champions League, prolonging the rift with UEFA and their European counterparts.

Tottenham (chairman Daniel Levy pictured left) and Liverpool (owner John Henry pictured right) have returned to the European Club Association

Manchester United (co-chairman Joel Glazer) pictured are back in the ECA after the failed Super League project

Roman Abramovich's Chelsea have also returned to the ECA despite their Super League involvement

All 12 founding Super League clubs quit the ECA in April when they reneged on previous commitments to UEFA to launch the Super League. The nine now reintegrated into the ECA collapsed the project when they abandoned the Super League amid a backlash from governing bodies and supporters - particularly in England.

The ECA is now chaired by Nasser Al-Khelaifi, the president of Paris Saint-Germain, which never signed up to the Super League that collapsed inside 48 hours. The ECA said there was 'an exhaustive process of re-engagement by the clubs and re-assessment' before its executive board allowed them to withdraw their previous resignations.

'The ECA executive board took into consideration the clubs' acknowledgement that the so-called European Super League project was not in the interests of the wider football community and their publicly communicated decisions to abandon said ESL project completely,' the ECA said in a statement on Monday.

Arsenal, owned by Stan Kroenke, signed up to the European Super League before withdrawing

Manchester City (owner Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan pictured) are back in the ECA

ECA chairman Nasser Al-Khelaifi said there was 'an exhaustive process of re-engagement by the clubs'

Real Madrid, Barcelona and Juventus are all refusing to give up on Super League

'The ECA board also acknowledged the clubs' stated willingness to engage actively with ECA in its collective mission to develop European club football - in the open and transparent interests of all, not the few.'

The nine former rebel clubs have already agreed to a financial settlement with UEFA, accepting fines as an acknowledgement of wrongdoing for trying to split from existing competition structures. They made a combined payment of £12.7million (€15million) and will give up 5 per cent of revenue for one season playing in Europe.

In a move to prevent them deploying the Super League threat again, the clubs have also agreed to be fined £84.9million (€100million) if they seek again to play in an unauthorized competition or £42.4million (€50million) if they breach any other commitments to UEFA as part of the settlement.

Despite lacking the backing of their biggest European counterparts, Real Madrid, Barcelona and Juventus are still pursuing legal action to challenge what they called 'UEFA's monopolistic position over European football.'

They hope the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg will rule in their favor and permit the concept of a Super League not run by UEFA being explored by teams.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The most celebrated career in tennis history is hanging by a thread after Roger Federer announced he would undergo his third knee surgery inside two years.

The 40 year-old Swiss declared that he would be 'out of the game for many months' as Father Time appears to take him into a fifth set tiebreak that he cannot win.

After his capitulation in the Wimbledon quarter final against Hubert Hurkacz it can only fuel fears that he will not be seen again on the sport's biggest stages.

Roger Federer has announced he will be out of tennis for 'many months' due to knee surgery

The Swiss capitulated in the Wimbledon quarter final against Hubert Hurkacz (L) last month

It seemed inevitable that he would miss the US Open at the end of this month, but he was desperately keen to play in the return of the Laver Cup after a two year absence. The team event is the brainchild of Federer and his management company, and will take place in Boston later in September.

Now there appears no chance that he will play seriously before next Spring - if ever again in the sport's flagship events he has graced since making his French Open main draw debut in 1999.

'I'll be on crutches for many weeks, and also out of the game for many months,' said Federer in a post via his Instagram account.

There appeared to be hints that he wants to ensure good health for later life, as a priority over making some kind of competitive comeback.

It only fuel fears that the 40-year-old will not be seen again on the sport's biggest stages

'It's going to be difficult in some ways but, at the same time, I know it's the right thing to do because I want to be healthy, I want to be running around later as well again.

'I also want to give myself a glimmer of hope to return to the tour in some shape or form. I am realistic - I know how difficult it is at this age right now to do another surgery and try it.

'But I want to be healthy. I will go through the rehab process with a goal, while I'm still active, which I think is going to help me during this long period of time.'

This certainly signals the end of his participation in the three-way race to see who ends up with most Grand Slam titles, with himself, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic currently tied on 20 each.

It had already seemed inevitable that he would miss the US Open at the end of this month

Already there are significant questions hanging over the Australian Open in January with the current situation there. Restrictions on players are already likely, further reducing the chances of Federer wishing to play.

By the time the next Wimbledon comes around he will be close to 41, having a birthday on August 8. However, he would not wish his final appearance at SW19 to end up being July's 6-0 fourth set drubbing inflicting by his Polish opponent.

While his increasing physical problems are a blow for his Laver Cup project, the wider game of tennis will also shudder at the thought of his demise.

No player has attracted such a following from a wide constituency or transcended the sport like Federer, who has been a lynchpin of what will be looked back upon as golden age in the men's game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It felt like a state occasion. The police vans, the cordoned off roads and the hundreds of cameras feeding every movement to television sets around the world. The sort of ceremony reserved for royalty.

To the masses outside the Parc des Princes, every second of this was a coronation.

Lionel Messi only stepped on to the street for 60 seconds but that was enough for the thousands of fans to anoint him the new king of Paris. He walked a few metres out of his Mercedes van to wave, signalling the beginning of a new chapter for French football.

Lionel Messi waves to fans as he edged closer to completing his move to Paris Saint-Germain

The Argentine arrived to a royal fanfare, with his adoring fans chanting ‘Messi est Paris!’

Here he is! Crazy scenes in Paris! pic.twitter.com/L3fOsTzNVe — Nik Simon (@Nik_Simon88) August 10, 2021

‘Messi est Paris!’ they chanted. Flares were lit as locals climbed upon bins, fences or whatever they could find for a better vantage point.

The police even told children to move away from the front to avoid the inevitable crush.

‘This is the biggest signing we’ve ever made,’ said one supporter. ‘Messi is the best in the world. With Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe, we’re going to win the Champions League. Paris is going to be the centre of the football universe.’

Hundreds of fans waited for a glimpse of Messi as he touched down in Paris on Tuesday

Flares were lit as locals climbed upon bins and fences to get a better vantage point of Messi

The dozens of police vans and the cordoned off roads made it feel like a state occasion

That is exactly what it felt like outside the Parc de Princes on Tuesday. A suburb that would typically be quiet on a Tuesday afternoon was bustling with news crews from everywhere from Iran to South Africa to Japan.

Neymar appeared to confirm Lionel Messi will complete a transfer to PSG on Instagram

Opposite the stadium, the club shop had its busiest day of the summer. In the world’s fashion capital, that blue polyester top became the hottest item in town.

Although you will have to wait until Wednesday to have Messi’s name printed on the back.

‘We’re not allowed to sell them yet,’ said the shop assistants at lunchtime, as word got out about the new arrival.

‘Back together,’ wrote Neymar on Instagram, early in the afternoon, unable to keep the secret.

The club posted a teaser on Twitter, showing six Ballons d’Or in front of the Eiffel Tower and a space in the dressing room between Neymar and Mbappe.

As the news spread, the fans gathered. Many arrived in the morning and spent hours chanting his name before Messi turned up at around 7pm. The crowd grew from 10s to 100s to 1,000s as the rumours turned into reality.

There were Argentina and Barcelona shirts and even some from Rosario’s Newell’s Old Boys. One young couple from Holland spent the first day of their honeymoon waiting around outside the stadium. ‘Once we saw the news, we couldn’t miss it,’ they said.

Messi was all smiles on a private jet alongside wife Antonella as they boarded a flight to Paris

In the early afternoon, Messi was pictured at Barcelona airport with his wife Antonela and their children, Thiago, 8, Mateo, 5, and Ciro, 3. Antonela later posted a selfie alongside her husband as they sat on their private jet waiting to fly to their new home.

Messi was wearing an adidas T-shirt, but the next time he was seen after landing at Bourget airport at around 3pm, he had changed into a top with Ici C’est Paris on the front.

He was escorted to a local hospital for his medical before arriving at the stadium to a frenzy of screams, sirens and whistles. And then, in a flash, he was gone, whisked away to his new home.

The coronation was complete.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tyson Fury's positive Covid test has drawn more scepticism with one of his own sparring partners Michael Hunter claiming the situation seems 'fishy' because the Gypsy King 'wasn't doing too well' in his preparations for Deontay Wilder.

The British world champion was due to fight Wilder in Las Vegas on July 24 but their trilogy clash had to be postponed until October 9 after Fury contracted Covid.

Heavyweight contender Hunter was brought in for sparring sessions to help get Fury ready to face Wilder for a third time and revealed he was struggling in his camp.

Tyson Fury's positive Covid test seemed 'fishy,' according to one of his own sparring partners

Michael Hunter (R) was brought in for sparring and claimed Fury's camp wasn't going to plan

The American suggested something underhanded could be at play as he cast doubts over Fury's withdrawal just days after Wilder claimed he was 'lying' to buy more time.

Speaking to FightHype, Hunter said: 'We do know that he wasn't doing too well in the gym, but not enough to call the fight off.

'To me, it was kind of funny because, on the first day, they said, "Somebody on this team got Covid".

'And then the next thing we heard was Tyson got Covid. So I thought that was a little fishy.'

Wilder accused Fury of 'lying' about testing positive for Covid alongside a picture and video of himself hitting the pads with trainer Malik Scott

Fury has since hit back at his rival on Twitter, labelling him a 'real piece of work' and a 'p****'

A furious Fury hit back at Wilder last week after the Bronze Bomber said he is 'going to hell' for lying about having Covid.

In response, Fury wrote on Twitter: 'This man is a real piece of work. A real bully excuse maker. Not a warrior or a man at all.

'Beat the mug 2 times. I’ve battered him and his trainer. But still talking s***. Real p******.'

Speaking exclusively to Sportsmail last month, Fury insisted that he was 'the last person to blame' for the situation, and was adamant that he had kept his inner circle small as he doesn't favour a 'large entourage'.

But his promoter Bob Arum - who was under the impression that Fury was fully vaccinated - took no prisoners as he ripped into Fury and his camp for the 'f*** up'.

Fury's positive test meant his fight with Wilder subsequently had to be pushed back to October

Fury's promoter Bob Arum was furious with him and his camp, calling the situation a 'f*** up'

Arum said: 'He said that he got the first shot when he was in Miami and then he had to wait the two weeks.

'He didn't want to get the second shot because he heard that people had a reaction from a second shot and he didn't want to lose any training time.

'They told me he was vaccinated. I assumed it was two shots. Who gets vaccinated and doesn't (get the second shot)? He only had one shot. I never knew that he hadn't (gotten the second one) until he got sick.

'I really screamed at all of them. It was a complete f*** up. The people in the gym, I mean, we had no controls. It was like every sparring partner brought his friend. SugarHill (Steward) had these Russians (he trains) running around.

'There was absolutely no precaution taken, which a lot of it was our fault. We should have been the adult in the room.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mikel Arteta consulted with Bukayo Saka about signing Ben White, it has been revealed.

Saka and White were together in the England squad at Euro 2020 although White played no minutes at the tournament, depriving the Arsenal boss of seeing his top transfer target on the international stage.

According to The Athletic, he sought the advice of Saka, who brought back encouraging reports about the 23-year-old defender and led Arsenal to push on and sign White from Brighton for £50million.

Mikel Arteta (left) sought advice from Bukayo Saka before signing defender Ben White (centre)

Saka got to know White while on England duty at Euro 2020 and gave positive feedback

The report said Arteta ' checked in with Bukayo Saka to get the youngster's view on his potential new clubmate' adding that the midfielder's feedback was 'overwhelmingly positive'.

White has also been complimentary of the 19-year-old, saying in his first interview with Arsenal's website that he was 'really surprised how talented' Saka is.

'So I had a bit with Bukayo over the summer,' White said.

'I hadn't seen much of him before then and he really surprised me how talented he is.

'I didn't train against him a lot but some of the other boys did. He's so sharp and I was really surprised how good he is.'

White, who backed up his fine loan spell with Leeds with another impressive campaign for Brighton last season, is Arteta's third senior signing of the summer after sealing deals for full back Nuno Tavares from Benfica and midfielder Albert Sambi Lokonga from Anderlecht.

White was also complimentary of Saka, saying he was surprised how talented the 19-year-old is

'Ben is an intelligent defender who is very comfortable with the ball at his feet and his style fits perfectly with us,' Arteta said after completing the signing of White on Friday.

'And of course, he is still young, so his age and profile fits with what we are building here. We are all looking forward to Ben being central to our future long-term plans.'

White added he didn't need 'too much convincing' to join the Gunners.

'Obviously Arsenal speaks for itself and I spoke to the gaffer a number of times during the summer,' he said.

'I got good vibes and the way the gaffer wants to play, I think I can produce quality in this team and hopefully get Arsenal back.

'I've played in the Football League, I've played for a number of teams on loan and the hunger's still there. I'm really happy to be at a massive club like this and hopefully bring the level up of this team.

Arteta said new signing White is 'an intelligent defender and his style 'fits perfectly with us'

'When times get hard in games, I can step up and control situations. I'm very relaxed on the ball and through that I can produce quality in bad moments of the game.

'My main [position] is obviously centre back. That's where I've developed over the years. I've slotted into different positions to help the team and I feel like I can do that to help the team. If I need to do that this season, I'll definitely be up for it.'

White could make his first appearance for Arsenal on Sunday in a friendly against Chelsea at the Emirates Stadium.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ben White has trained with Arsenal for the first time following his £50 million move from Brighton.

White, who was a late call-up to England's Euro 2020 squad completed his move to the Emirates on Friday after he returned from holiday.

The 23-year-old has been given the No 4 shirt and could be in line to make his debut in a pre-season friendly against Chelsea on Sunday, and White revealed he struggled to keep the transfer a secret during the summer.

Ben White trained with Arsenal for the first time and could make his debut against Chelsea

White (left) with assistant coach Carlos Cuesta at Arsenal's London Colney training ground

'It's been a while, hasn't it,' he told Arsenal Media. 'Obviously I've known for quite a while and it's taken longer than I thought it would, but I'm buzzing to be here.

'It's been hard to not tell anyone to be fair. I told my family to keep it quiet.

'Even when I was on holiday I was getting asked whether I am or not. It was tough but I managed to keep it [quiet].

'I think [I found out] when I was with England, that's when it got a bit more serious. It was obviously nice to find out and to be here is absolutely unbelievable.'

White (left) trains alongside new team mate Emile Smith Rowe ahead of the Chelsea game

Arsenal finished eighth last season, and missed out on European football for the first time in 25 years. However, White is confident that he can help the Gunners have a more successful campaign this time around.

He added: 'I'm really happy to be at a massive club like this and hopefully bring the level up of this team.

'When times get hard in games, I can step up and control situations. I'm very relaxed on the ball and through that I can produce quality in bad moments of the game.

'My main [position] is obviously centre back. That's where I've developed over the years. I've slotted into different positions to help the team and I feel like I can do that to help the team. If I need to do that this season, I'll definitely be up for it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's back. Less than five weeks after the end of Euro 2020, competitive football is back on our screens as the Premier League returns this weekend.

And what a season it could prove to be, with stadiums up and down the country reborn with full terraces for the first time in 18 months.

That's not all there is to look forward to either. As the 2021-22 campaign gets underway on Friday night, Sportsmail looks at 10 reasons to get excited about the return of the greatest league in the world.

The Premier League returns this weekend and most stadiums will finally be full once again

1) FANS BACK IN THEIR NUMBERS

Let's start with the supporters then.

Though the final few weeks of last season saw a small section of fans return to stadiums, the Euros showed the very genuine effect fans can have on their teams.

With no restrictions in place, stadiums will be packed to the rafters again, starting on Friday at the Brentford Community Stadium when the Bees make their Premier League debut at home to Arsenal.

Would that occasion be the same without spectators? Of course not. The last full ground in the top-flight was Leicester's game against Aston Villa on March 9, 2020.

It's been too long.

Supporters will be back in their droves in stadiums up and down the country this weekend

2) BRENTFORD MAKE THEIR TOP-FLIGHT DEBUT - AND COULD THEY CAUSE A SHOCK?

Brentford are ready for this moment.

A club with an unusually prudent and statistical approach to their dealings on and off the pitch, the Bees have come close to promotion for years now.

Yet last season Thomas Frank's side finally reached the promised land, courtesy in the end of a 2-0 play-off final victory against Swansea.

They haven't gone mad in the transfer market either, with Kristoffer Ajer from Celtic their only major signing, as they look to Ivan Toney and Bryan Mbeumo to score the goals necessary to keep them in the division.

First up they host Arsenal, who seem under pressure before a ball has even been kicked given a poor campaign last time out - could we have a shock straight off the bat?

Brentford won promotion to the Premier League via the play-offs and host Arsenal on Friday

3) ENGLAND STARS SANCHO AND GREALISH JOIN MANCHESTER BIG BOYS

The two standout Premier League transfers so far this summer involve the Manchester clubs and two rising English stars.

For Jadon Sancho and Manchester United, it was a case of if at first you don't succeed, try and try and try again. After being pushed back last summer by Borussia Dortmund, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer finally got his man for £73m a matter of days after Euro 2020 concluded.

Jack Grealish's £100m English-record move to champions City took a little longer. But after a summer where he was put on a pedestal as the nation's great hope, the ex-Aston Villa captain now has a chance to prove his worth at the top level of European football.

Both are exciting, livewire talents who make things happen from out wide. It'll be fascinating to see how both adapt to their new teams - and which one hits the ground running quickest, starting this weekend.

Jadon Sancho (left) and Jack Grealish will both be looking to hit the ground running

4) WILL KANE PLAY AGAINST HIS FUTURE EMPLOYERS?

Harry Kane's future has been one of the dramas of this summer, with the Euros only delaying a problem which is still unresolved.

The Tottenham captain skipped training last week, though he denies otherwise, and could well feature in Spurs' season-opener this Sunday.

And who could that be against? Only Manchester City, the team heavily linked with a £150m-plus move for the England captain.

Will he feature against his suitors? For now, it is unclear. If he provides a negative PCR test on Thursday he would be eligible to train on Friday.

It could well be fireworks if he does play though.

The future of Tottenham star Harry Kane has been one of the transfer sagas of the summer

5) RAFA AT EVERTON - HOW WILL THIS ONE PLAY OUT?

After Carlo Ancelotti's somewhat abrupt departure to Real Madrid, Everton's search for a manager looked to be somewhat futile.

Enter Rafa Benitez.

The Spaniard, famous for his six-year stint at Liverpool which included that memorable 2005 Champions League triumph, stunned just about everyone on Merseyside by taking the top job with the Toffees.

And by the look of things, he'll have to work hard to convince the Goodison faithful he's the right man for the job. A win at home to Southampton on Saturday would be a good start.

Former Liverpool manager Rafa Benitez took over at rivals Everton in a surprise appointment

6) SEASON NO 3 FOR ARTETA AT ARSENAL - AND THE CAMERAS ARE ROLLING...

The pressure is on Mikel Arteta from the get-go this season.

While an FA Cup triumph in a Covid-affected 2019-20 cut him some slack for a poor league finish, there was not much excuse in the last campaign - and no successful cup run to hide behind.

What's more, this season Arsenal have agreed to be recorded behind the scenes in the Amazon 'All or Nothing' series, which chronicled Jose Mourinho's first season at rivals Tottenham.

If that series is anything to go by, this one could be even more dramatic at the Emirates.

Arteta has a tough start too, with Chelsea, Man City and Spurs in his first six games. It could go some way to setting the tone for the rest of the campaign.

It is a big season for Mikel Arteta at Arsenal - and all-access cameras will capture everything

7) NINE SUBS ON THE BENCH - TAKE YOUR PICK GAFFER!

The Premier League announced this week that they would increase the amount of substitutes available to a manager on a matchday from seven to nine, increasing matchday squads from 18 to 20.

But, unlike European competition where bosses can make five subs, it'll still only be three in the Premier League, plus two concussion substitutes if needed.

Yet the choice available can only be a good thing as managers look for more ways to change a game.

It'll likely favour the top teams with bigger squads - but should also present more opportunities to young players on the fringes throughout the league.

The Premier League announced this week that they would increase the amount of substitutes available to a manager on a matchday from seven to nine to take the total squad up to 20

8) VIEIRA TO PROVE THE DOUBTERS WRONG AT CRYSTAL PALACE?

There's always a sense of genuine intrigue when former world class players are handed a crack of the whip in the Premier League - and this season is no different.

Patrick Vieira's appointment as Crystal Palace manager took many by surprise - and not in a good way. The ex-Arsenal captain's record in previous jobs at New York City FC and Nice is underwhelming.

Yet he has spent big, signing centre backs Marc Guehi and Joachim Andersen for a combined outlay of £36.75m, while impressive Chelsea midfielder Conor Gallagher has joined on loan.

Who knows, Vieira might just shock a few onlookers.

Patrick Vieira's appointment as Crystal Palace manager this summer took many by surprise

9) CAN THE KINGS OF EUROPE THREATEN CITY... EVEN WITH LUKAKU?

Chelsea are flying high at the moment. A stunning end to last season secured them a famous Champions League triumph, while they added another trophy to the cabinet with the UEFA Super Cup on Wednesday night.

Oh, and Romelu Lukaku is set to return for £98.5m. So, can they challenge and maybe even dethrone Manchester City after their sumptuous title triumph last season?

In head-to-head, Chelsea have the edge. But whether they can get maximum points week-in week-out is another attribute altogether.

Thomas Tuchel has assembled a terrific squad - now it's time for them to make history on the domestic front.

Chelsea won the UEFA Super Cup on Wednesday night after beating Villarreal in Belfast

10) THE 3PM BLACKOUT RETURNS - GET SOCCER SATURDAY BACK ON!

OK, so some people will see the removal of every Premier League game from their television screens as a negative.

But, in reality, does every single match need air-time?

The 3pm UK TV blackout returns this season, bringing back to prominence Jeff Stelling and his team on Soccer Saturday after something of a redundant role last campaign, with usually just one or two top-flight games at 3pm on a Saturday.

It should give more weight to Match of the Day on a Saturday night too. More than anything, it will feel like a return to normality - something we've all been crying out for since the start of this pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Double Olympic gold medallist Lamont Marcell Jacobs will not compete again this year, with his manager insisting the break is down to fatigue.

When asked by a follower on his Instagram profile when he would compete again, the 26-year-old Italian sprinter replied: '2022'.

At the Tokyo Olympics, Jacobs became the first Italian to win 100 metres gold and was part of his country's triumphant 4x100 metres relay team.

Lamont Marcell Jacobs wants to avoid a case of post-Olympic fatigue turning into injuries

Jacobs' manager, Marcello Magnani, said there were no injuries or other health reasons behind his decision to take a break.

'It is simply that Marcell has given so much this year, all he had, so to insist (on competing) would only mean risking an injury,' he added.

There are five Diamond League events left in the season — including the two-day finale in Zurich on September 8-9 — and Jacobs was due to compete in Eugene, Oregon, next weekend.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain may have added 'superhuman' Lionel Messi to their squad but Thierry Henry has warned them it is not enough if they want to challenge for trophies this season.

Henry insisted Mauricio Pochettino's side need to improve defensively to win trophies on both domestic and European fronts.

Messi joined PSG's attacking ranks last week, arriving on a free transfer after his shock exit from Barcelona but Henry claimed that 'balance is most important' if they want to be silverware contenders.

Thierry Henry claimed that Lionel Messi's arrival at PSG won't be enough to secure trophies

'Balance is the most important. At one point, we always talk about great players, attacking, going forward, but we need a balance,' the former France forward told Dimanche Soir Foot on Amazon Prime.

'We are talking about the team in which I played at Barca, but people forget to point out that we weren't conceding a lot of goals.

'In general, teams that don't concede a lot of goals are not far from the title, or even from the Champions League.

'When you have superhuman players, it gets a little easier but when I see how Paris is evolving at the moment, they concede too many goals for my taste to be able to go a little further. It is true that there was a lack of players but the balance is the most important.'

Messi joined PSG after his 21-year career at the Nou Camp came to an unexpected end

The 34-year-old has reunited with former teammate Neymar at the Parc des Princes

Messi will link up with France starlet Kylian Mbappe and former Barcelona teammate Neymar to create one of Europe's most threatening frontlines.

Neymar and Messi struck up a great relationship when the former joined the Blaugrana in 2013, winning eight trophies across four years together but were separated by the Brazilian's a world-record €222m move to PSG in 2017.

While Mbappe has developed into one of the greatest attacking talents of his generation.

However, the all-star attacking trident, dubbed MNM, could have a short lived spell together at the Parc des Princes as Mbappe is reportedly 'concerned' over the arrival of Messi.

Rumours over Mbappe's future at the club have been swirling all summer long, despite the speculation being overshadowed by the unveiling of Messi.

Real Madrid intend to submit a £100million offer for Mbappe who scored on Saturday

The 22-year-old has yet to commit to an extension on his contract that expires 10 months from now.

According to La Gazzetta dello Sport, Messi penning his deal has irked Mbappe, who now fears that he will be thrust into the shadow of his two illustrious partners.

La Liga giants Real Madrid, who have long been touted as potential suitors, reportedly intend to submit a £100m offer for Mbappe.

Spanish newspaper Marca said on their front cover on Monday that Real were entering the 'final stretch' of their long bid to sign the 22-year-old phenomenon.

Now, Henry claimed big-money additions won't solve problems on the pitch either.

Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Georginio Wijnaldum and Achraf Hakimi joined PSG

The former Blaugrana star expressed his concerns following PSG's victory over Strasbourg on Saturday, which saw them concede twice in a six goal 4-2 thriller.

PSG lost their Ligue 1 crown last season after Lille unexpectedly triumphed but after a continued stream of new signings this summer Pochettino will be hoping silverware is inevitable this season.

The Parisian side conceded 28 goals in their 2020-21 Ligue 1 campaign leading to the addition of Real Madrid veteran Sergio Ramos to their defensive unit this summer.

Ramos joined Gianluigi Donnarumma and Georginio Wijnaldum on free transfers, while Achraf Hakimi was brought in for £54m from Inter Milan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marcus Rashford has successfully undergone surgery on a long-standing surgery injury ahead of the new Premier League season.

The Manchester United striker returned home from hospital on Tuesday and gave fans an update on his latest situation via social media.

Rashford published a photo of himself looking happy and healthy at home, beaming into the camera with his left shoulder heavily padded up following the op.

Marcus Rashford has confirmed that 'everything went well' following his shoulder surgery

Rashford had been struggling with an issue after sustaining a muscle tear back in November

Adding a supplementary caption, Rashford wrote: 'Thank you for all the well wishes. I had my surgery on Friday morning and everything went very well.

'A little sore but other than that I’m feeling good. Hope you’re all having a great day!'

In late July it was confirmed that Rashford would be going under the knife following a short holiday and rest away from football, after struggling with an ongoing issue after suffering a muscle tear in November.

United were hoping that a three-week break after Euro 2020 would ease the problem

However, he returned from a holiday feeling an operation was still the best course of action

The forward was part of Gareth Southgate's England squad for the European Championships, though found his game time limited.

Following the tournament - in which the he missed a penalty against Italy in the Wembley final - Rashford released a statement in which he admitted he struggled last season both on and off the pitch.

Rashford had a scan on the shoulder in Liverpool last month which revealed that the muscle tear is unlikely to get any worse. However, he wanted the problem cured once and for all after requiring painkilling injections to play last season.

The forward is optimistic of getting back onto the pitch by October, though is set to miss a chunk of United's fixtures in the opening months of the campaign.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Everton held a commencement ceremony to mark the start of work beginning on their new £500million stadium.

The club were given the all clear to build the stadium, which will be housed on the Bramley-Moore dock site, by the Government and Liverpool City Council earlier this year.

An Everton-branded excavator was used to mark the 'momentous day' of work commencing and now the plan is to have the waterfront home ready ahead of the 2024-25 season.

'This is a momentous day. One that we have all been waiting for,' chairman Bill Kenwright said.

Work has finally commenced on Everton's new £500million stadium as a ceremony was held

Everton are looking to build a 53,000-seater stadium on the Bramley-Moore dock site

'To know that Evertonians and the people of this great city are together with us on this journey is a special feeling.

'Now that the work has commenced we can all watch our magnificent home as it comes to life.

Everton's chief executive Denise Barrett-Baxendale and Players' Life President Graeme Sharp also attended the ceremony to mark the start of a new era for the club.

The first phase of construction involves preparing the dock for the build, including repair and preservation of the Grade II listed dock wall and demolition of non-listed structures.

Once that is completed, contractors Laing O'Rourke will begin the process of infilling the dock.

A commencement ceremony to mark the first breaking of ground is traditional in development projects such as this and forms part of the required enabling works to the eastern quayside, which will eventually become home to the Fan Plaza – an area that could welcome as many as 9,000 fans on matchdays.

Other key works in this early phase will see Everton look to stabilise the listed hydraulic tower and the demolition of existing non-listed structures. Pipework is also being laid.

It is anticipated the project will create close to 12,000 jobs.

A new website is to be launched to allow fans to track the construction process of the ground

The club say the new site will help regenerate the semi-derelict area of the city's docks

The stadium is expected to cost around £500m and will have a capacity of 52,888 - nearly 13,000 more than Goodison Park, their home since its construction in 1892.

In a bid to keep fans up to date on the stadium development now construction is underway, a new website is due to be launched in the coming weeks.

The site will offer fans the latest news and information about progress on the Bramley-Moore Dock site as well as provide the option to view activity on-site through an installed webcam.

Barrett-Baxendale added: 'Breaking ground is a significant milestone for this project, for our football club and our city region.

'It is a tangible symbol of Everton's future and a clear signal of our club's ambitions.'

The site is based on the derelict area of the the city's northern docklands at Bramley-Moore
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hundreds of excited Paris Saint-Germain fans are waiting outside the Parc des Princes and one of the city's airports in order to catch the first glimpse of Lionel Messi.

After a tearful farewell to Barcelona on Sunday, the Argentine superstar is expected in the French capital to capital to complete his transfer to PSG in the next few days.

But they could be in for a long wait with Messi filmed on Monday wearing swimming trunks by the pool at his house in Barcelona.

Messi, 34, didn't confirm he was about to sign for the French club in Sunday's press conference but newspaper L'Equipe said he was set for a medical in Paris on Monday and to finalise terms.

Excited Paris Saint-Germain fans gathered outside the Parc des Princes on Monday as they await the arrival of Argentine superstar Lionel Messi

Messi is expected to arrive in Paris on Monday to finalise his move after leaving Barcelona

Fans waited all day on Monday outside the club's Parc des Princes stadium in anticipation

Another crowd of fans and media waited at Le Bourget Airport in the north of Paris for Messi

Fans were also outside Messi's house in Barcelona on Monday, where the player was filmed walking by the pool in swimming shorts

It has prompted many PSG fans to gather at the entrance of their team's stadium, under tight security from police officers and stewards, and at Le Bourget Airport north of the city. The airport is typically used for private jet and business flights.

PSG fan Mehmet Sen, who had been waiting at the gates of the airport since 2am, said: 'We're waiting for a legend, the legend that is Leo Messi.'

Fans also thronged the airport on Sunday night after a false rumour spread that Messi was due to arrive. But the large crowd chanting 'Messi, Messi' was left disappointed because the player was still in Barcelona.

That appeared to still be the case on Monday with the media assembled outside his house capturing a glimpse of him walking by the pool in swimming trunks.

He held an emotional press conference on Sunday morning, explaining he didn't want to leave the Nou Camp but Barcelona's crippled finances pushed him out.

PSG can sign Messi on a free transfer because his Barcelona contract had expired but he is reportedly set to earn enormous wages of £570,000-a-week.

Messi broke down in tears before he even got to his goodbye speech at the Nou Camp

Fans prepare to welcome Messi to Paris Saint-Germain with the Argentine's arrival imminent

He is set to be reunited with former Barcelona team-mate Neymar and also play alongside the exciting French forward Kylian Mbappe.

While the mood in Paris was giddy with excitement, Barcelona fans who gathered outside Messi's house were distinctly downbeat.

One Barca member even went as far as to file legal complaints with a French court and the European Commission to block PSG's move.

Juan Branco confirmed the complaint on Twitter on Sunday night by tweeting a statement that read: 'In the name of the 'socios' of Barcelona, my firm has prepared a complaint with the European Commission and demands for provisional suspension before civil and administrative courts in France to prevent Paris-Saint Germain from signing Lionel Messi.

Fans outside Le Bourget Airport in anticipation Messi will arrive there sometime on Monday

Fans were determined to be on the front row to get a glimpse of Messi when he arrives at PSG

Security was tight outside the Parc des Princes with police guarding the main entrance

'PSG's ratios in terms of 'Financial Fair Play' are worse than those of FC Barcelona.

'In 2019-2020, PSG's salary-to-income ratio was 99 per cent, while Barcelona's was 54 per cent. Meanwhile, the difference has increased.

'It is inconceivable that the 'Financial Fair Play' serves to aggravate the drifts of football-business, the instrumentalisation of football by sovereign powers, and the distortion of competitions.'

According to Marca , PSG will fall foul of FFP with the signing of Messi and Barcelona couldn't renew the star's contract because even after a 50 per cent pay cut, the club's wage bill would be 110 per cent of cap imposed by LaLiga.

In a document posted by Juan Branco, he confirmed the 'socios' are looking to stop the move

Messi, who also confirmed he had offered to take a 50 per cent pay cut to continue a period of service which brought 672 goals in 778 appearances, said: 'This is what Laporta said right up until the last minute, and because of everything with the league, it suddenly couldn’t happen.

'There’s nothing more to tell. Anything else, I can’t say. What’s clear is that I did everything possible; the club, Laporta, they couldn’t do it because of LaLiga.

'I’ve heard a lot of things said about me, that I didn’t want to continue, but on my behalf, we did everything we could because I wanted to stay.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivier Giroud's £1.7million move to AC Milan was considered a bargain by many and the former Chelsea striker is already showing his former employees what they're missing after a goal four minutes into his debut.

The Frenchman joined the Rossoneri two weeks ago and scored 39 goals in 119 games for the Blues after moving there from Arsenal in January 2018.

Stefano Pioli's men lined up for a pre-season friendly at the Allianz Riviera on Saturday against Nice as they work up to their Serie A opener on August 23.

Substitute Olivier Giroud got off the mark four minutes into his debut with his first touch

Giroud played the last half an hour as AC Milan drew 1-1 with Nice at the Allianz Riviera

Their French hosts took the lead on 58 minutes after Dan Ndoye was adjudged to have been clipped in the box by Rade Krunic, with Amine Gouiri slamming his penalty down the middle just past the dive of Ciprian Tatarusanu.

However, after coming on just after the hour mark for Rafael Leao, Giroud leapt above his marker to head home Samu Castillejo's inviting free kick with his first touch after Krunic had been fouled, ironically by Ndoye.

That was how the game stayed as Milan step up their league preparations over the next week against LaLiga opposition in Valencia and Real Madrid.

The Frenchman left Chelsea last month and ended his spell with Champions League glory

August 14 then sees Pioli's side face Panathinaikos in Trieste before they kick off their domestic campaign at Sampdoria.

Milan have qualified for the group stage of the Champions League after finishing second last season behind city rivals Inter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stuart Broad has been ruled out for the rest of England's summer with a torn calf.

The 35-year-old was due to win his 150th Test cap against India at Lord's but the chances of him making a landmark appearance at the world's most famous ground disappeared when he injured himself during training in the build-up.

The grade three tear will keep Test cricket's sixth most prolific bowler in history sidelined for between 10-12 weeks.

Stuart Broad has torn his calf and will miss the rest of England's Test series against India

Broad posted a picture of his leg in a cast on Instagram as he begins his road to recovery

That should see Broad back to bowling at full capacity by early November, the month in which the Test specialists are due to travel to Australia for the Ashes.

He was struggling to put weight through his right leg on Wednesday when he was dispatched for scans on both his calf and Achilles.

Broad jumped over a hurdle in practice on Tuesday and twisted his ankle upon landing. He then felt a whip-like sensation on the back of the leg when he made his next step and turned around to discover no-one was near him.

'England seamer Stuart Broad has sustained a tear to his right calf and has been ruled out of the LV= Insurance Test series against India,' read a statement from the ECB. 'He underwent an MRI scan in London on Wednesday lunchtime, which revealed a tear.'

Broad celebrates taking the wicket of KL Rahul during the first Test draw at Trent Bridge

The bowler took to Instagram to wish his team-mates luck as he begins his road to recovery.

He said: 'Things can change so quickly. A moment before training all smiles then during the warm up, I jumped a hurdle, landed a bit awkwardly on my right ankle then the next step felt like I’d been whipped by a rope as hard as you can imagine on the back of my leg. I actually turned to @jimmya9 & asked why he whipped me!

'But when I realised he was no where near me I knew I was in trouble. Scans say grade 3 calf. All so innocuous. Season over & gutted to miss this India Test Series but a huge focus on Australia now. Going to take my time, no rush, baby steps & be the fittest I can be heading out there. Big focus in my brain.

The fast bowler felt pain in his calf after twisting his ankle while jumping over hurdles

'Good luck to the @englandcricket boys this week. I’ll be watching every ball from my sofa hoping to see runs & wickets in the glorious Lord’s sunshine!'

Broad's injury lengthens England's list of missing pace bowlers just a fifth of the way into the series against Virat Kohli's team.

Jofra Archer and Olly Stone, two of the three 90-mile-per-hour merchants in the ECB's armoury, have been sidelined until 2022 with stress fractures of the elbow and back respectively while all-rounder Ben Stokes will not be back by the time the India series concludes in mid- September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Angel Di Maria has admitted that being able to play alongside Lionel Messi at Paris Saint-Germain next season is what he has 'always wanted' - and also insisted Kylian Mbappe will stay at the club.

Messi signed a two-year contract, with the option of a third, after his emotional departure from boyhood club Barcelona, and he has already started training with his new team-mates as he gears up for his debut.

He will be fielded next to Mbappe and Neymar, who he linked up with to devastating effect in Catalonia, with Di Maria potentially missing out on the team. Despite this, his feelings about the switch are nothing but positive.

Angel Di Maria has admitted that he 'always wanted' to play alongside Lionel Messi at PSG

Messi signed a two-year deal to officially complete his switch to Paris after leaving Barcelona

Di Maria and Messi are long-time friends, and have been team-mates on the international stage for Argentina for many years. After their success this summer at the Copa America, they will now target more trophies at club level.

'I'm more than happy,' he told ESPN. 'Everything I dreamed about happened in one month; winning the Copa [America] and being able to play with Leo in the same team. It's what I've always wanted.'

Mbappe is certain to lead the line once again this season, despite the speculation that has linked him with a move to Real Madrid. His contract situation is mired in uncertainty, despite the signing of Messi.

Di Maria and Messi are international team-mates for Argentina and remain very close friends

But Di Maria is bullish about the club's chances of keeping the young frontman, and believes that PSG may have put together the best team in the world.

'Mbappe? I think he stays,' he added. 'It's obvious that he's a player that all the big teams want but with the team that PSG has now, I don't think he's going to leave. I don't think he will find a better team anywhere.'

Di Maria appears to have been one of the players who helped convince Messi to make the move to Paris, with the superstar forced to explain that a picture of them together in Ibiza was not a hint over his future.

Messi was seen out with several PSG players, including Neymar and Di Maria, just a matter of hours before the jaw-dropping news broke that there was a U-turn on the agreement between him and Barcelona over a new deal.

Di Maria is also confident Kylian Mbappe will stay at the club despite interest from Real Madrid

But in the press conference he delivered before leaving the Nou Camp, he claimed that nothing could be taken from the snap.

'Coincidence? Completely. I met them in Ibiza, we met them one day, got together and we're friends,' Messi explained.

'I was going to meet Paredes and Di Maria. Ney called me and said, "do you want to see me?"

'We uploaded the photo in that moment because we were having a good time and there was a joke at the time, they kept telling me "come to Paris, come to Paris".

Messi was snapped in Ibiza earlier this summer with a number of his new team-mates at PSG

Messi took part in his first training session at PSG since joining the club this week on Thursday

'It was just a joke, that was all.'

Messi underwent his first session at PSG on Thursday, having taken to the pitch for the first time since rounding off his international duty earlier this summer.

He was put through his paces at their Camp des Loges complex.

In footage shared on Instagram by the club, Messi was seen sprinting down the field and carrying out drills largely designed to improve his fitness and sharpness.

He is said to be desperate to make the squad to face Strasbourg this weekend.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@KL Rahul hit a superb century while Rohit Sharma delivered a masterclass as India dominated day one at Lord's.

Jimmy Anderson, passed fit to play, produced two excellent deliveries to remove Rohit and Cheteshwar Pujara, while Ollie Robinson provided a late boost with the wicket of Virat Kohli.

Sportsmail's DAVID LLOYD offers his thoughts and insights on a disappointing day's cricket for England at Lord's.

KL Rahul hit a superb century as India dominated the first day at Lord's finishing 276-3

A MASTERCLASS FROM ROHIT

I’d give England a seven out of 10 for their bowling performance. Nothing to really get excited about. Joe Root was missing Stuart Broad while Mark Wood wasn’t seen until after lunch.

This was Rohit Sharma’s highest Test score outside India but together with KL Rahul he provided a masterclass of application, technique and awareness of where off-stump is.

Rohit Sharma produced a masterclass before he was bowled out for 83 on Thursday

COMMON GROUND

Caught a glimpse of Geoffrey Boycott in the crowd sat alongside Sourav Ganguly. The president of the BCCI was listening intently and I reckon the conversation centred around running between the wickets. Both have previous and neither were usually the victim.

SUNAK'S CORRIDOR OF UNCERTAINTY

Geoffrey and Sourav were sitting in the same hospitality box as the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, who clearly had taken a day’s holiday with the economy in such good shape.

I can categorically guarantee you that Geoffrey would have given him a piece of his mind at some point during the day!

Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak was in the stands for the first day of the Test

WHY NO SHORT LEG?

So England were bowling first, with the Lord’s slope and Jimmy Anderson fit in overcast conditions – and there was no short leg. It just seems to be an unfashionable position these days.

I took over 300 catches there and I would get right under the batsman’s nose. When Haseeb Hameed finally went in he was so deep he could almost walk in.

Sportsmail's David Lloyd's hat made him look like Bryan Cranston from Breaking Bad

TREAD LIGHTLY...

Excited to arrive in London to collect my two new hats. The wonderful Lisa from Taylor Red makes them for me and I’ve now got a lovely Bakers Boy job and the pork pie hat I was wearing on Thursday. Some say I looked like Bryan Cranston in Breaking Bad.

SPOT OF BOTHER AT HOME

Bit of a crisis at home with the younger of my two fox terriers, Spot. She got out of the garden and ran on the golf course where she was delighted to pinch two balls.

She brought them home, with an irate golfer in tow. My wife Vipers says any more of that and she’ll have to be re-homed. To which I told Vipers I’d rather re-home her first.

One of the two terriers, Spot, brought home a golf ball with an irate golfer in tow

HURRY UP FROM BROAD

Match referee Chris Broad got to work after Trent Bridge and gave a signal to get on with it by fining both teams two World Test Championship points for slow over-rates.

And it was notable on Thursday how few fiddly interruptions there were. Not too many 12th men running on for no apparent reason. It’s a start but I will be keeping my eye on this one.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Kane 'must have felt badly wronged' by Tottenham to go AWOL, claims Gary Neville but Roy Keane insists the striker 'can't have his cake and eat it'.

Neville, alongside Keane and Jamie Carragher, weighed in on Kane's situation on The Overlap Live Fan Debate, and the transfer saga is still rumbling on amid interest from Manchester City.

Kane reported back to Spurs late from his summer holiday in protest at being denied the move he wants and for the 28-year-old to go against his 'saintly' instincts, something behind the scenes must have severely irked him, says Neville.

Gary Neville and Roy Keane weighed in on the ongoing Harry Kane transfer saga

The Tottenham striker wants to leave and join Manchester City this summer

'You can't not turn up for training, you have to turn up to do you're job. But I also know Harry Kane, I worked with him for three years, he's like a saint when it comes to football,' the ex-Manchester United full-back offered.

'Honestly, he doesn't drink, is so professional. So for him to get to this point, I can only imagine that something behind the scenes has happened that has made him completely disrespect.

'I genuinely don't know what it is that has annoyed him but he's got to turn up to training and if you're under contract you have to perform for that contract, however, for him to do what he's done, he must feel badly wronged.'

Kane's late arrival means his involvement against City this weekend is uncertain. The forward was said to have a gentleman's agreement with chairman Daniel Levy to be allowed to leave this summer but Keane slammed the naivety of expecting anything when contracts are signed and binding.

Neville and Keane were joined by Jamie Carragher in fielding questions about Kane

'There's nothing wrong with Harry wanting to leave and better himself, we all do that in life surely. But for Harry to put a price on it, you know, I'm pretty sure they're looking after him at Tottenham, he's not on £5,000-a-week,' he said.

'If City really want you, let them do the deal. Harry can't have his cake and eat it, Gary says he's a great lad but great lads get on with their training.

'We're saying he's a great lad, and a good pro and he turns up and does his job, f***ing hell that's your job! This idea that you can say "last year you promised me this", I've never heard so much rubbish in my life.'

Neville believes the reason Levy is so reluctant to let Kane leave even for a massive fee, is because they could not replace him.

He added: 'Losing Harry Kane would have an impact for a good few years, it is a big problem and I can see why Daniel Levy is holding out for massive money because he isn't going to replace him.

'Another Harry Kane won't go to Tottenham and that's the problem they've got. The idea you get £140-160m in... they cannot go and get another player in because a player as good as him won't go there.'

Pep Guardiola is keen on Kane and his side face Spurs in their season opener

Kane reported back late from his summer holidays in protest at not being allowed to leave

And Keane agreed: 'The top players want to play in the Champions League, the top players aren't interested in a project, £150m to Spurs in a sense is no good to them.'

But Jamie Carragher argued that even with Kane, Spurs have not managed to win anything so selling him to reinvest might be a worthwhile option.

He said: 'Harry Kane is what Steven Gerrard was at Liverpool, if he leaves everything falls apart, you're thinking "he's our talisman". But Liverpool didn't win the league with Gerrard and Kane hasn't won a trophy at Spurs.

'Where is the lowest Tottenham will ever finish, you sell Kane, get that money... they'll always be sixth and challenging for the Champions League positions minimum. When it was amazing under Pochettino they were challenging for the title.

'With Liverpool, they were forced to sell Coutinho and reinvested and went to another level when before then at that time there was nothing in it. I'm not saying they should sell Kane, but thinking the club would fall apart... they've not won anything with him so you've got to remember that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England star Declan Rice enjoyed some quality time with Mark Noble and James Corden after settling in for another season with West Ham.

Rice had been linked with Chelsea, Manchester United and Manchester City but West Ham's £90million transfer valuation blocked a move to a Champions League club.

As a result, the 22-year-old will remain at the London Stadium, under the tutelage of David Moyes, for extra 12 months before assessing his options once again.

The news of Rice's decision will delight West Ham fans up and down the country - including Corden, who was spotted smiling alongside Rice on Instagram.

The England midfielder took to Instagram to share a picture of himself, Noble and Corden sat at a dinner table on Wednesday night.

The trio were seen sitting together smiling, while Rice's arm was placed around the shoulder of the TV personality.

Rice reportedly struck up a friendship with Corden during England's Euro 2020 campaign, when the West Ham captain, Noble, took him to watch one of the games.

The Hammer's skipper and TV presenter have known each other for several years and went to watch England vs Germany together.

England star Declan Rice enjoyed some quality time with Mark Noble and James Corden

Rice spoke about his new-found-friendship with Corden the official England podcast. He said: 'Since the Scotland game I speak to James Corden quite a bit, we FaceTime each other.

'He was with Mark Noble at the Germany game so I spoke to them after and they were buzzing.

'There are people who don't even like football or don't sit down and watch it, and now it is a ritual to lock in and watch the games in this tournament.

'James Corden said to me, 'do you actually understand what you are doing?' and I don't really.

'It has not hit me yet and even when the tournament has finished it probably won't hit me until my career finishes.'

Rice - who shared more photos of himself with Corden on his Instagram story - was expected to leave West Ham this summer as he looked to join one of the top six.

Rice has accepted he'll stay at West Ham because of their £90million transfer valuation

Rice feels that an extra season playing under David Moyes will help him to develop further

Rice was a long-term target for Chelsea when Frank Lampard was manager, but Thomas Tuchel prioritised other positions this summer.

While Manchester United and Manchester City were unable to meet West Ham’s demands given the financial impact of the pandemic and their summer spending.

United forked out more than £100m on Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane, While City have broken the British transfer record on Jack Grealish.

As a result, West Ham manager, Moyes, will delighted to keep hold of Rice. He will hope Rice can help the club get their Premier League campaign off to a flying on Saturday against Newcastle United at St James' Park on Sunday.

Rice was wanted by Thomas Tuchel's Chelsea, Manchester United and Manchester City

However, United and City could not afford him after buying Jason Sancho and Jack Grealish

Nevertheless, Rice has never hidden his ambitions, saying: ‘When you start out in football you always want to play at the top. You want to play in the Champions League.

‘If you were in football and you didn’t want to do that, there would be no point playing.’

However, he’s decided an extra season working in east London and playing every week there will help continue to develop his game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

And to think, Romelu Lukaku is waiting in the wings. Thomas Tuchel won’t be getting carried away but it must be difficult not to.

Fresh from their second Champions League triumph, Chelsea have been billed as one of Manchester City’s main rivals for the Premier League crown.

They looked every inch title contenders here as their season started in convincing fashion.

Chelsea brushed aside Crystal Palace at Stamford Bridge to make it a day to forget for new Eagles boss Patrick Vieira

Trevoh Chalobah scored the pick of the bunch with a brilliant long-range effort to make it 3-0 on the day

It was an emotional goal for the centre back, who was making his first start at the Bridge after coming through the academy

Chalobah is overwhelmed with emotion after scoring at Stamford Bridge in front of 38,965 returning supporters

MATCH FACTS, PLAYER RATINGS AND LEAGUE TABLE CHELSEA: (3-4-3) Mendy 6.5; Chalobah 8, Christensen 7.5, Rudiger 8; Azpilicueta 7 (James 66, 6.5), Kovacic 7.5, Jorginho 7.5, Alonso 8.5 (Emerson 86); Mount 7, Werner 6.5, Pulisic 7 (Havertz 81) SUBS NOT USED: Kepa, Silva, Abraham, Zouma, Hudson-Odoi, Chilwell GOALS: Alonso (27), Pulisic (40), Chalobah (58) BOOKINGS: None COACH: Thomas Tuchel 8 CRYSTAL PALACE: (4-4-2) Guaita 5.5; Ward 6, Kouyate 6, Guehi 6, Mitchell 6; Ayew 6, Riedewald 6 (Rak-Sakyi 76), McArthur 6, Schlupp 6 (Andersen 57); Zaha 6, Mateta 5.5 (Benteke 57) SUBS NOT USED: Butland, Clyne, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Street GOALS: None BOOKINGS: None COACH: Patrick Vieira 6.5 REFEREE: Jon Moss MAN OF THE MATCH: Marcos Alonso (Chelsea) VENUE: Stamford Bridge ATTENDANCE: 38,965 Season at a glance Live tables

Fixtures

Scores Premier League

Premier League

Championship

League One

League Two

Scottish Premiership

Scottish Div 1

Scottish Div 2

Scottish Div 3

Ligue 1

Serie A

La Liga

Bundesliga



Advertisement

Were they at their best? Probably not. But they swept Crystal Palace aside with minimal fuss courtesy of goals from Marcos Alonso, Christian Pulisic and full debutant Trevoh Chalobah.

They say the ability to win when not playing well wins titles. Well, if that’s the case, then Chelsea look to be well equipped in that department.

This wasn’t the necessarily the sort of performance that will send shivers up Pep Guardiola or Jurgen Klopp.

It was one, though, that suggests Chelsea will be there or thereabouts in May.

This was, of course, a tough first gig for new Palace manager Patrick Vieira. He could have done without facing the European champions on his first outing as a Premier League boss.

But it is what it is, Vieira won’t need to be told that.

Marcos Alonso broke the deadlock in the 27th minute when he hit a superb free-kick into the top corner

The Spaniard lifted the ball over the wall and put enough power on it to leave Guaita in Palace's net rooted to the spot

The Eagles shot-stopper didn't even move from his spot and could only watch Alonso's free-kick fly past him

Alonso (left) passionately celebrates scoring Chelsea's first Premier League goal of the new 2021-22 campaign in style

His team are a work in progress; Vieira should be afforded the time to stamp his mark on a squad that is undergoing a facelift following the departure of former head coach Roy Hodgson and a host of senior players over the summer.

Palace will, however, have to learn quickly or a miserable season may lie ahead.

For 25 minutes, Vieira’s team looked entirely comfortable. Okay, they weren’t laying a glove on Chelsea - but you could have aimed the same accusation at the host’s.

Pulisic’s tame header from Alonso’s cross was easily saved by Vicente Guaita before the Palace keeper punched Mason Mount’s curling free kick away in the 15th minute.

Hands on his waist, Vieira would have been quietly satisfied with the opening moments of his Palace tenure.

Yet, you’re only a moment of magic away from having the carpet whipped from under you in the Premier League; Vieira knows that.

Christian Pulisic (left) then doubled Chelsea's lead shortly before the half-time interval with some quick-thinking

The American pounced on a spilled save by Guaita, lifting the ball high and into the roof of Crystal Palace's goal

Pulisic reacted quickly to get to the ball and get enough on it to send it into the back of the net and in off the crossbar

The visitors' defenders can only watch as the ball flies in, giving Thomas Tuchel's men a strong first-half advantage

So when Alonso executed a beautifully arcing free kick to perfection in the 25th minute, the Palace manager wouldn’t have been surprised.

Guaita could only stand there as the Chelsea left-back’s effort sailed past him to give Chelsea the lead.

Alonso, fist clenched, mumbled ‘Vamos’ to himself as he jogged back to the centre circle. Tuchel had similar sentiments.

His team certainly weren’t at their best but they were ahead - that’s all that really matters.

All of sudden, Palace’s robust resistance appeared way more flaky. A second was inevitable; it arrived in the 40th minute.

Pulisic grabbed the glory bundling home after Guaita mishandled inside his six yard box.

But the real damage was caused by Cesar Azpilicueta and Mount, who exchanged passes before the latter’s low cross prompted Guaita’s error.

Wilfried Zaha (left) was kept quiet for the majority of the game as Chelsea kept a clean sheet on the opening day

Timo Werner, who will fear being the fall guy in Lukaku’s return to the Bridge, picked up where he left off last season, squandering a good opportunity served up by Alonso on the stroke of half-time to really rub Palace’s faces in it.

But it was game over by that point; Alonso and and Pulisic had seen to that.

‘We know what we are,’ roared the home supporters, who were intent on gloating about May’s Champions League triumph in Porto at every opportunity, as the teams headed in at half-time.

By the looks of things, Tuchel could well add the Premier League title to his increasingly impressive resume by the end of the season.

The second half was nothing more than a procession.

Guaita produced an excellent save to deny Alonso, who timed his run to perfection to connect onto Jorginho’s pass with the sweetest of volley’s.

Palace, at least, showed some attacking intent - but when Wilfred Zaha breached Chelsea’s back line, Antonio Rudiger was on hand to slam the door back in the Palace forward’s face with an excellent last ditch tackle in the 53rd minute.

Mason Mount applauds the crowd at Stamford Bridge who watched their team put in a strong performance

Alonso put in a man of the match display and could have had two goals if not for some good goalkeeping from Guaita

But the Palace attack provided just momentary respite for Vieira as the Blues continued with their onslaught.

Palace probably thought they had the situation under control when Chalobah picked up the ball around 35 yards out.

Well, they didn’t. A couple of strides forward and bang - Chelsea were three ahead as Chalobah, on his first Premier League game, crashed home a vicious low strike that arrowed past Guaita.

The Chelsea debutant dropped to his knees - Palace had adopted a similar position by this point.

What a way to mark the biggest day in this 22-year-old’s career so far. Even if Chalobah goes not to make an other 500 Premier League appearances, he won’t hit many sweeter than this.

Scroll down to see how the 3pm action unfolded with Sportsmail

Chelsea against Crystal Palace headlines five 3pm kick-offs on the opening Saturday afternoon of the Premier League season.

The Blues have signalled their intention to challenge for the title by spending £98million on striker Romelu Lukaku this week.

Follow Sportsmail's SAM MCEVOY for live EPL coverage of Chelsea vs Crystal Palace, including build-up, team news and updates.

Elsewhere, there are a further four Premier League matches kicking off at 3pm, being Burnley vs Brighton, Everton vs Southampton, Leicester vs Wolves and Watford vs Aston Villa. We'll keep you up-to-date with all the scores.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I am willing to go out on a limb here. Football supporters inside stadiums: it might well catch on, you know. What an electrifying return that was, from start to finish.

Honestly, the Brentford game made you realise — if you had not realised already — why you have missed the Premier League at full capacity.

I watched them in the old Division Three and for that to happen against the mighty Arsenal on Friday night was just incredible. The pure emotion of it all, the old guy crying on our television sets. He has watched some bad football over the years, that man.

It was brilliant to see fans back in stadiums up and down the country over the weekend

Brentford boss Thomas Frank conducted the crowd as Hey Jude was blasted out the speakers

Some Brentford supporters were reduced to tears as they watched their team beat Arsenal

It would have been such a shame for that occasion to have been in an empty ground. We would not have been able to see Thomas Frank — who I like, a bit of a showman — conducting the crowd as Hey Jude blasted out from the speakers afterwards.

Even the pundits, Gary Neville and Jamie Carragher, were excited about it down on the touchline. They don't have any allegiance to either team but it is so easy to find yourself caught up in the joy. And Brentford's players went up a notch because of the noise.

There was a reconnection up and down the country, an outpouring we have all been waiting patiently for. And it was a long old wait.

I consider myself privileged to have been at some Premier League matches last season but the feel of it just was not the same.

There were more than a few times last year when it all felt a bit of a soulless existence. I've played in loads of those games down the years, the behind-closed-doors stuff or in the reserves. Last season was basically just like one of those on repeat — not the top flight.

The Premier League is built on going to difficult places with tough atmospheres but it often became a completely different sport.

Teams played in a different way, the games were slower, occasionally with no edge. Fans do not allow you to get away with that. Who knows whether Trevoh Chalobah would have rattled in his first ever Chelsea goal from 25 yards in an empty stadium, but the cries of 'shoot' from the fans inside of Stamford Bridge would certainly have given him the encouragement to have a go.

The first round of fixtures averaged more than three goals a game in electrifying return of fans

Trevoh Chalobah may not have opted to shoot before he scored had it not been for the crowd

Tottenham fans celebrate after Son Heung-min scored the winner against Manchester City

For an academy lad to experience that after his years of loan spells away from the club is so special. The whole ground came together as one to celebrate that moment.

What we witnessed was the first round of fixtures averaging more than three goals a game and it is understandable why that happened. There is more energy in your legs and a desire to put on a show. How a game progresses can be changed by the paying, or baying, public — good and bad.

For me, the more hostile the better. Turkey was so daunting but I absolutely loved it with Liverpool. Besiktas, that buzz beforehand.

We went out to have a look at the pitch with the programmes and the place was already full, already rocking. The whistling was deafening, they were all bouncing in unison. We got beat, but enough about that.

I always remember being in the San Siro. Like the Colosseum, you can hear that roar outside and the buzz. You are down in a little dungeon of a dressing room.

That is what makes it. I probably would not have even told my grandkids that I played there if it was behind closed doors.

That is how we all feel about football without fans. It just doesn't mean anything, does it? That is why this weekend was so special, real sense of occasions everywhere.

The matches will go up a level this time and we have seen it already.

Bruno Fernandes lapped up the fans' support at Old Trafford while scoring a hat-trick

Ken Sema enjoys a moment of joy with a fan after Watford scored against Aston Villa
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Georges St-Pierre will never be tempted back into the octagon but admitted he could yet fight for charity or compete in a novelty match-up.

One-off fights have become regular occurrences, with crossover bouts between boxers, MMA fighters and retired athletes.

And GSP, regarded by many to be one of the greatest fighters in UFC history, still keeps himself in shape and the 40-year-old would be open to a contest in a non-professional capacity.

Georges St-Pierre will not compete in the UFC again but is keen to fight in a charity event

Unless it is an exhibition match for charity, Georges St-Pierre tells @robinblackmma that his days of fighting professionally "are over." pic.twitter.com/rDQP8d7U0o — Haymakers \\: (@haymakerstv) August 9, 2021

Speaking to Haymakerstv , he said: 'I’m telling you, I’m not going to fight again to prove that I’m the strongest man in the world.

'This part of my life is over because I believe my best years are behind me.

'However, for a charity or for a fun competition as a novelty fight, I might compete again, whether that’s boxing, grappling, or whatever.

'That might be interesting because I’m a competitor inside of me and to do it for fun, something that would maybe not affect my legacy because it’s for a different reason, I could do it.'

The Canadian still keeps himself in shape and is in strong condition at 40-years-old

Jake Paul's boxing match against Ben Askren and upcoming bout with Tyron Woodley, Anderson Silva's exhibition against Julio Cesar Chavez Jr and Logan Paul's clash with Floyd Mayweather are all recent examples of lucrative one-off contests.

GSP would consider a similar style of match-up for charity and has not fought competitively since UFC 217, when he came out of retirement to claim the middleweight title from Michael Bisping.

A super-fight between GSP and Khabib Nurmagomedov was talked up for a time but never came to fruition and the Russian has also now retired.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Premier League players have been given the green light to hug and high-five during goal celebrations this season after league officials relaxed Covid-related restrictions.

The way players celebrated goals came into sharp focus at the turn of the year as football continued behind closed doors amid the pandemic.

Premier League chief executive Richard Masters wrote to clubs in the height of the pandemic reiterating the importance of adhering to new, stricter coronavirus protocols, with sports minister Nigel Huddleston backing that stance.

Referees reminded players of their responsibilities through pre-match meetings with captains, but still saw a number of players ignore pleas and continue hugging their team-mates after scoring a goal.

However, The Times are reporting that there will be no such Covid-19 boundaries imposed for the new campaign.

Premier League players will be allowed to hug during goal celebrations this season

But, while players have the green light to hug when celebrating a goal, many restrictions will initially remain in place, including teams filing out on to the pitch separately, with indoor areas remaining socially distanced.

Covid tests will continue to be taken twice a week, albeit lateral flow tests rather than the PCR ones used previously, and press conferences will continue to be held virtually as red zones remain in place at grounds. Vaccination is not mandatory for players or fans.

The Premier League announced on Monday that fans are set to be subject to random spot-checks of their Covid-19 status at some grounds in the opening few weeks.

Football supporters of Premier League teams won't all be subjected to show their Covid vaccination or test status at matches

The league said fans going to games should be prepared to show they have been fully vaccinated or have received a negative lateral flow test in the previous 48 hours.

It is understood punishment for failing to do would be decided on a club-by-club basis.

The Premier League also said fans must comply with a supporter code of conduct, and stressed the importance of wearing masks in indoor areas, avoiding close contact with people you do not know and following one-way signage around stadiums.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ibrox was full again. Full of raucous noise that turned to cries of exasperation. Full of bitter disappointment after so much buoyant expectation.

Make no mistake, the scars from this extraordinary evening will take some time to heal. A goal and a man up on the night, Rangers contrived to blow their £30 million Champions League chance in front of a first capacity crowd for 17 months.

It became bewildering viewing for supporters whose commitment, both financial and emotional, never wavered throughout the pandemic.

Rangers have been dumped out of the Champions League after losing to 10-man Malmo

The title secured last season was supposed to be the foundation stone of a bigger, brighter future. And a pathway towards an elite group stage last graced in 2010.

No-one ever said getting there would be easy. But neither did anyone predict Steven Gerrard’s side would collapse at the first hurdle in quite this dismal manner.

Control of the tie was in their hands after 45 minutes. Put level on aggregate by an Alfredo Morelos goal, they saw Malmo diminished when midfielder Bonke Innocent belied his name by collecting two yellow cards in the closing stages of the first half.

It should have opened the door wide to the play-off round. Instead, Rangers replicated the feeble defending that cost them so dearly in Sweden. In fact, it was worse. Leaking goals in the 53rd and 58th minutes to ten-man opposition – the second which came from a throw-in - was a scarcely believable way for their ambitions in this tournament to come an abrupt end.

Malmo would figure somewhere around the average mark in the big European picture. Rangers have beaten better than them in the Europa League during recent seasons. But the Swedes had the clinical touch, the organisation and the sheer heart to record a result that outstrip even their 2011 defeat of Rangers in this same competition. They were outstanding in the second period.

MATCH FACTS Rangers (4-3-3): McGregor; Tavernier, Goldson, Balogun, Barisic; Davis, Aribo, Arfield (Hagi, 70); Wright (Sakala, 63), Kent, Morelos Subs not used: Bassey, Helander, Hogarth, Itten, Kelly, Lundstram, McCrorie, Patterson, Simpson Goals: Morelos (19) Booked: McGregor, Morelos Manager: Steven Gerrard Malmo (4-4-2): Dahlin; Moisander, Nielsen, Ahmedhodzic, Lewicki; Rieks, Christiansen, Bonke, Birmancevic (Rakip, 74); Berget (Beijmo, 83), Colak (Abubakari 90+1) Subs not used: Bjorkqvist, Eile, Ellborg, Gwargis, Johansson, Larsson, Nalic, Nanasi Goals: Colak (53, 58) Booked: Innocent (sent off), Ahmedhodzvic Manager: Jon Dahl Tomasson Advertisement

For Gerrard, though, a third successive defeat brings searching questions about just where their championship-winning form has gone. And why preparation for this tie didn’t work.

One of the primary goals of this campaign has already vanished. Regrouping in the Europa League play-offs against either Kairat Almaty or Alashkert is essential but no-one can pretend that’s what where they wanted to be.

Malmo coach Jon Dahl Tomasson sought to crank up the pressure pre-match by claiming Rangers needed the Champions League money. That may just have been mind-games, but the remaining weeks of the transfer window could yet be interesting if big offers arrive. Transformative income will not be arriving from European football.

The Ibrox side pushed to try and get back into it as the minutes ticked down but it was clear well before the end it wouldn’t happen. Malmo repelled everything that came their way.

Gerrard had spoken of needing one good performance to ‘light the fire’ again. He brought in Morelos and Joe Aribo from the first leg – and made a more eye-catching alteration in defence.

Out went Filip Helander and in came Leon Balogun. The Nigerian did not have a good evening.

The Ibrox outfit wore their new purple third kit ahead of schedule, insisting UEFA rules and ‘the limited options made available’ by Malmo had forced the move.

Previously part of the rotation in season 1994-95, the colours conjured up memories of Brian Laudrup, Richard Gough, Mark Hateley and more.

Mind you, it wasn’t a particularly good omen in European terms. As Laudrup recalled in Sportsmail yesterday, Rangers lost to AEK Athens in that year’s Champions League qualifiers.

There were no lack of initial urgency invested in trying to avoid a re-run. Morelos tried to set the tone after just two minutes. His upper body strength was too much for Lasse Nielsen as they fought for possession near the byeline. The striker’s cross broke back for Aribo and his shot was blocked behind by Anel Ahmedhodzic.

The Swedes overturned a one-goal deficit on the night to land a huge win at Ibrox on Tuesday

Aribo’s forward runs were giving Rangers additional options. He stretched to try and meet a Borna Barisic as the host continue to turn the screw. You sensed something was coming. It arrived on 18 minutes.

Barisic won a free-kick inside the Malmo half, enabling the ball to be worked left to Kent. His inswinging cross was a peach and Morelos bundled it over the line at the far post.

He went with his head but the final touch may have been off his shoulder or back. No-one cared.

The noise inside Ibrox would have endangered a decibel meter. Bedlam. As if 17 months of waiting, all that pent-up emotion, had burst forth at the sight of the ball in the net.

There is always a danger immediately after such moments. Rangers had to refocus and keep Malmo on the back foot. Initially they did.

Aribo robbed Innocent to let Scott Arfield feed Morelos. He drifted in from the right to get a strike away, but all the pace on it was removed by Nielsen’s block.

Tomasson was irate figure in his technical area, veering between venting at the fourth official and urging more from his players. Malmo badly needed a foothold.

They gained one through an unlikely source. Allan McGregor’s lengthy European record is littered with pristine saves but he misjudged the flight of the ball as he sought to gather ahead of first leg scorer Veljko Birmancevic. Slovenian Referee Slavko Vincic deemed he handled outside his area and produced a yellow card.

The direct free-kick was wasted into the wall, but it did signal a little period of Swedish pressure. Balogun got in a great clearing header to thwart Antonio Colak before the Croatian forward was off target from a Jo Inge Berget cross. Birmancevic then failed to get enough oomph behind an angled effort as the Ibrox defence wobbled.

It seemed as though a release valve had been activated just before half-time when Innocent became guilty. Already booked on 41 minutes for a foul on Morelos, the midfielder went into a challenge against Connor Goldson inside the Rangers half.

The Ibrox centre-back was hurt but it looked a 50-50. A second yellow card seemed harsh. Vincic thought differently. Ibrox roared again as Tomasson looked on aghast.

The Dane had picked the same starting line-up as the first leg but now had a mammoth task on his hands. Gerrard would have spent half-time demanding Rangers made it even tougher.

Morelos smashed too high after Malmo goalkeeper Johan Dahlin got in a mess. A booking for a foul on Anders Christiansen left the Colombian walking a tightrope.

Alarmingly for Gerrard, so were Rangers. Despite the man advantage, they were pegged back to level on the night – and behind on aggregate – in the 53rd minute.

Birmancevic played a lovely reverse pass in behind Balogun and Colak thumped a laser-guided finish into the far corner of the net.

That was bad enough for the Ibrox men but worse followed within five minutes. They were crumbling.

A simple throw-in went straight to Colak, who took a touch away from Balogun before reversing a finish beyond McGregor. It was an astonishing way to concede a dominant position.

Rangers desperately needed a rapid response. Arfield saw a cute header deflected over the top before Morelos was denied by a terrific sliding challenge from Soren Rieks.

Chances came. And substitutes were made. One of those, Fashion Sakala, was denied by a brilliant Dahlin save before Ibrox echoed to boos.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is not only major first team recruits Manchester United have brought on board for the coming campaign, as they bid to finally climb back to the summit of English football.

Sensational summer swoops for Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane have heightened expectations around Old Trafford, though it is the arrival of a certain Mr Eric Ramsay which has got tongues wagging behind the scenes.

Little known to the average football fan, Ramsay is renowned as a set-piece specialist and has joined the Red Devils with the specific remit of addressing one of last season's most troublesome issues.

Eric Ramsay is Manchester United's secret weapon next season, to address set-pieces

Throughout the last campaign only Marcelo Bielsa's Leeds United conceded more goals from set-pieces that United, as the issue became a real thorn in the side for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's men.

Ramsay previously worked at Shrewsbury Town and Swansea City and arrived this summer following a glowing recommendation from United first-team coach, Kieran McKenna, who he studied alongside at Loughborough University.

Former Hull City and Bolton Wanderers star Sam Ricketts also worked closely with Ramsay as he developed as a coach, and told the Telegraph that United are bringing on board an exciting talent.

Ricketts studied for his UEFA Pro Licence with Ramsay via the Welsh FA before they ended up together at Shrewsbury and make their first foray into coaching.

Ricketts said: 'He’s a clear thinker, he’s got a good tactical brain and a real level of detail in what he does.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer brought the young coach on board to stop his side leaking goals

'That is why he went on first to Chelsea from Shrewsbury and now finds himself at Man United.

'His personality is the big thing. He’s a people person. He’s a very rounded individual who won’t be fazed by anything but who will be very attentive and detail-driven in everything he does.'

Ricketts went on to add how Ramsay's commanding personality makes players immediately switch on to what he is saying, while his ability to whistle using his fingers would 'make a shepherd envious.'

He added: 'I know it sounds stupid but he’s got one of one of the best whistles with his fingers I’ve heard on a training pitch and when he wants to make a point quickly it can be very effective.

'A shepherd would be envious. Eric could control a sheep dog two fields away.

'Some people can’t get intensity into sessions. Maybe they’re too placid, quiet, nice, but Eric can flip between the two. His whistle can be part of that. It pricks your attention.'

Last season only Leeds conceded more from dead balls than United in the Premier League

On Monday new boy Sancho trained for the first time with his new team-mates after finally sealing his blockbuster summer move from Borussia Dortmund.

The £73million star completed his move three weeks ago but had been on holiday since missing a penalty in England's Euro 2020 final defeat to Italy on July 11.

But with five days until United begin the new campaign against Leeds United at Old Trafford, the 21-year-old winger has reported for duty at Carrington.

French defender Varane is expected to also soon link up with his new team-mates, and be unveiled by the club, once his quarantine period ends.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Great Britain's eventers took a glorious gold medal in the team competition in Tokyo.

The trio of Oliver Townend, Laura Collett and Tom McEwen prevailed in the final showjumping round after going into the day with a near impregnable lead of 17.9 penalties. Even though that was cut to 13.9 at the end of the night, it was still enough for glory.

Final British rider Townend had the luxury of knowing he could knock four fences down and still win gold, such was the team's dominance.

Great Britain's eventing team won the gold medal for the first time since the 1972 Olympics

Oliver Townend, Laura Collett (above) and Tom McEwen produced GB's 11th gold of the Games

All three British riders were making Games debuts, but they delivered high-class displays to end a 49-year wait for team gold.

Britain finished on a score of 86.30, and it is a third equestrian medal in Tokyo for Team GB following Charlotte Dujardin, Carl Hester and Charlotte Fry winning dressage team bronze, and Dujardin also collecting an individual bronze.

It is only Britain's third Olympic team crown in eventing after Stockholm in 1956 and Munich 16 years later.

Attention now switches to the individual final, which follows the team competition later on Monday, with Townend starting the showjumping phase in the silver medal position behind Germany's Julia Krajewski.

Townend is second in the individual standings and in with a chance of winning a second gold

Reflecting on his round, McEwen said: 'He is a class horse and a great jumper, so it was just up to me on top.

'My nerves were fine. They (Townend and Collett) are both brilliant riders, and I had no doubt they would pull it straight out of the bag quite easily and comfortably.'

And Collett, who dropped places individually after having one fence down, added: 'He (London 52) was his normal self at the start, then I think there was a reflection off the water and he just spooked, basically.

'He got it back together. It's a shame, but it could have been a whole lot worse in that situation. It was a very clever course.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trent Alexander-Arnold has extended his stay at Liverpool after signing a new long-term deal until 2025 just weeks before the new campaign gets underway.

The 22-year-old right back has become a key member of Jurgen Klopp's squad since breaking into the first-team in 2016, helping them win the Champions League and Premier League in recent seasons.

The Times are also reporting the academy graduate will now be among the highest earners at Liverpool after signing what is understood to be a new four-year extension.

Trent Alexander-Arnold has extended his stay at Liverpool after signing a new deal until 2025

Alexander-Arnold admitted he is 'honoured' after signing his new long-term Liverpool contract

Ready for some boss Friday news? 😁@TrentAA has signed a new long-term contract with the Reds 🙌 — Liverpool FC (@LFC) July 30, 2021

'I'm honoured to be given the opportunity and to be shown the trust in the club to be given an extension, so it was a no-brainer for me,' Alexander-Arnold told the club's official website.

'The state the club is in and where I'm at in my career is always a good option for me. To extend and make sure I'm here longer is always a good thing. I'm made up.

'It's the only club I've ever really known, so to be here for this amount of time and extending to be here for a longer amount of time is amazing for me and my family.

'It's a proud moment for me – it always is – signing a new contract here. To be given the trust, like I said before, by the club and the staff is an amazing feeling.'

The 22-year-old right back has become a key member of boss Jurgen Klopp's squad

The right back has won the Premier League and Champions League since his first-team debut

Alexander-Arnold has gone on to make a total of 179 appearances and has also won the FIFA Club World Cup with his boyhood side.

The right back endured a mixed season in 2020-21, going off the boil during the first half of the campaign, but bounced back to help Klopp's men secure a Champions League spot.

Alexander-Arnold's last-gasp winner against Aston Villa was a key result in helping the Reds finish in the top four and his resurgence saw Gareth Southgate recall him for the Euros, after the England boss omitted him from the Three Lions' fixtures in March.

However, the Reds star would not compete at the Euros after picking up a thigh issue in the Three Lions' first pre-tournament friendly against Austria, with new Arsenal defender Ben White named as his replacement.

But speaking earlier this month having returned to full training, Alexander-Arnold declared himself 'ready to play' and 'fit' for the new season.

He endured a mixed 2020-21 but bounced back to help Reds seal a Champions League spot

'(I am) fully pain-free. I've been doing a lot of rehab when we were off over the summer with the physios and the medical staff, which was good for me,' he told the club's website.

'I feel fit, I feel healthy and I'm back in full training now, so it's good. It's good for me.

'I've done quite a few sessions with the lads now, I feel fit enough to play. But the decision comes from the manager, the staff and obviously the medical staff, they need to talk and see if it's worth the risk.'

Reports suggest Liverpool are now looking to tie a host of other first-team regulars down to new deals, including the likes of goalkeeper Alisson, midfielder Fabinho, Virgil van Dijk, Mohamed Salah, Andrew Robertson and Sadio Mane.

They have also commenced discussions with captain Jordan Henderson, but reports suggest those contract talks have collapsed and that he is now facing an uncertain future at Anfield.

The defender (right) missed England's Euro 2020 bid after an injury in a friendly with Austria
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tim Krul remembers standing in the tunnel at Anfield on the opening day of Norwich’s last season in the Premier League two years ago and feeling concerned about how the night may go.

‘I could see our young lads looking at Salah, Mane, Van Dijk and the rest,’ the Norwich goalkeeper told Sportsmail this week.

‘I could see their faces and then it can be difficult to walk out in front of 50,000 people. Of course, that does something to your confidence and then suddenly you are two goals down.’

Krul believes Norwich are more streetwise than in their previous spell in the Premier League

Norwich were beaten 4-1 by Liverpool in 2019 but Krul expects his team to fare better this time

Norwich lost that game 4-1 and things didn’t improve an awful lot from there. Daniel Farke’s expansive but inexperienced side were relegated in last position. This weekend it’s Liverpool who once again present the opening challenge and Krul is confident things can be different.

‘We can all look at each other five minutes before kick-off and realise what we achieved to get back here,’ added Krul.

‘It will be a full house at Carrow Road for the first time in a long time and I cannot even imagine the noise, the explosion, that we will have.

‘Playing in the Championship in the pandemic last season was a huge challenge but we just took it by the horns. I remember playing Millwall away and we all were changing in a basketball hall. At Birmingham City, the changing room was like a pub. There was a bar in there! ‘But now with the fans back in, this all feels incredibly exciting. It feels like a privilege.

‘There are no excuses this time but equally there is no fear factor and I think we can ask a bit more from ourselves. ‘The younger boys have grown into men and we have added some top-quality players. We are better equipped.’

This interview was due to take place at Norwich’s training camp in York a fortnight ago. But a Covid outbreak in the squad put paid to the club’s plans. Farke subsequently said the problem wrecked his pre-season ahead of a daunting opening run of fixtures that reads: Liverpool, Manchester City, Leicester and Arsenal.

The 33-year-old cannot wait to play in front of the Norwich supporters at Carrow Road again

‘That’s not an exaggeration,’ nodded Krul on Zoom. ‘We missed two games and haven’t had even one game with the settled back four or XI that we are going to start with against Liverpool.

‘It was a massive Covid hit. We had about 13 out at one stage. ‘When those fixtures came out I already thought somebody was having a bit of a laugh. People say it’s a good time to play those teams but I am not sure!

‘But I do think we are ready to be more streetwise this season. We all know this squad can play amazing football but there are other sides to the game and you can’t just play that same style all the time.

‘I remember last time beating Man City at home and then the next week going to Burnley thinking we would just roll them over. ‘They literally just stormed all over us, bullied us. ‘This time I think we will be more streetwise, I really do.’

Norwich’s approach to Premier League life last time round was questioned. The club didn’t invest heavily in players and appeared — from the outside at least — to have gone down without a fight. Crucially, though, they kept faith in Farke and the German, along with sporting director Stuart Webber, plotted an immediate route back as champions.

Krul says he has bought into the culture at Norwich and the philosophy of Daniel Farke

‘I have been here three years and have bought into the culture,’ said Krul. ‘If you see the training ground from when I walked in you would not believe it. I remember the gym basically being a conservatory. I was in there doing leg weights and water was coming in through the roof.

‘Now we have a world-class training centre and world-class stadium. Stuart Webber, the boss and the board clearly had a path and that involved investing in the infrastructure.

‘Yes, they made a clear decision that maybe did not help us two years ago as a squad, because we were definitely quality-wise not what we ideally should have been. ‘But the club was nearly bankrupt a few years before so I totally understand why they didn’t chuck £100million on players.

‘If you see the style we have played over the last couple of years it is the best football I have ever been part of and hopefully we can still add some more quality, like we have done by signing Billy Gilmour from Chelsea.’

Krul stated that he started to take being Newcastle's first-choice goalkeeper for granted

The issue of sporting directors in English football remains a live one. Some managers welcome the support. Others don’t see it that way. ‘They are clearly on the same wavelength here,’ said Krul, matter-of-factly.

‘They bounce off each other. The manager says if you have a contract issue, go to see Stuart. Equally, Stuart is not going to tell a player he is not playing on a Saturday. ‘We are not at a club where a player can go behind the manager to the sporting director and tell stories of what is happening. There is no division and that’s amazing because I know a lot of clubs where it is done differently. Here, we have peace.’

Norwich’s recent history feels like a good fit for Krul, who is still only 33. He, too, has had to go backwards to move forwards. He spent a decade at Newcastle and became a Holland international before a knee injury sidelined him for more than a year.

When he returned, Rafa Benitez made him train with the academy players. A move to Brighton, where he hooked up with former Newcastle manager Chris Hughton once again, was enjoyable but he couldn’t shift Mat Ryan from the No 1 position.

Then came the call from Norwich who, in 2017-18, had just finished 14th in the Championship.

The goalkeeper suffered frustration at Newcastle when Rafa Benitez made him train with the academy players

‘I was desperate to prove people wrong who thought I was finished after my injury,’ he explained.

‘It keeps me ticking, to show people I am still capable of being up there with the best in the world. ‘Benitez clearly didn’t want me at Newcastle but that actually kickstarted my love for football again.

‘At Brighton, I didn’t play much but it reignited my love for it. Chris Hughton eventually told me I was a No 1 and that I had to go somewhere and show people that. ‘So yeah, I took a risk coming here. It could have gone both ways. But I am lucky. It went up.

‘At Newcastle, I was No 1 for five or six years and started to take it for granted. I just drove into St James’ Park for a match like it was just a normal thing. But it’s a case of not realising what you have got until it is taken away.

‘Training with the academy when the first team are on the pitch next to you is ruthless and it should never have ended that way.

‘But going back to play them and getting the love from the fans — standing in front of the Gallowgate and hearing that from 30,000 of them — is why you do it. That means more than one person not believing in you. ‘You know, I have had 25 or 30 managers in my career and it would be a miracle if they all loved you. It’s just not going to happen like that.

‘These things shape you. You need to find motivation in life and those things may feel like a door is always closing in your face but it does make you more determined.’

Krul admitted he was blindsided by not featuring for Holland at Euro 2020 this summer

This summer also brought some disappointment. Named as No 2 goalkeeper for Holland at the Euros, he expected to play once Jasper Cillessen was ruled out with Covid. Ultimately, Maarten Stekelenburg was promoted to the first team. ‘That completely blindsided me as I was happy like a boy that I was going to start the Euros in my own country,’ he admitted.

‘It took me a bit to get over that as I had worked so hard to get back to that level. But eventually you have to go, “Right”, and switch your mindset. I had a Premier League season to prepare for.’ Sitting in his kitchen with new baby son Charlie asleep behind him, Krul has a handle on perspective.

His wife Claire — who he met in Newcastle — was pregnant when her husband contracted Covid last January. It scared him and he is now fully vaccinated. He sees that as the best way forward for football.

‘I have worried a lot for my family about this,’ he said. ‘It has been very unnerving. It’s horrible. Claire was pregnant when I had it in the winter. ‘So I definitely believe if we can reduce that risk of bad illnesses and transmission and infection, then the jab is definitely the way for all of us.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Spurs star Sergio Reguilon got his guns out as he worked on his arms in the gym – only to be pranked by teasing teammate Eric Dier with a video comparing him to Screech Powers.

Unimpressed Dier shared the iron-pulling clip with his vast Instagram following of more than 860,000, likening hard-at-work Reguilon to the much-loved yet decidedly scrawny character from TV hit Saved by the Bell.

While Reguilon puffed out his cheeks and pulled at two weight stacks, Dier baulked at his bulk with an animation of the nerd, played by the late Dustin Diamond, flexing his skinny limbs in a leotard.

Spurs defender Serge Reguilon has suffered a heavy bout of pranking from teammate Eric Dier

While Reguilon worked on his arms, Dier used his fingers to post a video of him on Instagram

Spain wideman Reguilon seemed blissfully unaware that he was being flexed upon by Dier as he knuckled down in the seemingly empty conditioning room.

The surreptitious filming and mocking embellishment from Dier may have given many Spurs fans a lift ahead of their heavyweight top-flight opener at home to Manchester City on Sunday.

According to the Premier League's profiles, La Roja's Reguilon tips the scales at around 10st 7lbs, making him one of the lighter players in the top flight.

The former Real Madrid defender has been known to show off his six-pack on his own Instagram account alongside his model girlfriend Marta Diaz, who has more than 2.8 million followers on the platform.

Dier's animation showed spindly Screech Powers (left), from bygone TV hit Saved by the Bell

Reguilon and Dier will be hopeful of overpowering Man City in the Premier League on Sunday

Versatile Dier is listed as weighing around three stone more than him, suggesting he could have more power than the left-back in gym sessions.

England hopeful Dier, who has been at Spurs since 2014, has appeared to build a good relationship with Reguilon since he arrived at the club last September.

The pair have been seen laughing together in training, although neither had much to smile about when Dier hauled a distraught Reguilon from the turf and urged him to refocus after he scored an own-goal in a loss to Aston Villa in May.

Both will be hoping for revenge on Sunday after enduring a 1-0 defeat when Spurs last played City, losing the Carabao Cup final at Wembley in April.

A repeat of Tottenham's 2-0 win in the Premier League in November, which the duo started, would add a weight of expectation to their chances of success this season and bring City's run of successive wins in the fixture screeching to a halt.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brighton boss Graham Potter insists Yves Bissouma is happy at the Amex Stadium but admits he does not know what the player's future holds.

Bissouma impressed last season in the Premier League and had been expected to leave the Seagulls this summer but Potter claimed the Brighton star was happy and wanted to play at the club.

The Mali midfielder has been repeatedly linked with a move away from the south coast but is set to begin the new Premier League season in Albion colours at Burnley on Saturday.

Yves Bissouma is 'happy' at Brighton despite interest from Tottenham and Liverpool

Top-flight rivals Tottenham and Liverpool are among the clubs rumoured to be interested in the 24-year-old, while a possible switch to join former Seagulls team-mate Ben White at Arsenal has also been reported.

'I've been speaking about Yves Bissouma for quite some time and he's still here,' said Potter, ahead of the trip to Turf Moor.

'That's all I can say on it. I can't control the future, I don't know what's going to happen essentially - that's the beauty of life and football.

'Yves is with us, he's happy, he's smiling, he wants to play, he wants to keep improving his career, he's taking steps.

'He's our player and, while he's still here, we'll do our best to help him.'

The midfielder has been linked with a move but has played in Brighton's pre-season fixtures

Bissouma, who has two years remaining on his Brighton contract, has scored four times in 96 appearances since joining from French club Lille for a reported £15million in 2018.

Albion appear under no pressure to sell having gained around £50m from White's departure to the Gunners, with the capture of Zambia midfielder Enock Mwepu for approximately £20m their only major outlay of the summer.

Head coach Potter has funds available to strengthen his squad but will not be rushed into making rash purchases and remains content to work with the players already at his disposal.

Brighton boss Graham Potter insisted 'Yves is with us' ahead of the start of the new season

'While the window is open, you never know, that's how football is,' he said about potential new arrivals.

'That's the beauty of the transfer window, there's lots of speculation, that's part of the noise.

'We have to spend it wisely, which is the right player, the right person; if that comes along then of course then it helps us to help the group.

'We've got that possibility but if not we have to keep improving the players that we have here, that's my job.'

The Mali midfielder (left) could join former Seagulls team-mate Ben White (right) at Arsenal

Tariq Lamptey will miss the start of the season due to a hamstring injury from last December

While Bissouma and White impressed for the duration of last term, another key talent, Tariq Lamptey, has not featured since mid-December due to a hamstring issue.

The right-back will be absent against the Clarets and could be sidelined for at least a further month.

'He's joined the group intermittently. He's still doing his rehab, a slow few weeks but has made good progress recently, so he has joined in a few sessions with the players,' said Potter.

'We're hoping he'll step that up. With a bit of luck, maybe after the international break we might see a bit more of Tariq.'

Dutch goalkeeper Kjell Scherpen, a recent arrival from Ajax, Dan Burn, Moises Caicedo and Danny Welbeck will also be absent this weekend due to injury.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The roars cascaded around the roof of the Stretford End and echoed up into the higher reaches of the Sir Alex Ferguson Stand. Doubtless the din would have been heard loud and clear as the chorus carried over the Ship Canal and on to Salford’s Shopping Centre. To be honest, those voices were probably audible in Pendlebury, Radcliffe and on to Bury.

Football fans were back. And, it would easy to say, so were Manchester United, except that one opening-match bonanza does not a season make. Yet, on a momentous day, when 72,000 gathered for a Premier League match for the first time since March 2020, how those fans made themselves heard. All that pent-up energy, the days of shared grief the sheer lack of communality was evident in the joyful outburst of the occasion.

And how their team played for them. This was as close as you will get to the good old days, when Old Trafford regularly thundered its approval for a magnificent team rampaging forwards at every opportunity. ‘A perfect day,’ said Ole Gunnar Solkjaer. And it pretty much was for everyone with loyalties this side of the Pennines.

Bruno Fernandes scored a hat-trick to fire five-star Manchester United to an emphatic victory over rivals Leeds at Old Trafford

Fernandes (left) was found in unstoppable form on the opening day of the new top-flight season and put Leeds to the sword

His hat-trick was sealed in superb fashion, with a first-time finish smashed beyond Illan Meslier and into the top of the net

Fernandes is hailed by his team-mates for a brilliant afternoon as United made a statement of title intent at Old Trafford

Another moment of excitement for the Old Trafford crowd came when £73m man Jadon Sancho made his debut

Manchester United played like a team intoxicated by their fans’ return. Leeds United played like a team intoxicated by Marcelo Bielsa’s philosophy, totally unable to adjust when it was clear that Bielsa-ball was the worst way of defending against Mason Greenwood, Bruno Fernandes and an inspired Paul Pogba.

Raphael Varane, introduced before the game to a rapturous acclamation, must have looked on and been convinced he had committed himself to a proper football club. ‘This is the real Manchester United,’ continued Solskjaer. ‘That’s how I sold the club to Edinson Cavani. You can’t leave after playing just one year with no fans.’

What promise lies ahead for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s team on days like this. Who to choose for man of the match? Hat-trick hero Fernandes? The irrepressible Greenwood? Yet how to ignore the imperious Paul Pogba creator of four goals, each assist seeming to top the last? (That said, we will ignore, for now, his failure to close down Luke Ayling when Leeds’ briefly looked equal to their task on 49 minutes. All this and Jadon Sancho, who got 15 minutes, Marcus Rashford and Varane to come.

MATCH FACTS AND RATINGS Manchester United (4-2-3-1): De Gea 6; Wan-Bissaka 7, Lindelof 8, Maguire 8, Shaw 8.5; Fred, 8.5 McTominay 8.5 (Matic 69 7); James, 6 (Sancho 7 75) Fernandes,9 Pogba 9.5 (Martial 7, 75); Greenwood 8.5 Subs not used: Mata, Pereira, Dalot, Heaton, Williams, van de Beek Goals: Fernandes 30, 54, 60; Greenwood 52; Fred 68 Booked: Shaw Manager: Ole Gunnar Solskjaer Leeds United: (4-1-4-1) Meslier 5; Ayling 7, Struijk 6, Cooper 6, Dallas 5.5; Koch 4.5; Raphinha, 5 Rodrigo, 5 (Junior Firpo, 46, 5) Klich 5, Harrison 5.5 (Costa 69, 5); Bamford 4.5 (Roberts 77 5) Subs not used: Forshaw, Klaesson, Phillips, Summerville, Greenwood, Shackleton Goals: Ayling 48 Booked: Cooper, Raphinha Manager: Marcelo Bielsa Referee: Paul Tierney 7 Advertisement

United are expected to challenge for the Premier League title this season and sent out a statement to their top six opponents

The caveats are that United still look a team set up to counter attack. Which is all well and good and makes for a good record against a team as dogmatically committed to attack as Leeds. But it’s a plan that is less easy to execute against Newcastle, Crystal Palace or Watford.

Still, spectacles like this need to be enjoyed when they present themselves. United played with the same joyful catharsis their fans were experiencing. ‘Sir Alex Ferguson, the gaffer, always used to say enjoy yourself,’ said Solskjaer. ‘Express yourself. You’ve got enjoy the privilege and the pressure and the responsibility of playing in front of 75,000 fans at Old Trafford and millions watching on TV.’

The reconnection with fans, he hoped, might even persuade Pogba that he is truly loved and that this is where he should commit to playing his football. ‘I love seeing those boys smiling, when they’re enjoying their football,’ said Solskjaer.

Fernandes scored the opening goal of the game on 30 minutes after Leeds surrendered possession cheaply in their own half

The Old Trafford crowd were delirious as Fernandes ripped the Leeds defence apart time after time to score a hat-trick

Paul Pogba played Fernandes through on goal with a delicate, deft touch and the playmaker fired through Meslier to score

Pogba and Fernandes celebrated with each other after the opening goal and then continued to link up to devastating effect

Fernandes was keen to acknowledge the assists from Paul Pogba as the pair combined to devastating effect

Bielse had less to be pleased about. How Leeds missed Kalvin Phillips in midfield, but in truth this was a failure of tactical flexibility. There’s no point expecting Bielsa to change, so it’s senseless bemoaning it when he has brought so much that is good. But Robin Koch was stranded alone in holding midfield and centre halves Liam Cooper and Pascal Struijk were overwhelmed as players continued to flood forward.

United forewarned Leeds of their intent. Mason Greenwood, 19, visibly stronger than three months ago – ‘he is a man compared to the boy he was’ according to Solskjaer - was flying forwards at every opportunity. And on 14 minutes he drove through midfield to release Paul Pogba, who executed a delightful quick-foot shuffle, dummy and shot which fooled almost everyone as the net rippled to a huge roar before Old Trafford realised he had struck the side netting. Daniel James was similarly played in by Greenwood on 26 minutes but had neither the composure nor the touch to finish.

Leeds weren’t without their first-half moments, Mateusz Klich;’s curling free kick producing a David De Gea save and Rodrigo’s header from a free kick being the best of them. But they were authors of their own downfall, undone by the softest of goals. What was supposed to be a sophisticated chipped goal kick by Illan Meslier was simply headed back into the path of Scott McTominay.

Mason Greenwood had netted United's second goal of the afternoon after smashing into the corner and in off the far upright

Pogba was involved again with an inch-perfect ball over the top, and Greenwood wheeled away to celebrate after burying in

Fred even secured a spot on the scoresheet, an unlikely name, after a flowing move allowed him to slot home a neat cutback

Meslier threw out a leg in an attempt to stop Fred's shot from finding the net, but the United midfielder added insult to injury

With the majority of Leeds’ players in attacking positions, McTominay simply moved the ball on to Pogba, who chipped in on for the Fernandes. His control, with stretched out leg, capped a fine move. His shot actually struck Meslier but still bounced in from the rebound.

Ayling’s extraordinary strike for 25 yards threatened to spoil the party on 49 minutes. Yet United were not even in top stride yet. A remarkable 17 minutes of football, between 52 minutes and 69 minutes, simply swept Leeds aside, Pogba strutting the stage like he was born for this.

His driven ball straight through a hopelessly-open Leeds defence on 52 minutes was delightful. Yet Greenwood still had work to do, sprinting in on goal as the angle narrowed. With this 19 year old, like all the best strikers, you pretty much know how it’s going to finish. Sure enough, he drove the ball past Meslier into the far corner, an astonishingly confident strike.

Luke Ayling thundered Leeds back on level terms soon after the second-half restart and sparked wild scenes in the away end

Ayling was afforded too much time and space on the edge of the box and left David de Gea helpless with his rip-roaring strike

Leeds' players bundled the scorer over and dived into a big pile to mark the moment, but were ultimately left well beaten later

Pogba could have also scored for United early in the first half but sent his shot wide after trying to skip past stopper Meslier

Just two minutes later, Pogba again drove a disguised pass into the path of Fernandes. Again, there was plenty to do, as the Portuguese turned inside to shoot. Ayling scrambled it seemingly away but the ball was over the line and the game effectively won at 3-1.

Next Victor Lindelof played the Pogba role on the hour, a through ball bouncing into the path of Fernandes. This was probably the pik of the goals, a thunderous half volley past Meslier.

Then even Fred’s moment on 68 minutes, Pogba breaking down the right to pull back into the midfielder’s path. ‘When Fred scores, we know everyone can score,’ said Solskjaer. It truly was the best of days for Manchester United.

Jadon Sancho was sent on for his United debut with the hosts firmly in the lead and tried to dazzle the 72,000-strong crowd

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer enjoyed the perfect start to the season and remained animated on the touchline as the goals went in

Raphael Varane is United's second big-name signing of the window and was officially unveiled on the pitch before kick-off

Re-live all the drama and goals from Old Trafford with live commentary from Sportsmail's DANIEL DAVIS below...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's move to Paris Saint-Germain has dominated the headlines for days and has served as further proof the tectonic plates of world football are shifting.

Barcelona are financially crippled and could no longer afford to keep the Argentine star who has dazzled in their colours for 17 years.

PSG, meanwhile, can comfortably accommodate a £1million-a-week salary for a 34-year-old - or at least give the impression they can - with their Qatari billions.

Argentine superstar Lionel Messi has signed for Paris Saint-Germain after leaving Barcelona

Messi's move has led to a feeling of deep sorrow in Barcelona but sparked scenes of jubilation in Paris where the belief is he can lead them to the holy grail of Champions League glory.

It's certainly a move that has rocked the football world but where does it rank on the all-time list of transfers that left us shocked?

Thousands of PSG fans gathered outside the Parc des Princes for Messi's unveiling

10. Roberto Baggio (Fiorentina to Juventus, £8m, 1990)

We've become accustomed to Juventus' dominance of Serie A - both on the pitch and in the transfer market - in recent times but it was a different story 30 years ago.

Nonetheless, signing Roberto 'The Divine Ponytail' Baggio from rivals Fiorentina for a world-record transfer fee of £8m back in 1990 didn't go down at all well.

It really rubbed Viola noses in it after Juve had beaten them in the UEFA Cup final a few weeks earlier and was viewed as disloyalty of the highest order after Fiorentina helped him back to his best after knee surgery.

Roberto Baggio's 1990 transfer from Fiorentina to bitter rivals Juventus sparked rioting

Confirmation of the move led to days of fan riots in the beautiful Tuscan city with Baggio's efforts to appease them by saying 'I was compelled to accept the transfer' cutting little ice.

When he returned to the Stadio Artemio Franchi in April 1991, Baggio refused to take a penalty awarded to Juventus but his replacement, Luigi De Agostini, missed and Juventus lost 1-0.

Baggio picked up a Fiorentina scarf thrown onto the field when he was substituted, which angered Juve fans, but they couldn't argue at his return of 27 goals that season.

9. Ashley Cole (Arsenal to Chelsea, £5m and William Gallas, 2006)

One of the most drawn-out and acrimonious transfer sagas of the Premier League era saw Cole cross the London divide from Arsenal to Chelsea.

Let's not forget that Arsenal were still a force at this time, having completed the Premier League season unbeaten in 2003-04 and reached the Champions League final in 2006.

But, fuelling by Roman Abramovich's billions, Chelsea were emerging as the major force in English football and Cole, the world's best left-back at that time, wanted to be part of it.

Jose Mourinho can't contain his excitement after finally signing Ashley Cole in 2006

There was the scandal of the 'tapping-up' meeting in 2005 involving Cole, his agent Jonathan Barnett, Chelsea manager Jose Mourinho and chief executive Peter Kenyon.

Fined heavily, Chelsea backed off but Cole let rip at Arsenal in his autobiography, claiming he'd been 'fed to the sharks' over the affair. He also claimed to have been left 'trembling with anger' over Arsenal's wage offer of £55,000-per-week.

Right on deadline day in August 2006, the move finally went through with Arsenal accepting £5m and William Gallas in part-exchange.

Cue furious Arsenal fans renaming him 'Cashley' and waving fake £20 notes with his face on them when the two clubs met that December.

Fuming Arsenal fans taunt Cole at Stamford Bridge in December 2006 after his Chelsea move

Fake £20 notes were waved around after Cole admitted his anger at Arsenal's £55,000-a-week contract offer

8. Carlos Tevez and Javier Mascherano (Corinthians to West Ham, undisclosed, 2006)

Carlos Tevez could probably appear on this list two or three times given he later crossed the Manchester divide and became the world's best-paid player at Shanghai Shenhua.

But the sheer madness of Tevez and fellow Argentina international Javier Mascherano turning down interest from some of Europe's leading clubs to join relegation-threatened West Ham in 2006 remains astonishing looking back.

The pair joined the Upton Park club from Brazilian side Corinthians late in the summer transfer window and immediately questions were asked as to how they could afford it.

Alan Pardew welcomes Carlos Tevez and Javier Mascherano to West Ham in September 2006

As later became clear, the players' rights were owned by a third party, Media Sports Investment (MSI), rather than Corinthians.

It took a Premier League investigation to untangle the situation and this led to a £5.5m fine for breaching their rules.

Mascherano soon moved on to Liverpool in January 2007 but Tevez, cleared to continue playing for West Ham after the league's investigation, helped keep them up at the expense of Sheffield United.

The Blades pursued compensation and eventually won a £20m pay-out from West Ham. The cost of them dropping out the top-flight, for 12 seasons, was significantly more.

Tevez scores the crucial goal at Old Trafford that kept West Ham in the Premier League in 2007

7. Robinho (Real Madrid to Man City, £32.5m, 2008)

In the space of a day, Manchester City had been transformed from a middling Premier League club (at best) to a world-football superpower.

The Abu Dhabi United Group officially completed their takeover on deadline day 2008 and in the few hours that remained of the market went on a mad trolley dash for a memento.

Wild offers for David Villa and Kaka were rejected but Real Madrid, presumably quite baffled, accepted a £32.5m bid for Brazilian Robinho after most people had gone to bed.

Manchester City's £32.5m signing of Brazilian star Robinho raised eyebrows in 2008

Robinho had expected, even on the last day of the window, to sign for Chelsea. Indeed, just after his move went through, he said in an interview: 'On the last day, Chelsea made a great proposal and I accepted.'

The reporter replied: 'You mean Manchester, right?'

'Yeah, Manchester, sorry!' replied the Brazilian.

He never really came close to living up to his price tag, managing 15 goals in 41 games during his one full season at the Etihad. But City's new owners had certainly shaken things up a bit.

The Abu Dhabi United Group's takeover of City, led by Sheikh Mansour (right) and Khaldoon Al Mubarak (left), had gone through earlier in the day they signed Robinho

6. Eric Cantona (Leeds to Manchester United, £1.2m, 1992)

Surely everyone knows the tale of how Eric Cantona came to cross the Pennines between bitter rivals, providing the spark to make Manchester United the dominant force of the early Premier League era.

Legend has it Leeds chairman Bill Fotherby rang up his Man United counterpart Martin Edwards to inquire about the availability of Denis Irwin.

The Irishman wasn't for sale but Alex Ferguson, who happened to be in the room with Edwards, judged him to ask whether Cantona was for sale as they needed a striker.

Alex Ferguson welcomes Eric Cantona to Old Trafford from Leeds United in 1992

The Frenchman was an enigmatic character - genius on the pitch but with a reputation for causing trouble for managers. Perhaps that helped prompt Leeds to sell in a £1.2m deal that would become known as the best bargain buy in Premier League history.

Ferguson knew how to harness Cantona's fiery personality to the benefit of the team and United had soon ended their 26-year wait for a league title.

By 1997, when he stunned football by announcing his retirement, Cantona had won three more titles and two FA Cups, making a very strong case to be the best the Premier League has ever witnessed.

5. Mo Johnston (Nantes to Rangers, £1.9m, 1989)

This was a transfer that angered both sides of the Old Firm divide and also the Sectarian split in Glasgow.

Scotland international striker Johnston played for Celtic in the mid-1980s and was a prolific goalscorer before spending a couple of years at French club Nantes.

He said initially he would return to Celtic but in July 1989 decided instead to sign for their bitter rivals Rangers.

Rangers manager Graeme Souness (right) with new signing Mo Johnston at Ibrox in 1989

Since the 1920s, Rangers had an unwritten rule whereby they didn't sign any player known to be a Roman Catholic, creating a deliberate distinction between themselves as a Protestant club and Celtic.

Johnston, brought in by manager Graeme Souness, was their first major Roman Catholic signing since World War One. And it didn't go down too well.

A section of Rangers supporters burned scarves and returned season tickets, while the club's kitman refused to lay out Johnston's kit in protest.

The only way Johnston could win them over and calm down the furore was by scoring goals. This he did, including a late winner in the Old Firm derby that November.

4. Lionel Messi (Free agent to Paris Saint-Germain, 2021)

So where do we place Messi's move this week? It depends on which perspective you take.

The manner of his departure from Barcelona - essentially because they could no longer afford his £570,000-a-week wages amid a post-pandemic financial collapse - was shocking.

The fact it all ended so suddenly and emotionally for Messi, after he'd agreed to a staggering new five-year deal only for the situation to change completely, was shocking.

Messi prepares to put pen to paper on his Paris Saint-Germain contract sat alongside club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi

But the upshot that the Argentine star has joined Paris Saint-Germain is not remotely shocking.

There were only realistically two clubs Messi could sign for as a free agent and Manchester City have other targets this summer.

So inevitably it had to be PSG, the Qatari-bankrolled club pretty much alone in being able to afford a £1m-a-week contract for Messi.

Perhaps the perception of this move will change over time but, for now, it goes in at No 4.

3. Sol Campbell (Tottenham to Arsenal, free, 2001)

There are many footballing divides that really shouldn't be crossed and the one in north London between Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur is certainly one of them.

Sol Campbell always wondered what the fuss was about but his transfer in the summer of 2001 remains one of the most controversial in English football history. Imagine if it happened now in the age of social media.

His contract at White Hart Lane had expired in 2001. Spurs offered to make the England defender the club's highest-paid player ever but Campbell ultimately made clear his aspiration to play Champions League football and win trophies.

Sol Campbell crossed the north London divide from Tottenham to Arsenal back in 2001

It was galling for Spurs because Campbell had previously said on record he could never play for Arsenal and there had been plenty of public pronouncements that he would be staying.

Even worse, they didn't get a transfer fee from Arsenal for him. Arsenal's confirmation of his arrival was also a total shock because rumours of the move hadn't leaked out into the press.

What's more, Campbell had offers from several clubs overseas but opted to move down the road. He was called 'Judas' by Spurs fans for years afterwards.

But he did achieve that success, winning two Premier League titles and three FA Cups when at Highbury.

Tottenham fans never forgave 'Judas' Campbell for signing for their bitter rivals

2. Neymar (Barcelona to Paris Saint-Germain, £198m, 2017)

It wasn't so much that PSG, keen to flex their financial muscles, had broken the world-transfer record. It was more that they absolutely obliterated the world-transfer record.

Paul Pogba had moved from Juventus to Manchester United for £89m in 2016. A year later, PSG had not doubled that and added a bit more to bring in Neymar from Barcelona.

The jaw-dropping fee was £198m. One hundred and ninety-eight million pounds. It remains the world-transfer record and is unlikely ever to be beaten.

Neymar shows off his ball skills after joining PSG for a world record £198m back in 2017

In their pursuit of winning European football's top prizes, PSG had just gone out and met a release clause that Barcelona had no doubt believed untouchable.

Neymar has scored 87 goals in 116 games for PSG, winning three league titles and a host of other domestic honours in France. He has not yet helped them deliver the Champions League.

There have been constant suggestions he wanted to head back to the Nou Camp, something that was never too likely to happen.

Now his old mate Messi is going to play alongside him again, perhaps Neymar can finally conquer Europe.

The Brazilian is still waiting to win the Champions League at PSG despite many domestic cups

1. Luis Figo (Barcelona to Real Madrid, £36.2m, 2000)

If you're going to launch a plan for world domination based on signing the very best players, as Florentino Perez did with his Galacticos in 2000, then definitely start by poaching the best player of your bitter rivals.

Luis Figo's move from Barcelona to Real Madrid at the turn of the century caused an absolute sensation and an outpouring of hatred seldom witnessed in a football stadium.

The move was simple enough; Real were feeling flush and matched the £36m release clause in Figo's Barca contract.

Luis Figo's transfer from Barcelona to Real Madrid in 2000 signalled the Galactico era

The Portuguese wasn't just some squad player at the Nou Camp but an integral figure who was respected by the fans for never shirking responsibility. It's fair to say their opinion of him flipped in an instant.

Ninety-eight thousand of them made their feeling abundantly clear when Figo returned to the Nou Camp with Real in October 2000 where banners featuring words such as 'traitor' and 'scum' hung.

Figo was mercilessly abused every time he touched the ball and subjected to a hail of objects, including bottles, cigarette lighters and even mobile phones, every time he came near the crowd.

His team-mate Michel Salgado told a brilliant story: 'By the second or third corner, I turned to Luis and said: "Forget it mate, you're on your own."

Barcelona fans burn a poster of Luis Figo in the stands on his first return to the Nou Camp

'I used to offer him the chance to take a short corner but missiles were raining down from the stands: a coin, a knife, a glass whiskey bottle. Johnnie Waller, I think.'

That wasn't even the pig's head incident. That occurred in his second time back in November 2002 when it took him two minutes to take a corner and the game was suspended for 20 minutes at one point.

That pig's head came to symbolise a new chapter in the Clasico rivalry.

Figo played 245 times for Real, just four games short of his tally for Barcelona.

He won two league titles and the Champions League but, for all the outlay on him, Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo and others, nobody judged the Galactico era an overwhelming success.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi has confirmed that Kylian Mbappe will be staying at the club for the 2021-2022 season.

The Frenchman's future has been up in the air this summer, given he has one year remaining on his deal at the Parc des Princes and has gained attention from Real Madrid.

However, Al-Khelaifi has dismissed claims that the 22-year-old could leave the French capital this summer - claiming that he 'is a PSG player' and that there are 'no doubts or excuses of any other kind' - with the Ligue 1 side now an attractive proposition after snapping up the epic signing of Lionel Messi from Barcelona.

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi has confirmed that Kylian Mbappe will stay at the club

Speaking at Lionel Messi's first press conference at the club, Al-Khelaifi (left) said there were 'no doubts' about Mbappe's future amid links to Real Madrid

Speaking at Messi's first press conference at the club, Al-Khelaifi touched on Mbappe's situation.

He said: 'Everyone knows the future of Mbappe. He is a PSG player. Kylian is very competitive, he wants to win, he has publicly said that he does not want to leave the team and there are no doubts or excuses of any other kind. Mbappe stays'.

Messi, who recently signed a two-year contract with Paris St-Germain worth a staggering £1million per week after leaving Barcelona, said he was excited about playing with Mbappe and Neymar - calling them 'the best players' during his press conference.

'It feels great to play with them to play everyday with these great players, and the other players who are here,' he told the world's media. 'I can't wait to train with them. It's great to do it everyday.

Real Madrid coach Carlo Ancelotti is reportedly plotting a deadline day swoop for Mbappe

Following Al-Khelaifi's confirmation, Messi said he was excited about playing with Mbappe (right) and Neymar (left) - calling them 'the best players' during his press conference

Real Madrid had hoped to prise Mbappe from Paris as they were certain that PSG would be unable to build a side with Neymar, Messi and the Frenchman in their attack due to Financial Fair Play (FFP) rules.

Mbappe had also revealed before his Euro 2020 campaign with France - which saw him miss a penalty in the last-16 shootout defeat by Switzerland - that he was undecided on his future.

However, Al-Khelaifi claims that the 22-year-old is now committed to the club and that he will not accept any potential offers from other clubs - including Real Madrid.

Real Madrid could now have to look elsewhere to add strength to their attacking line ahead of next season. Reports from Spain had claimed Los Blancos were plotting a deadline day swoop for the French superstar to tempt PSG into selling - amid the fear of losing him for nothing next year.

Mbappe revealed before his Euro 2020 campaign with France - which saw him miss a penalty in the last-16 shootout defeat by Switzerland - that he was undecided on his future

Real tried to sign Mbappe in 2017 from Monaco, with Spanish reports saying they were unable to get a deal through due to Gareth Bale's continued presence at the club and his huge salary.

Any deal for Mbappe would be a tricky one to negotiate, given the club have taken careful steps to reduce their wage bill this summer, refusing to give captain Sergio Ramos a new contract and also agreeing to sell Raphael Varane to Manchester United, set to pocket them £42million.

David Alaba is the only major signing they have made - on a free transfer- and there is now a bit of breathing room for Real to finally get Mbappe and count on one of the top strikers in the game for many years to come.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@PSG have released an all-access video of Lionel Messi's first day as he travelled from Barcelona to Paris and met his new team-mates and manager.

The 34-year-old put pen to paper on a mega £1million-a-week two-year deal on Tuesday amid much clamour and excitement in the French capital.

And the Ligue 1 giants have released a nine-minute long behind-the-scenes video showing Messi's dramatic 24 hours, including his plane journey, medical and meeting the likes of Georginio Wijnaldum and Mauricio Pochettino in the evening.

PSG have released an all-access video of Lionel Messi's first day as he joined the club

The Argentine met new team-mate Georginio Wijnaldum (L) and boss Mauricio Pochettino (R)

The video begins by recording Messi's journey from Barcelona to Paris on a private jet, accompanied by his wife, Antonela, and three kids.

He then touches down in the French capital and waves to passionate supporters from the window of the airport.

The 34-year-old then undergoes a thorough medical test, with routine checks and fitness readings all included.

With shots from inside the car taxying Messi from place to place too, he then arrives at the Parc des Princes and wears the PSG kit - with Messi and the No 30 on the back of the shirt - for the first time.

The video begins by recording Messi's journey from Barcelona to Paris on a private jet

The 34-year-old then undergoes a thorough medical check once in the French capital

Later in the evening, he met president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, with Leonardo (R) looking on too

Later in the evening, he meets new team-mate Wijnaldum - who also joined as a free agent this summer - and also manager Pochettino, who only joined himself in January.

He then poses for the cameras once again as he signs his contract alongside PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, with sporting director Leonardo also present on a momentous day for the French club.

PSG are holding a press conference on Wednesday morning when the world will directly hear from Messi for the first time since his move.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Allowing Lionel Messi to leave has not solved Barcelona's huge financial problems.

They will still need to take drastic action over the coming days to be able to register new signings ahead of the season that begins on Friday, and over the coming weeks to avoid having to give up their special status as one of Spain's four member-owned clubs.

One member of the commission on the club's proposed stadium renovation has already quit.

Joan Laporta is in a race against time in a bid to get to grips with Barcelona's crippling debts

Lionel Messi looked devastated as he spoke to the media and his team-mates at his farewell

Jaume Llopis said the club never really tried to keep Messi, bemoaned the fact that the wage bill was still 95 per cent of projected revenue and questioned whether new signing Memphis Depay could even be registered to start the campaign.

The special status problem is an even bigger shadow on the horizon.

In 1990 such was the financial state of Spain's football clubs that they were all instructed to become public limited sports companies. Barcelona, along with Real Madrid, Osasuna and Athletic Bilbao were exempt and allowed to continue as non-commercial sports associations.

The big difference is that members run the four exempt clubs but there can be no private ownership – no rich benefactor.

Barcelona will do everything possible to avoid having to give up the special status but president Joan Laporta has already underlined just how serious the situation is despite Messi's departure.

The club last season recorded losses of €487million £412m) and still has to service a debt of €1,17bn (£1bn). Although supporters are being allowed back into stadiums for the new season capacity limits have been set at 40 per cent for the first month.

The club's shirt sponsorship deal with Rakuten ends next year and their Nike agreement ends in 2023. If they are renewed they will be renewed for less money – an obvious repercussion of losing Messi.

Players are still being urged to make further pay sacrifices in line with the 50 per cent cut that Messi said he was prepared to make.

Barcelona have a special status in Spain as a fan-owned club and they want it to stay that way

Finances are so bad it is unclear if new signing Memphis (left) can be registered for the season

And there is still hope that money can be raised in the transfer market to bring the wage bill back down to the 65-70 per cent that is considered financially healthy.

Antoine Griezmann was close to a move to Atletico Madrid three weeks ago but the deal fell through because Atletico were not willing to match his Barcelona wages.

Big earners on long deals are proving almost impossible to shift.

Both Samuel Umtiti and Philippe Coutinho, two examples of that group, were whistled by spectators at Barcelona's final pre-season friendly on Sunday. Even club stalwart Jordi Alba was jeered.

He has been promoted to fourth captain at the club but some Barcelona supporters, unhappy that Coutinho and Umiti have not moved elsewhere, are also unhappy with the new contract Alba signed under the previous president.

Sergio Aguero missed that season curtain raiser and will now miss the first three months of the season injured. His future is in doubt with the possibility that he leaves before he plays for the club.

Big earners such as Philippe Coutinho are becoming impossible to find a new club for

It may suit neither the player nor the club that he stays having been brought in to appease his pal Messi. Barcelona will want money for him but having arrived on a free he will want to leave the same way if he goes.

Laporta had identified two possible routes to bring in an immediate cash injection without selling players but both have led to nothing.

First he hitched his wagon to the subsequently derailed European Super League gravy train. He met with Real Madrid president Florentino Perez and Juventus president Andrea Agnelli on Saturday but while those three clubs stand alone there is little they can do to breath new life into their cash cow.

Option two was the agreement between LaLiga and the US investment fund CVC worth €2.7bn (£2.3bn).

The money would have been distributed between the clubs in Spain's top two divisions with Barcelona receiving around €280m (£240m) – €42m (£36m) of which they would have to spend on debt restructuring, €199m £169m) on the redevelopment of the Nou Camp, and €42m (£36m) on players.

But Laporta ended up rejecting the deal because it meant giving up 10 per cent of the money made on television rights, to the investors, for the next 40 years.

Selling the club's promising young players would be the end for this current Barca board

Pedri is expected to become Barcelona's franchise player and selling him would cause uproar

There have been suggestions that one long-term condition of investment funds putting their money in to LaLiga or a European Super League is that all the clubs are private entities that allow private ownership.

Barcelona are also trying to sell off 'Barca corporate' a package of sections of the club including Barca Studios, the club's academy, Barca Innovation Hub, and Barca licensing. There are suggestions there are offers in excess of €200m (£170m) for this package but they have not yet been properly reviewed by the incoming board.

The one area where the club would have no problem selling players but where it would hurt them most is the young players who have emerged over the last two seasons. The highly-rated 18-year-old midfielder Ilaix Moriba is available for well below his €100m (£85m) clause.

Club supporters will accept his departure but selling Ansu Fati and more especially Pedri would be the end of the current board despite the massive interest in both.

Barcelona believe it will not come to that, and that it will not come to relinquishing their special status but they must find new revenue from somewhere.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The mother of legendary New Zealand cricketer Chris Cairns has been blocked from seeing her son as he fights for his life because of Sydney's lockdown laws.

Cairns, 51, is reportedly on life support after a massive heart attack in Canberra last week when he suffered a devastating aortic dissection.

He has since been transferred to a Sydney hospital for specialist treatment and has undergone several life-saving operations as medics battle to keep him alive.

But his mother Sue Wilson is banned from being by his hospital bedside under current Covid lockdown restrictions despite only being 300km away in Canberra.

Sue Wilson, left, the mother of legendary New Zealand cricketer Chris Cairns, right, has been blocked from seeing her son as he fights for his life because of Sydney's lockdown laws.

Cairns, 51, seen here with wife Mel in 2010, is reportedly on life support after a massive heart attack in Canberra last week when he suffered a devastating aortic dissection.

Travel between ACT and NSW has been tightly restricted in the during the outbreak, forcing his mother to remain in Canberra while she awaits permission to visit.

Cairns is understood to have developed an infection which is complicating his recovery from the heart attack.

An aortic dissection is a major medical emergency caused by a tear in the innermost layer of the body's main artery that branches off the heart.

If blood is able to flow through the outside layer of the large blood vessel's wall, aortic dissection can be deadly.

The right-hand batsman and fast-medium bowler is credited as one of the most talented all-rounders of his generation.

Cairns played 62 test matches, 215 one day internationals, and two T20's for New Zealand between 1989 and 2006. He is the son of Black Caps legend Lance Cairns.

Legendary New Zealand cricketer Chris Cairns (pictured) has reportedly collapsed after suffering an aortic dissection in Canberra last week

Several media outlets have reported the legendary right-hand batsman and fast-medium bowler is currently on life support after the freak medical episode

His family previously endured tragedy in 1993 when his sister Louise was killed when a truck failed to stop at a level crossing in New Zealand and collided with her passenger train.

In 2015, Cairns emerged on the right side of two prominent British trials following his victory in a libel case against Indian cricket administrator Lalit Modi in 2012.

The cricketer was found not guilty of perjury and perverting the course of justice charges in relation to match-fixing allegations.

Former Black Caps captain Brendon McCullum testified against Cairns in court but led the tributes to his former team-mate on Wednesday morning.

'It's a difficult subject to obviously talk about. We haven't seen each other for quite a long time,' McCullum said on his New Zealand breakfast radio show.

'We've been reflecting on just how fine a cricketer he was when the news came through and what he did for the game and New Zealand cricket throughout his career as well.

Cairns, a former Black Cap, is due to be transferred to a specialist hospital in Sydney soon

The 51-year-old had been living and working in Canberra with his wife and their two children for several years before he collapsed last week

'Our relationship is unimportant in the whole thing, the fact is that Chris is a father and also a son to Lance and Sue. They've already had such tragedy in their life with the loss of Chris' sister a long time ago as well.

'It's a really difficult time for those people and I know the cricket community and all those who support the Cairns family will be suffering right now. Today my family and myself are thinking of those people who are suffering.'

The born-and-bred Kiwi went on to commentate for Sky News and has been the chief executive of SmartSportz, a company that produces virtual sport.

The 51-year-old had been living and working in Canberra with his wife and their children for several years before he suddenly collapsed last week.

However the allegations had a severe impact on the cricketers life, with Cairns describing his reputation as 'completely scorched' by the legal saga.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Khamzat Chimaev has revealed his regret at falling out with Khabib Nurmagomedov over a misunderstanding.

The Chechen fighter was making waves last year after increasing his undefeated record with dominant victories in his first three UFC encounters on Fight Island.

He called out every top name under the sun and it ended up causing tension between him and Khabib, who he has always admired.

Khamzat Chimaev (right) said his tension with Khabib Nurmagomedov (left) was from a misunderstanding on social media

Chimaev burst onto the scene in the UFC last year with three dominant wins

Chimaev explained why they had a strained relationship, telling Frontkick: 'Some guy wrote something about me like, "Khabib is going to smash you," and I answered this guy, but it was my wrong because I answer to this bulls*** guy that nobody knows.

'I answered him if he wants to smash me, I’m going to smash him, too. (I answered) like this because I’m a real man and I’m going to answer like that.

'If somebody says he’ll smash you, what do you want me to say?'

He went on: 'Someone saying, "Khabib going to smash you" and in my head, if somebody says he’s going to smash you, of course I’m going to answer, "Nobody is going to smash me. I’m going to smash everybody."'

'If you’re a real man, you have to think like that, (unless) you’re some chicken you can’t stay up.

'Sometimes you forget you’re famous, and I become famous like one day before, and still sometimes and you wake up and think it’s normal life for you.'

UFC boss Dana White (right) set up a fight v Leon Edwards but it was cancelled due to Covid-19

Far from feeling any kind of animosity towards Khabib, Chimaev has always been a huge admirer.

He added: 'People think I hate him, but I love him because he’s Muslim. I’m Muslim. It’s like the same like he comes from some village like me, same country.

'Small republic like Chechnya, Dagestan like this is still the same. I have a lot of brothers from Dagestan, and yeah, I’m Muslim, he’s Muslim – alhamdulillah.'

Chimaev suffered horribly with Covid and feared he might be forced to retire after contracting the illness towards the end of last year.

But he has fought his way back to fitness and will take on China's Li Jingliang at UFC 267 in October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nuno Espirito Santo revealed he is yet to speak to Harry Kane, despite the Tottenham striker's future overshadowing the team's pre-season preparations.

Spurs played out an entertaining 2-2 draw with Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on Wednesday night but the hot topic remains the club captain's absence as he tries to push through a move to Manchester City.

When asked about Kane's future after the pre-season clash, Espirito Santo said: 'It is not that I don’t want to comment.

I believe we should discuss internally among us the issue relating to Harry and try to avoid any kind of public argument or discussion about it.

Nuno Espirito Santo revealed he has not spoken to Harry Kane yet since taking charge

Kane is hoping to pile the pressure on Daniel Levy (right) to allow him to leave Tottenham now

'Us, we have to focus on what is important. We have to solve the situation but first between us.

'We solve the situation internally with the club. Speaking and trying to reach a better solution and conclusion to this situation.

'All pre-season for all clubs has been hard in terms of preparation, I know this is a different aspect. I know it is different circumstances but it has been very hard for everybody.'

When asked directly if he has spoken to Kane, he admitted: 'The answer I will give you is I expect to speak with Harry soon and I haven’t had the chance yet.

Steven Bergwijn (second right) and Lucas Moura (right) were both on target to help Spurs peg Chelsea back from two goals down in their friendly at Stamford Bridge

Kane's decision to stay away from training is an attempt to force a move to City this summer

'Anything in relation to Harry is internal so first of all we have to first of all solve the problems ourselves and then I will speak with you.'

Chelsea are hunting a deal for Romelu Lukaku while Kane is the external focus for Spurs fans but despite the limelight on absent strikers, an entertaining game played out on Wednesday night.

A Hakim Ziyech brace gave the Blues a comfortable lead before Spurs pulled one back through Lucas Moura and then levelled with Steven Bergwijn's strike.

It was a brief glimpse of what life post-Kane could look like, though it remains to be seen whether the England striker will leave this summer.

Nuno watched his side fight back to draw but Kane's future was still the hot topic

He was due to return to pre-season training on Monday but has continued his summer holiday with an extra day in Florida.

The 28-year-old still plans to return to Spurs this weekend, but he is likely to need a Covid test at their Enfield base and complete a period of isolation before he can return to training.

He could 'test to release' on day five of his quarantine but even then is likely to be short of fitness for next Sunday's opener against City, the team he is pushing to sign for.

Pep Guardiola's side's offer of £100million was rejected by Spurs, and there is uncertainty over whether the champions can strike a compromise with Daniel Levy.

The Spurs chairman has put a £150m price tag on last season’s top scorer, and the Kane saga is expected to drag on unless Spurs alter their demands.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona are still struggling to register new signings just 48 hours ahead of the start of their LaLiga season.

The Catalan giants are in financial disarray and must sell players and reduce their wage bill before new boys Memphis Depay, Sergio Aguero and Eric Garcia can be included in Ronald Koeman's squad.

Sportsmail looks at the ramifications, not to mention the embarrassment, of another sorry chapter in their catastrophic summer.

Barcelona president Joan Laporta still has work to do to register his club's new signings

Lionel Messi may have gone but the club are still desperately struggling to balance the books

What normally happens?

Clubs sign players and they have to register them before the transfer window shuts on the last day of August. Only free agents can be signed after that date.

Why can’t Barcelona do that with Eric Garcia, Sergio Aguero, Emerson and Memphis Depay?

LaLiga has told teams who find themselves over their salary limit that they have to apply a 1/4 ratio to summer business.

If they sign someone who costs €10million (£8.4m) - and that includes salary - then they must offload someone for €40m (£34m) - again including salary.

Barcelona have completely failed to get anyone off the wage bill so it’s difficult for them to register their new recruits.

Barcelona have failed to get anyone off the books so it’s hard for them to register new recruits

What about Messi!?

Messi had already left the club. He was off the wage bill on the last day of June. He would have counted as a new signing had he stayed.

They have got rid of Matheus Fernandes, whose contract was paid off. But the midfielder, who played just 17 minutes for the first team after being signed for €7m (£6m) in 2020, actually counts as a cost - albeit it one they can defer - because he had a deal until 2025.

So they can’t register anyone until someone leaves?

In a nutshell. Although Emerson actually counts as a returning loanee after his two seasons out at Betis so it’s just Memphis, Aguero and Eric Garcia.

Messi's exit had no impact because he had already left the club and was off the wage bill

Will they have to send them back?

Back where? They were free transfers out of contract. The club is fairly certain that by the August deadline all three will be signed up. The only doubt maybe is with Aguero.

Memphis is the priority and the club believe they can get Miralem Pjanic out on loan to allow them to bring him in. Garcia would probably not have played anyway because he was at the Euros and the Olympics but by the time he is ready he will be registered.

Barca are also still trying to place Samuel Umtiti. Martin Braithwaite is another they could sell because he has a market in the Premier League but he makes a small dent in the wage bill and Ronald Koeman believes he will be useful.

Memphis Depay is the priority and Barcelona want Miralem Pjanic out so they can register him

And Aguero?

Well he’s out for ten weeks anyway. And because he’s a free agent then he could join after the August deadline. But let’s see if that still suits both parties.

There was a meeting between Aguero’s agents and the club on the Friday after it became clear Messi was not staying. He was brought in principally because of his chemistry on and off the field with his international team-mate.

Barcelona could still do with his goals but if there are going to be injury problems and with his salary – even though he took a huge pay cut to come – then maybe the club will not stand in the player’s way if he wants out.

And obviously Barcelona can’t sign anyone else?

Let’s see what swaps can still be cooked up. Antoine Griezmann to Atletico and Saul Niguez to Barcelona was agreed by both players only for the clubs to then fall out with regards who paid Griezmann’s wages.

Griezmann now looks like staying for sure but others could move out in deals that bring new faces.

And as Joan Laporta said after waving Messi off: ‘The wage bill is still 95 per cent of projected revenue’. LaLiga says it should be 70 per cent.

A swap deal involving Antoine Griezmann and Saul Niguez was done before the deal collapsed

Is there no other way without sales or salary cuts?

An injection of new money would change everything but they have so far rejected LaLiga’s deal with the US investment fund CVC worth €2.7billion (£2.2bn).

The money would be distributed between the clubs in Spain’s top two divisions with Barcelona receiving around €280m (£237m) – €42m (£35m) of which they would have to spend on debt restructuring, €199m (£168m) on the redevelopment of the Camp Nou and €42m (£35m) on players.

The €42m (£35m) would allow them to register players and even sign but because CVC would get 10 per cent of television money from Spanish football for the next 50 years they don’t want to ratify it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea supporters risk missing out on the club's season opener against Crystal Palace due to incomplete work in the Matthew Harding Lower Stand at Stamford Bridge.

The Blues, fresh off their Super Cup triumph in Belfast this week, are hoping to close the gap on Manchester City and challenge Pep Guardiola's side for the Premier League title this campaign.

However, Chelsea have announced that unfinished work on installing rail seating in the Matthew Harding Lower Stand means it will remain closed until further notice, meaning season ticket holders could possibly miss out on attending the first game on Saturday.

Chelsea fans are at risk of missing the first game due to incomplete works at Stamford Bridge

Thomas Tuchel's side are set to host Crystal Palace in their curtain raiser in West London

Supporters affected by this development have been guaranteed a refund based on the ticket and membership they have acquired.

'In the event that we cannot complete these seats those affected season ticket holders will receive a pro-rata refund for the match plus a refund of any reasonable pre-booked travel costs,' the club statement read.

'Affected members will receive a full refund, plus a refund of any reasonable pre-booked travel costs.

'In addition, after discussions with the Fans Forum and several supporter groups, affected season ticket holders and members will also receive a complimentary ticket to one of the first three home Champions League Group stage games this season.

However, incomplete rail seating work has left the club in a rush to finish it for the fixture

The club has promised refunds and an announcement is expected by 3pm on Friday

'Those affected supporters will be contacted next week regarding the process for redeeming this.'

The European champions also confirmed that works on the Shed Upper and Lower Stands have been completed.

The areas of the Matthew Harding Lower Stand most at risk are blocks 8, 9, 14, 15 and 16, with a definitive confirmation for the Palace game expected on Friday at 3pm BST.

'We sincerely apologise for this situation, we should have done better,' the club added.

'We have tried everything possible to avoid it, but due to the bespoke nature of the fittings we have no alternative but to wait and see if the supplier can meet our manufacturing and fitting deadlines.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish is expecting to spend most of his time on the left of the attack for Manchester City this season.

Following his £100million British record move from Aston Villa, City boss Pep Guardiola said Grealish could play in a number of positions.

But Sportsmail understands that when available, Grealish has been earmarked to play a similar role to the one in which he thrived during the last two seasons at Villa Park.

Sportsmail understands Jack Grealish will be utilised on the left side of Man City's attack

It was a position which Grealish impressed in during his last two seasons at Aston Villa

The 25-year-old produced 14 goals and 15 assists in the Premier League in that period, sparking City’s interest.

During his Villa career, Grealish also played in a three-man midfield and also as a No 10 in a 4-2-3-1 system.

Guardiola hopes Grealish will play a vital role this season as they look to retain the Premier League title.

They kickstart their season on Sunday afternoon against Tottenham.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Conor McGregor has bitten back at Michael Bisping, describing him as a 'nobody', following the former UFC champion's warning that The Notorious would get torn 'limb from limb' by Daniel Cormier.

McGregor, who has been particularly outspoken on social media since his defeat to Dustin Poirier at UFC 264, made the comment during a Twitter Q&A.

It came after Bisping sent a fierce warning in the 33-year-old's direction, insisting a bout between he and Daniel Cormier would be a non-starter, following a war of words between McGregor and the American in recent weeks.

Conor McGregor has hit back at Michael Bisping, describing the former champ as a 'nobody'

Having been alerted to Bisping's warning on Twitter, McGregor took aim at the retired 42-year-old, insisting he 'rushed back to competition' after his stoppage defeat to Georges St-Pierre.

'Bisping is a nobody on Sirius xm,' he wrote. 'Rushed back to competition after being dropped/strangled and then gets shotgun slept by (Kelvin) Gastelum's left hand. Devastating.

'Even though I collect commission on all his fights, I still said to the team to pull the 'gast' fight. I knew it was coming.

'But hey, 100k! 50k off the top of each fight. I used to say "yoink" every time it hit the account.'

McGregor's outburst came after Bisping warned he would be no match for Daniel Cormier

The Notorious insists Bisping came back too early after being defeated by Georges St-Pierre

McGregor is facing a year on the sidelines after suffering a fractured tibia in the UFC 264 headliner at the end of a first round dominated by Poirier.

However, the Irishman has stayed involved in a number of feuds since his second successive defeat, notably with 42-year-old Cormier.

McGregor described Cormier as a 'fat drunk f***', after the American was critical of both his post-fight interview, in which he took aim at Poirier and his family, and his later-deleted tweet directed at Khabib Nurmagomedov.

The tweet read 'Covid is good and father is evil', responding to the Russian's comments that 'good always defeats evil' following McGregor's defeat to Poirier.

Cormier said that McGregor's tweet about Khabib's father's death was a 'cry for help', while also being impressed by Dustin Poirier's checked kicks throughout the bout

McGregor took exception to Cormier saying Poirier was checking McGregor's kicks and shared this image on social media

Bisping believes McGregor is picking the wrong fight in Cormier, warning the Irishman that a bout between the two would be "murder".

'Careful what you wish for,' Bisping said on the 'Believe You Me' podcast. 'Careful who you're picking fights with.

'I'm not disrespecting Conor McGregor — but I don't care what Conor McGregor it is, whether it's double-champ Conor McGregor (or what). DC is gonna f****** pull you limb from limb.

'He could do it one-handed, he could do it with one eye, two eyes, no eyes. He could do it after 25 Modelos. That ain't a fight. That is murder, that is assault, somebody call the cops!'

Michael Bisping insists McGregor should stay away from a potential fight with Cormier

Cormier, who seems to have riled McGregor up after praising Poirier's checked kicks in their UFC 264 bout, has previously described the Irishman's subsequent Twitter outbursts as a cry for help.

He told ESPN: 'I get shock value and I get trying to get people to talk but way too far. To the point that I immediately called Khabib last night and said, "Are you OK?"

'Asking him if he’s OK after having to see that, especially with no ability to do anything about it again. He spoke to my kids at my wrestling program the other day and said he was never happier than when he got to fight McGregor on the day. Because for so long, he wanted to get his hands on Conor and beat Conor up.'

Cormier added: '(Conor McGregor) Absolutely crossed the line.

'I think when stuff like that is being said, it’s a cry for help. Conor has all the money in the world, he has all the fame, but now when you start to dig at that level, it’s like somebody needs to get to McGregor and help him to start to kind of re-shift his mind and his focus and get him back to a better place. It’s unfortunate.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona's legendary midfield duo Xavi and Andres Iniesta admit it will be 'hard and it will hurt' to see Lionel Messi in a PSG shirt after he signed a stunning £1m a week two-year deal on Tuesday.

The Argentine, who was Barcelona captain and won 31 major trophies during 21 years at the Camp Nou, emotionally departed the club last week after being unable to sign a new deal due to financial restrictions.

And as the six-time Ballon d'Or winner put pen-to-paper on his sensational new deal in the French capital on Tuesday, Xavi admitted he was 'so sad' for his former team-mate, whom he won seven LaLiga titles and four Champions Leagues with.

Xavi and Andres Iniesta admit it will be 'hard and it will hurt' to see Lionel Messi in a PSG shirt (pictured after Messi won the 2010 Ballon d'Or, when Iniesta and Xavi came second and third)

Messi holds the Paris Saint-Germain shirt after completing his move to the French side

'It's a pity to see he and the club couldn't find a solution,' Xavi told The Times.

'I know that Leo wanted to stay, but in the end it could not be sorted. The only thing I can say now is that I will miss him a lot.

'It's even hard for me to picture Messi with a shirt other than Barca's. It's sad for Leo, especially for how I saw him emotionally at the Camp Nou the other day, but for FC Barcelona as well.'

Meanwhile Iniesta, who is still playing for Japanese club Vissel Kobe after leaving Barca in 2018, told AFP: 'I don't know what happened internally, nor how things unfolded, but the club will need to recover from this transfer.

The trio were the star players during the glory years under Pep Guardiola from 2008-2012

The 34-year-old Argentine put pen to paper on his Paris Saint-Germain contract on Tuesday

Moments before the announcement, PSG teased a trailer showing him in the centre circle

'It will hurt to see him in another team's shirt. Leo personifies Barcelona. He was everything, he's a player who transcends the team. I've never seen a player like him and I don't think I ever will.

'[Barcelona] will continue to be one of the best teams, one of those that has to be on the summit.'

Iniesta and Xavi were second and third respectively as Messi won the 2010 Ballon d'Or with the trio the star men in Pep Guardiola's all-conquering Barca team, as well as Luis Enrique's 2015 treble-winners.

Meanwhile, Barca fans were critical of president Joan Laporta, as well as LaLiga boss Javier Tebas, after Messi was forced to leave the club in emotional circumstances last week with the fallout at the Nou Camp likely to continue in the coming weeks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona fans chanted Lionel Messi's name in the tenth minute of their victory against Juventus in the Joan Gamper Trophy on Sunday night.

It was Barcelona's first game since the departure of their legendary No 10.

Ronald Koeman's side ran out 3-0 winners at the Estadi Johan Cruyff, with Memphis Depay, Martin Braithwaite and Riqui Puig all scoring.

Fans Chanting Lionel Messi's name at the 10th minute ❤



You'll forever be in our hearts Leo ❤



pic.twitter.com/C6FqTHjQ7N — Messaitama🤺🇦🇷 (@messaitama) August 8, 2021

Barcelona fans chanted Lionel Messi's name in the tenth minute of their win against Juventus

Memphis Depay scored the opening goal as Barcelona managed to secure a 3-0 victory

Martin Braithwaite is congratulated by his team-mates after making it 2-0 to Barcelona

Although he may no longer be a Barcelona player, the Argentina international's incredible impact on the club was evident, with some supporters at the game holding Messi shirts aloft.

It was an encouraging performance from Barcelona as they prepared for the new LaLiga campaign, which gets under way next weekend.

Midfielder Riqui Puig completed the scoring for Barcelona with an impressive finish late on

Cristiano Ronaldo, who played 45 minutes for Juventus, was unable to get on the scoresheet

Barcelona took the lead in the third minute, with youngster Yusuf Demir playing in Depay, who finished past Wojciech Szczesny.

Neto made a save to deny Cristiano Ronaldo and Barcelona proceeded to make it 2-0 in the 57th minute, with Braithwaite scoring with a header.

Riqui Puig rounded off the scoring with an excellent finish in stoppage time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leicester star James Maddison bizarrely posed for a selfie with a pitch invader during his side's Community Shield success against Manchester City at Wembley.

The Foxes prevailed with a 1-0 victory on Saturday, with Kelechi Iheanacho scoring a penalty late on.

During the game a fan somehow managed to evade security and get close to the pitch, with Maddison happy for a photo to be taken ahead of a set-piece.

James Maddison posed for a selfie with a Leicester fan during the Community Shield victory

The incident occurred before a set-piece was taken during the clash at Wembley on Saturday

A mid game selfie with @Madders10, as you do. 🤣 pic.twitter.com/7Gx9oxPnzT — Gary Lineker 💙 (@GaryLineker) August 7, 2021

Former Leicester striker Gary Lineker posted a video of the incident accompanied by the caption: 'A mid game selfie with @Madders10, as you do.'

There were previously security concerns at Wembley during the Euro 2020 final between England and Italy last month, when some fans forced their way into the stadium without tickets.

Maddison played 71 minutes as Leicester secured more silverware.

Maddison won more silverware with Leicester to follow on from last season's FA Cup success

The 24-year-old, who won the FA Cup with Leicester last season, has been linked with a move to Arsenal this summer.

Last season Maddison scored eight goals in 31 appearances in the Premier League, while he provided seven assists.

He will be aiming to get back into the England squad, having made one appearance for his country so far, which came against Montenegro in 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Team GB's Jessie Knight endured heartbreak at the Olympics as she crashed into the first hurdle during her 400m heat.

After an initial false start, the 27-year-old tripped as she approached the hurdle and ended up stumbling into it.

Following the race Knight was left in tears and didn't want to discuss the incident.

Team GB's Jessie Knight was left in tears after crashing into the first hurdle in her 400m heat

#GBR Kneels before 1st hurdle Jessie knight. She okay. Not cool that this was a restart. She would have rocked it on the first start. First start called off for echo pic.twitter.com/bAerT2qLC6 — G G (@tweetgregory) July 31, 2021

Knight looked distraught as she watched the other competitors push on.

It has been a nightmare Olympics so far for Knight, who had to isolate upon arrival in Tokyo after a person on her flight tested positive.

Knight looked distraught as she watched the other competitors in the race push on

It has been a nightmare Olympics so far for Knight, who had to isolate after arriving in Tokyo

That proved to be heavily disruptive with regards to her preparation.

She gave up her job as a primary school teacher in order to pursue her dream of Olympic glory on a full-time basis.

Sydney McLaughlin of Australia finished first with a time of 54.65 seconds. Gianna Woodruff (Panama), Sara Slott Petersen (Denmark) and Thi Lan Quach (Vietnam) also progressed.

Knight still has a chance of glory in the 4x400 metre relay.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Even Lionel Messi says it is ‘madness’. And it is. A front three of Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe is just about as ‘mad’ as a front three can be.

Imagine you’re Julien Stephan, Strasbourg’s manager. You’ve got Paris Saint-Germain this weekend. Where do you begin to prepare?

Probably by praying that Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe aren’t fit to start together just yet. Save that for Brest the following week.

Lionel Messi has joined Paris Saint-Germain after his stunning exit from Barcelona last week

A front three of Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe will frighten the life out of their rivals

Lille pipped PSG to last season’s title, but let’s not kid ourselves: Mauricio Pochettino’s side are going to walk Ligue 1 this time. Whatever competition was left in that league is gone.

With Messi, Neymar and Mbappe — or MNM as they’ll inevitably become known — PSG are the footballing equivalent of the Harlem Globetrotters.

Are they the most terrific trio ever? I’m not so sure. There are a few contenders for that title.

Messi, Samuel Eto’o and Thierry Henry for Barcelona. Gareth Bale, Karim Benzema and Cristiano Ronaldo for Real Madrid. Wayne Rooney, Carlos Tevez and Ronaldo for Manchester United.

But the best of them all, in my opinion, was Messi, Luis Suarez and Neymar — otherwise known as Barcelona’s MSN. From 2014 to 2017, they got 364 goals and 174 assists. The flair and the connection they had, it was frightening. They won the Champions League in 2015.

That competition will act as the barometer for this PSG trio. Not Ligue 1. The record for most goals scored in a 38-match season in that league is 118, by RC Paris in 1959-60. That should be beaten.

It will take some going to beat Barcelona's MSN which had Luis Suarez instead of Mbappe

The most points is 96, by PSG in 2015-16. That should go, too. The biggest victory stands at 12-1, for Sochaux against Valenciennes in 1935.

Even that could be bettered if they fancy being exceptionally ruthless one afternoon in the French capital. I see Pochettino using Neymar on the left, Mbappe down the middle and Messi on the right.

In truth, they are so good and so versatile that it doesn’t matter where they play! This attack will frighten the life out of every team across Europe.

Even at 34 years old, Messi is still brilliant. But they have got some doing to topple the MSN.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Six minutes into the UEFA Super Cup, Marcos Alonso got in behind Villarreal’s defence and fired a ‘tap me in’ ball across the six-yard line in the Spaniard’s box.

Kai Havertz was on his heels and Hakim Ziyech, this time, had not started his run into the danger area quickly enough.

Minutes later Havertz flashed another ball into Villarreal’s area which Timo Werner missed before N’Golo Kante’s eventual shot saved.

Romelu Lukaku is the perfect man to take advantage of the many chances Chelsea create

Thomas Tuchel was on his feet applauding Chelsea’s purposeful start.

In Chelsea matches to come those sort of opportunities may well end with head coach Tuchel having a couple of goals to celebrate instead.

They were sort of openings a ‘real No 9,’ as Tuchel called him, would anticipate and that the incoming Romelu Lukaku will be bought to finish off. His track record more than suggests he will.

Chelsea’s lack of ruthlessness, cutting edge and a focal point, particularly in a first half they dominated but also during later periods they dominated, was on display again in Belfast.

Ziyech scored once from one of many inviting deliveries Chelsea whipped into the Villarreal box but there should have been more for Tuchel’s side.

Chelsea's lack of cutting edge in Wednesday's UEFA Super Cup was on full display in Belfast

Thomas Tuchel's men created plenty of first-half chances but they weren't finished off

If he was watching somewhere, Lukaku’s determination to get started would only have increased on sight of the sort of service he might receive.

Last season, despite it ending with a Champions League triumph that earned Chelsea this meeting with Villarreal, also explained why finding a player makes it their business to get into goalscoring positions and take chances was essential for the Stamford Bridge club this summer.

According to the stats, they should have been the third highest scorers and created the fourth highest number of big chances.

Yet, for all that, they finished the season as the eighth highest scorers in the division and with the 14th best shot conversion rate out of 20 teams.

Fear not. The man who should get all of Chelsea’s attacking numbers to match up is on the way.

Lukaku landed in England, at Biggin Hill airport, at around 6pm last night not too long before Chelsea strode into Windsor Park.

It is not hard to see why Chelsea have spent £98m on Lukaku, who will spearhead the attack

Meanwhile, progress was also being made in the other related moves. Edin Dzeko was on the verge of being confirmed as Lukaku’s Inter replacement.

Roma are also hoping to persuade Tammy Abraham to become Dzeko’s successor having agreed a £34m deal with Chelsea.

Abraham is thought to be tempted after discussing Roma with friends familiar with the Italian club but was due to make a final call after his involvement as an unused sub on Wednesday night.

Lukaku has made up his mind over his future. It’s not hard to see why Chelsea have spent big to re-sign him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just when England wondered if things could be in any more disarray, they now face the possibility of going into a Test without both Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson for the first time in almost five years.

That causes obvious problems for their bowling attack. Take 1,145 Test wickets out of any team and you leave a huge hole. But it also presents issues for a batting line-up that was already facing questions.

The issue is this: if both Broad and Anderson are missing, England cannot risk selecting a four-man attack, because two of those bowlers would be inexperienced, and another could be Mark Wood, who tends not to bowl long spells. That means they’ll need to pick five bowlers — and that, in turn, means something must give in the batting.

England are facing the possibility of a test without stars Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson

Jonny Bairstow has tightened up his technique and could play as a makeshift number three

First, though, it’s worth saying that what has happened is a reminder of how lucky we’ve been to have Broad and Anderson together for so many years. It shows how fit they’ve been, as well as the benefit of central contracts. There have been times when we’ve taken them for granted.

England’s problem now is the knock-on effect of their absence. There has been talk of replacing Zak Crawley with Haseeb Hameed and bringing back Ollie Pope, but if Jos Buttler is at No 6 to accommodate a five-man attack, both those things won’t be possible.

The problem position is No 3. Pope was part of England’s first-choice team before he injured a thigh, so it makes sense that he returns to the side — but he’s never batted above No 4 for Surrey.

And if Joe Root, the captain and — by a distance — best player, is unwilling to move up a place, England would be shooting themselves in the foot by risking the runs he scores at No 4.

That potentially leaves Jonny Bairstow as a makeshift No 3. He’s had problems in the past against the moving red ball, but he has tightened up his technique — he now goes back and across — so he could be an option.

If they’re keen for Hameed to play, then I would have no problem with him replacing Dom Sibley. Rory Burns was player of the series against New Zealand, so he can’t be dropped after one bad game, and if you’re picking on potential, Hameed edges Sibley.

It was almost five years ago that England went into a Test without Anderson or Broad

I can easily see them sticking with Sibley after he twice saw off the new ball at Trent Bridge, but I’d have no issues with Hameed walking out to open this morning.

That brings us to the bowling. Assuming Anderson is ruled out, it gives others a chance to stake their claim, not just for this series but the Ashes, too. Moeen Ali has a great opportunity now to prove the skills that have brought him nearly 3,000 Test runs and nearly 200 wickets can do a good job for England.

Clearly Ollie Robinson plays again, because he has made an excellent start to his Test career, and will have fond memories of Lord’s — at least on the field — after his strong debut there against New Zealand in June.

I’d also go with the express pace of Wood, and there is room for Sam Curran to provide left-arm swing and lower-order hitting.

Saqib Mahmood should take the last seam-bowling slot ahead of Craig Overton for the Test

The tricky one is the last seam-bowling slot, but I’d go for Saqib Mahmood ahead of Craig Overton, even though Mahmood has only just been drafted into the squad. I like what I have seen from him every time he has played, and he is the type of bowler, with his reverse swing, who could do well in Australia.

Whatever team England go with, it will be a great shame if Anderson misses one of the landmark events of any home sporting summer: a Test against India at Lord’s with the series in the balance.

That’s especially the case after what happened in Nottingham, where he dismissed Virat Kohli first ball after not getting him out since 2014. That seemed to have set up a mouthwatering second round at Lord’s. If it’s not to be, then England will just have to hope others can step up.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United have reportedly made £37m signing Amad Diallo available for loan this summer.

The 19-year-old who arrived at Old Trafford back in January, made eight first-team appearances for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side in the second-half of last season.

United have strengthened their side again this summer with the long-awaited addition of Jadon Sancho on a £73m deal from Borussia Dortmund.

Manchester United could be set to let Amad Diallo leave the club on loan this summer

Manchester Evening News have now reported that the club are willing to loan out Diallo for the coming season to boost his chances of regular first-team football.

There are plenty of attacking players available to Solskjaer this season in addition to Sancho.

Anthony Martial, Dan James and Mason Greenwood started in their 4-0 pre-season victory over Everton and are ahead of Diallo in the pecking order.

United also have Jesse Lingard and Edinson Cavani to their disposal, while Marcus Rashford will be sidelined until October after undergoing a much-needed operation on a troublesome shoulder.

United have strengthened their right-wing position with the signing of Jadon Sancho

United have already loaned out right-sided forward Facundo Pellistri to Alaves for the upcoming season and Diallo could follow him out the doors for the 2021-22 season.

Diallo was predominantly used as part of United's Under 23 side last season, notably getting a brace against rivals Liverpool in his first appearance in their colours.

He made his first senior appearance as a substitute for Greenwood during a 4-0 Europa League victory over Real Sociedad.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jo Konta's frustrating summer has taken another turn for the worse after she withdrew from the National Bank Open in Montreal on Thursday, just two weeks before the start of the US Open.

The British No 1 was due to face American 15th seed Coco Gauff for a place in the last eight but pulled out due to a knee injury. Konta had been hoping for a prolonged run at the WTA Tour event after missing both Wimbledon and the Olympics.

Jo Konta's injury troubles have continued following her Wimbledon and Olympic absences

The 30-year-old was unable to play at the All England Club as a close contact of a Covid positive. She then caught the virus herself and was unable to travel to Tokyo.

Her return to action in Canada had been going well and she reached the third round by beating third seed Elina Svitolina on Wednesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jannik Vestergaard is undergoing a medical today ahead of completing his £15million move to Leicester from Southampton.

Foxes boss Brendan Rodgers confirmed the Denmark defender had arrived in the East Midlands and was completing the formalities on his transfer, with a contract of three or four years anticipated ahead of a probable debut against Wolves on Saturday.

Vestergaard, 29, had been on Leicester's radar for 18 months but they moved again for him after Wesley Fofana broke a leg and damaged knee ligaments during a pre-season friendly with Villarreal.

Leicester have completed a deal with Southampton for the transfer of Jannik Vestergaard

With Jonny Evans also struggling with a foot problem until at least mid-September, Rodgers had wanted a player with Premier League experience to hit the ground running.

Vestergaard has been in England for three seasons after joining Saints from Borussia Monchengladbach in 2018.

Rodgers was already looking at a centre-back even before Fofana was injured and has also made it clear that a left-footed winger remains a priority.

It is understood that Saints will land an initial £14million fee for Vestergaard's services that will rise to £15m with certain add-ons, taking the total that the club have taken from transfer sales this summer to over £50m.

Leicester were compelled to sign a defender after Wesley Fofana broke his leg in pre-season

Hasenhuttl confirmed the deal was done, as he now looks outside of England for a replacement

The defender joins star striker Danny Ings in leaving the club this summer, after he swapped St Mary's for Aston Villa in a £25m switch plus add-ons.

Vestergaard joined Saints from German club Borussia Monchengladbach three years ago and has been a regular at the heart of defence. He was also part of the Denmark squad that made the semi-finals of Euro 2020.

Leicester will listen to offers for midfielders Hamza Choudhury, Dennis Praet and Nampalys Mendy as they attempt to build the squad Rodgers wants.

Southampton, meanwhile, are looking closely at options outside England as they try to replace Vestergaard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The 2021/22 Premier League season is finally upon us, with Arsenal set to get the campaign underway with a Friday night visit to promoted side Brentford.

Following the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic, last season was largely played behind closed doors, with fans prohibited from watching their beloved teams.

That has now changed, with every Premier League match to be played in front of a capacity crowd, as things stand.

With the absence of fans last season, fixtures were scattered across the weekends, with each and every game televised - sometimes even for free.

However, with the fans now returning to the stadiums, there will be multiple 3pm Saturday kick-offs each weekend, with more traditional match times returning and fewer games shown live.

The TV schedule therefore becomes even more important knowledge, and Sportsmail outlines how you can watch every televised match throughout the season, which we will update as further fixtures are announced.

Manchester City were largely unrivalled as they strolled to the 2020/21 Premier League title

A total of 200 matches will be broadcast live across the 2021/22 Premier League campaign

Where to watch Premier League football this season

A total of 200 Premier League matches will be televised live this season, across the division's three primary broadcast partners Sky Sports, BT Sport and Amazon Prime Video.

Sky Sports is once again the main broadcaster of Premier League football for next season, showing a total of 128 matches.

Subscribers can watch the games either on the TV or by streaming it on Sky Go.

For those who are current customers but don't have access to sport, you can upgrade to a combined package of Sky's Premier League and Football channels at a cost of £18 per month, while the complete sports package costs £25 per month.

For non subscribers, a Sky TV and Sky Sports package is available for £41.

Viewers can also buy a Sky Sports day membership from Now for £9.98, or a Now Sports Membership for £25-a-month for 10 months, in a contract-free offer that is available until August 29. The offer saves over 25 per cent across the Premier League season and can be cancelled at any time.

For BT Sport, who will be showing a minimum of 52 games this season, a contract-free subscription will cost you £25, with matches then available to stream on their website and app.

Finally, to get access to Amazon Prime Video, where 20 matches will be televised, you will need to spend either £7.99 a month, or a £79 per year one-off payment. They offer a free 30-day trial if you want to try it out first.

Of course, Match of the Day will also be showing highlights of the Premier League matches on BBC One each weekend.

Premier League TV schedule in full

Friday 13th August

Brentford v Arsenal (8pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 14th August

Man Utd v Leeds (12.30pm) BT Sport

Norwich v Liverpool (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 15th August

Newcastle v West Ham (2pm) Sky Sports

Tottenham v Man City (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 21st August

Liverpool v Burnley (12.30pm) BT Sport

Brighton v Watford (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 22nd August

Southampton v Man Utd (2pm) Sky Sports

Arsenal v Chelsea (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Monday 23rd August

West Ham v Leicester (8pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 28th August

Manchester City v Arsenal (12.30pm) BT Sport

Liverpool v Chelsea (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 29th August

Burnley v Leeds (2pm) Sky Sports

Wolves v Manchester United (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 11th September

Crystal Palace v Tottenham (12.30pm) BT Sport

Chelsea v Aston Villa (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 12th September

Leeds v Liverpool (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Monday 13th September

Everton v Burnley (8pm) Sky Sports

Friday 17th September

Newcastle vs Leeds (8pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 18th September

Wolves v Brentford (12.30pm) BT Sport

Aston Villa v Everton (5.30pm) ) Sky Sports

Sunday 19th September

West Ham v Manchester United (2pm) Sky Sports

Tottenham v Chelsea (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 25th September

Chelsea v Manchester City (12.30pm) BT Sport

Brentford v Liverpool (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 26th September

Southampton v Wolves (2pm) Sky Sports

Arsenal v Tottenham (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Monday 27th September

Crystal Palace v Brighton (8pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 2nd October

Manchester United vs Everton (12.30pm) BT Sport

Brighton vs Arsenal (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 3rd October

Crystal Palace vs Leicester (2pm) Sky Sports

Liverpool vs Manchester City (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 16th October

Watford vs Liverpool (12.30pm) BT Sport

Brentford vs Chelsea (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 17th October

Everton vs West Ham (2pm) Sky Sports

Newcastle vs Tottenham (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Monday 18th October

Arsenal vs Crystal Palace (8pm) Sky Sports

Friday 22nd October

Arsenal vs Aston Villa (8pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 23rd October

Chelsea vs Norwich (12.30pm) BT Sport

Brighton vs Manchester City (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 24th October

West Ham vs Tottenham (2pm) Sky Sports

Manchester United vs Liverpool (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Saturday 30th October

Leicester vs Arsenal (12.30pm) BT Sport

Tottenham vs Manchester United (5.30pm) Sky Sports

Sunday 31st October

Norwich vs Leeds (2pm) Sky Sports

Aston Villa vs West Ham (4.30pm) Sky Sports

Monday 1st November
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku's agent has denied the striker joined Chelsea for the money, saying that interest from his former club 'touched his soul'.

The 28-year-old completed a £98m move from Inter Milan to return to Stamford Bridge, seven years after he originally left the club.

His move has upset Inter Milan fans after losing their star man who helped fire them to the Serie A title last season.

Chelsea completed a £98m move to re-sign Romelu Lukaku seven years after leaving the club

The move has upset Inter Milan fans after Lukaku fired them to the Serie A title last season

Lukaku's agent, Federico Pastorello, has felt obliged to respond to claims made over the move by releasing a statement.

Pastorello said: 'The narrative - that Lukaku's transfer was 'engineered' and 'forced' just to pander to financial interests - is leading everyone absolutely astray.

'Where Lukaku has never publicly expressed any unease or discontent about his experience at FC Internazionale, his contractual situation or the well known events of the Club, the interest of Chelsea has really touched Romelu's soul from the very first moment because that club means to him something unique and special.

'In recent days I have seen a video from 2009 in which the 16- year-old visited the Stamford Bridge stadium with his school and swore that one day he would play on that pitch.

'I recommend everyone to watch it carefully: it's impressive how clearly a 16-year-old boy was already drawing his future. He wanted to wear that shirt, he succeeded when he was only 18 and unfortunately he left before he could make his mark and win something important.

'This challenge remained like a bug in his heart and mind for all these years. And when, almost unexpectedly, the opportunity to try again came up - at the age of 28 after two seasons as a main player with FC Internazionale - he almost didn't believe it.

'It was a chance to come full circle and being the exemplary professional that he is, he decided it was time to accept that challenge again.

Lukaku had unfinished business at Chelsea after leaving the club he loves back in 2014

'Believe it or not, the supporters affection and the special bond with the city of Milan made him think about it for a long time: but then, once he made his decision, he carried on with conviction and firmness.'

In his statement, Pastorello also revealed that both he and the player have received angry threats from Inter fans, including some against his family.

He said: 'I would like to clarify that I have always accepted - and will continue to do so - confrontation and constructive criticism: they are part of the game for those who play a role with considerable media relevance.

'What we absolutely cannot tolerate are the falsehoods, insinuations, insults and threats we have received (also against my family and my daughters, i.e.), which have far exceeded the limits of civilisation, decency and tolerance.'

Lukaku's move back to Stamford Bridge comes seven years after they sold the striker to Everton for just £28m.

Lukaku's agent Federico Pastorello (left) said that even his family has received threats

It's previously been reported that Chelsea have smashed their wage record to land Lukaku who will earn somewhere between £325,000 and £450,00-per-week at the club.

His wage could be as much as £160,000-per-week greater than their next highest player which is N'Golo Kante £290,000-per-week, while it puts him in the upper echelons of the Premier League's best earners.

The 28-year-old has unfinished business in England, having left United without making the impact he had hoped.

His exploits in Italy, plus the seismic transfer sum paid and earnings he will pocket, sends a clear message that the Belgian returns with lofty expectations to storm the goalscoring charts for the Blues.

'I'm happy and blessed to be back at this wonderful club,' Lukaku told the club's official website.

'It's been a long journey for me: I came here as a kid who had a lot to learn, now I'm coming back with a lot of experience and more mature.

'The relationship I have with this club means so much to me, as you know. I have supported Chelsea as a kid and now to be back and try to help them win more titles is an amazing feeling.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Great for Tottenham, and maybe not so bad for Harry Kane, either.

Perhaps this was the performance that might persuade Daniel Levy £150million is more valuable to his club in their present economic state than one, admittedly fabulous, player.

Certainly it is the performance that should persuade Sheik Mansour to give Tottenham what they want for their greatest asset while there is still time.

Manchester City cannot get away with another year minus a world-class goalscorer, surely. It worked for them last season because Liverpool were holed below the waterline defensively, because Chelsea were in transition midway through the season, because Manchester United were inconsistent and because City’s midfield is quite exceptional.

Son Heung-min scored after 55 minutes to seal victory for Tottenham in their opening game of the new season

Tottenham were dangerous on the counter attack throughout the match and were rewarded with Son's second-half strike

The result gives Nuno Espirito Santo the best possible start to life as manager of Tottenham after leaving Wolves

Jack Grealish was lively in the first-half but struggled to make an impact to help City get back into the game after going down

MATCH FACTS AND RATINGS Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris 6; Tanganga 6 (Doherty 82min), Sanchez 7, Dier 7, Reguilon 6; Hojberg 6.5 (Romero 89), Skipp 6.5, Alli 6; Moura 8, Bergwijn 7.5 (Lo Celso 76); Son 7.5. Subs not used: Winks, Gil Salvatierra, Sissoko, Gollini, Davies, Scarlett Manager: Nuno Espirito Santo 9. Goal: Son 55 Booked: Sanchez, Moura Man City: Ederson 6; Cancelo 6, Dias 6, Ake 6, Mendy 6 (Zinchenko 78); Gundogan 6, Fernandinho 6.5; Grealish 6.5, Mahrez 6 (De Bruyne 78), Sterling 6 (Jesus 70, 6); Torres 5. Manager: Pep Guardiola 6 Subs not used: Walker,Stones, Steffen, Laporte, Rodri, Bernardo Silva Booked: Grealish Referee: Anthony Taylor 7 Attendance: 58,262. Advertisement

But can they do it again? This suggests not. Tottenham are organised, hard-working and disciplined under new coach Nuno Espirito Santo and that was enough. They deserved this win for the way they stuck at it after an opening spell that suggested City might sweep them aside.

That they didn’t was due, in the main, to not having a player that decides the tightest matches. They had 18 unsuccessful shots at goal and in the 70th minute, Riyad Mahrez set up a chance that would have been the stuff of dreams for Kane, or Romelu Lukaku, or Edinson Cavani, or any one of three for Liverpool. Ferran Torres missed it.

By contrast, given half a sniff of the target 55 minutes in, Son Heung-min scored. It would be ridiculous to suggest Spurs would not miss Kane, but they do possess other forwards of great quality. Son was complemented by Lucas Moura and Steven Bergwijn here, and it worked.

The trio combined for the goal, even if Moura’s only contribution was the flick out of defence that started a breathtaking counter-attack. Bergwijn sped the length of the field and found Son on the right. He cut inside Nathan Ake, dragged out of position with Benjamin Mendy absent, and with the goal in sight shot across Ruben Dias and Ederson.

Had Bergwijn not wasted a one-on-one opportunity after a ball from Moura deflected into his path on 60 minutes, it could have been all over. Pep Guardiola has never lost to the same team four times on the spin away from home, but there’s a first time for everything.

Tottenham clearly have a jinx on him but this win was not about fate. Nuno may be more roundhead than cavalier, but given the disappointment of last season, the locals will not mind some old-fashioned diligence and organisation. It is not as if a team with Tottenham’s talent is ever going to be dour.

Familiar strengths remain, not least those counter-attacks, from back to front at warp speed. Tottenham were as fast as they have ever been, but fitter, too. They worked hard without the ball and, once in front, always looked capable of holding on. They were not Spursy in the least.

By the end, the mood was jubilant. ‘Are you watching Harry Kane?’ sang the home crowd — he was, and from inside the stadium apparently — before changing the words to the song they created especially for the striker.

‘Japhet Tanganga, he’s one of our own,’ they exclaimed, and what a game the young man had, up against a movable feast of attacking midfielders, including this country’s most expensive player, Jack Grealish.

Tottenham defender Japhet Tanganga battled with Raheem Sterling and Jack Grealish all game and impressed

£100m summer signing Grealish had a frustrating debut and was given a yellow card for a foul on the impressive Lucas Moura

Lucas Moura set Steven Bergwijn free who found Son, and the South Korean took on Nathan Ake before curling home

It wouldn’t be right to say he snuffed them all out because it is next to impossible to do that, but he did a quite outstanding job on Grealish, Raheem Sterling and Mahrez, and was arguably man of the match.

And, yes, he’s one of their own. One of England’s, too. Carry on like this and he could be a full international by the end of the season. Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg was excellent for Tottenham, too.

Make no mistake, this was a big shock for City, their manager, and the league. This is the Premier League’s 30th campaign, yet only the third time the reigning champions have lost on day one. In addition to this, we need to rewind to 2008 to find the last time City lost their first game, or Guardiola lost his. Numancia beat Barcelona that season, Aston Villa did for Manchester City — and while Tottenham have pretensions to be among the members of the elite, this was still a shock. Tottenham have a new manager — far from first choice — finished seventh last season and were without their best player.

Credit them, then, with getting into the game when for the first 15 minutes it didn’t appear they knew it was permissible to emerge from their own half. Manchester City dominated to a worrying extent and had three good scoring chances within six minutes with Tottenham at full stretch trying to repel them.

Grealish, the biggest signing of the English summer, actually started — a rarity for new arrivals these days — and he was immediately into the action, speeding past Oliver Skipp who resorted to clipping his heels outside the box. Ilkay Gundogan, a huge danger last season, also started where he left off, curling a free-kick which clipped the top of Tottenham’s wall and deflected over.

The South Korean forward stepped up perfectly in the absence of Harry Kane who was not fit enough to take part in the game

Pep Guardiola's side have had a frustrating start to the season after defeats in the Community Shield and the opening game

The corner cleared, it was recycled swiftly and Mendy crossed for Fernandinho, who headed just wide with Hugo Lloris floundering in Tottenham’s goal. Only two minutes later, Mahrez had a shot blocked by Eric Dier, the ball falling to Joao Cancelo, who steered his effort narrowly wide.

Tottenham were in trouble, but City without a striker are still City without a vital cutting edge and, gradually, their failure to take advantage of so much possession allowed the home side to enter the game.

It took a while but Tottenham gained a foothold through corners and free-kicks, Ederson missing a dead ball completely after 24 minutes, giving Moura a sight at goal from the right. His shot was blocked on the line by Gundogan.

It was a fine counter-attacking performance from Tottenham, although while Son likes to play in a central role, he is no replacement for Kane when holding up the ball and it meant Tottenham, like City, lacked that focal point at times.

Son did provide their best chance of the first half, mind, after 40 minutes when Moura hared upfield and slipped him the ball, his shot deflecting narrowly wide off Cancelo.

At the end, Son enjoyed a personal lap of honour. Slowly walking to all sides of the ground, saluting the fans. Brentford did the same after beating Arsenal on Friday. It’s a marathon, not a sprint, of course, but having played to empty houses for so long, the sentimentality is understandable.

Whether Kane will ever experience this stadium rising as one in his honour again remains to be seen. But if they don’t appreciate his worth in Abu Dhabi now, they never will.

Espirito Santo gives the thumbs up to the camera after taking an impressive win in his competitive debut as Spurs manager

Tottenham fans showed their support for Kane despite their star man being linked with opponents Manchester City

Sportsmail's KIERAN LYNCH provided live EPL coverage of Tottenham vs Manchester City, including build-up, team news and updates. Kick-off is at 4.30pm.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Crystal Palace are in talks to sign Will Hughes from Watford.

The 26-year old has turned down the offer of a new contract at Vicarage Road and as a result has been left out of the first-team plans. He has been training with the club's U23s.

Palace want a midfielder and two forwards to bolster Patrick Vieira's young squad.

Will Hughes is in talks with Crystal Palace after turning down the offer of a new Watford deal

Arsenal's Reiss Nelson, Ademola Lookman of Red Bull Leipzig and Manchester City's Morgan Rogers remain among their options.

Speaking after a 3-0 defeat at Chelsea, Vieira urged his bosses to back him before the window closes.

'When you look at the bench we had today, I think the young players did really well in pre-season, but are not ready for that level,' he said.

'It's just showing we need to work, and work hard, to bring in a couple of players. We are a little bit short on numbers, and the young players we had on the bench are not ready to play at this level yet.'

Vieira has had a busy summer window to date at Selhurst Park as he looks to rebuild the side in his vision.

Crystal Palace boss Patrick Vieira is keen to add to his options in central midfield this summer

Defenders Marc Guehi and Joachim Andersen arrived to bolster the back-line while midfielder Michael Olise joined on a permanent deal from Reading.

Conor Gallagher of Chelsea has joined on a season-long loan and back-up goalkeeper Remi Matthews provides competition for Vicente Guaita.

But Hughes would add greater depth in midfield and when asked about the former Derby County player on Friday, Watford head coach Xisco Munoz said: 'Will was a very good player for us and gave everything in the last season.

'And now my focus is with the players I have in the dressing room.

'Sometimes football is football and about him I can say nothing more especially.'

Arsenal's Reiss Nelson is among the targets if a deal to get Hughes proves to be unsuccessful

It marks a major shift in the thinking of the midfielder having vowed in May that he was happy with life at Watford - even suggesting his focus was on securing a new deal.

'I'm really happy here, I'm settled, back in the Premier League,' Hughes said at the time.

'There's nothing better and that's how I want it to remain. It's as simple as that.

'There's no thoughts in my head about me moving elsewhere.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Conor McGregor has branded Daniel Cormier a 'fat drunk f**k' and continues to take aim at the former two-weight champion turned commentator.

Cormier was among those to criticise McGregor when he tweeted, then deleted, 'Covid is good and father is evil', to Khabib Nurmagomedov after his old nemesis had said 'good always defeats evil' when Poirier overcame McGregor via doctor's stoppage.

The message was a very personal attack and came after McGregor had also brought up Poirier's family during an expletive-laden tirade as he sat on the octagon floor with a broken leg.

Conor McGregor is still raging with Daniel Cormier and continues to hit out at him

McGregor took exception to Cormier saying Poirier was checking McGregor's kicks and shared this image on social media

McGregor suffered a fractured tibia in the UFC 264 headliner at the end of a first round dominated by his opponent.

Cormier believes the personal nature of the insults from McGregor are 'a cry for help' and it seems the 33-year-old is intent on continuing his barbs in the American's direction.

He posted an image of him landing a leg kick on Poirier along with the caption: 'Clean check right there by Poirier’ fat drunk f*** DC.'

During the fight, Cormier had said that Poirier was checking a number of McGregor's leg kicks, which is evidently something that rankles the Dubliner.

Cormier said that McGregor's tweet about Khabib's father's death was a 'cry for help'

Previously, Cormier's assessment of McGregor's outbursts were as follows to ESPN: 'I get shock value and I get trying to get people to talk but way too far. To the point that I immediately called Khabib last night and said, "Are you OK?"

'Asking him if he’s OK after having to see that, especially with no ability to do anything about it again. He spoke to my kids at my wrestling program the other day and said he was never happier than when he got to fight McGregor on the day. Because for so long, he wanted to get his hands on Conor and beat Conor up.'

Cormier added: '(Conor McGregor) Absolutely crossed the line.

Poirier beat McGregor by doctor's stoppage TKO but there was not a natural conclusion

'I think when stuff like that is being said, it’s a cry for help. Conor has all the money in the world, he has all the fame, but now when you start to dig at that level, it’s like somebody needs to get to McGregor and help him to start to kind of re-shift his mind and his focus and get him back to a better place. It’s unfortunate.'

McGregor is set to be sidelined for around a year as he recovers from his broken leg and underwent successful surgery soon after the fight.

Poirier is expected to fight for the lightweight title against Charles Oliveira before the end of this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Anthony Taylor has revealed details of the night Christian Eriksen suffered a cardiac arrest for the first time.

The 42-year-old was widely praised for his swift response to Eriksen’s situation during Denmark’s European Championship fixture against Finland.

The former Tottenham midfielder was revived by CPR on the Copenhagen pitch, firstly administered by captain Simon Kjaer, and a defibrillator.

Anthony Taylor was the referee when Christian Eriksen collapsed at Euro 2020

The midfielder was surrounded by his distraught team-mates while medics worked tirelessly

‘It makes you realise how precious life can be,’ Taylor said at his local club Altrincham, one of more than 2,000 recipients of the Premier League’s Defibrillator Fund.

‘I was 10 metres away, looking directly at him. There was nobody near him. I could clearly see there was something seriously wrong.

‘I’ve witnessed someone suffer a sudden cardiac arrest before, when I was refereeing Burnley and Newcastle. One of my colleagues, Eddie Wolstenholme, had a cardiac arrest in the changing room.’

Eriksen was revived by CPR on the Copenhagen pitch, firstly administered by captain Simon Kjaer, and later a defibrillator

Denmark’s opening game of the tournament was suspended before resuming later that evening.

‘I vividly remember just before we took the teams back inside. A security guy came to me asking permission for his wife to be on the field,’ Taylor added.

‘For me, an absolute no-brainer, of course it’s OK.

‘When it came to a decision over restarting the game, which is one that has obviously been debated, that was made in full agreement with both sets of players and federations.

‘The players had spoken to Christian over FaceTime. Christian had actually said to them that they finish the game.

Taylor says resuming the game was 'made in full agreement with both sets of players and federations' before taking back to the pitch

‘It’s certainly been the most challenging situation in my career but it highlights the importance of handling people and emotions.

'People think referees have no heart and just there to ruin afternoons but the bottom line here is understanding how people feel and react.’

Taylor added: ‘It is managing people and emotions rather than a split-second decision. My concern was for the players and my team.

‘The real heroes are the doctors who did the compressions and Simon Kjaer who started it. My role shifted a little bit, you become central to crisis management. It is humbling to be praised but I reiterate - the only thing I did was get the doctors on.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brighton have signed Japan international Kaoru Mitoma on a four-year deal from J1 League side Kawasaki Frontale.

The 24-year-old will spend the 2021-22 season on loan at Belgian first division team Royal Union Saint-Gilloise.

Mitoma was part of the squad which narrowly missed out on the bronze medal at their home Olympics, though he scored as a second-half substitute as they lost the third-place play-off 3-1 to Mexico.

Brighton have confirmed the signing of Japan international Kaoru Mitoma on a four-year deal

The 24-year-old will spend the 2021-22 season on loan at Belgian's Royal Union Saint-Gilloise

'We're delighted to be able to sign Kaoru, who arrives off the back of a couple of really strong seasons in Japan,' Brighton technical director Dan Ashworth told the club website.

'As part of his development we have decided to loan him to Union Saint-Gilloise, to help him become accustomed to European football and test himself in a different environment.

The 24-year-old has recently been competing with Japan at the Tokyo Olympic Games

Mitoma (centre) is a regular fixture in the Japan team and will now head to Union Saint-Gilloise

'He's one we have tracked for a while so we are looking forward to seeing how he progresses in the next year and we will be watching him closely during his time in Belgium.'

In the 2020 J1 league, Mitoma found the net on 13 occasions as his side lifted the title, and has 30 goals from 64 appearances for Kawasaki Frontale.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Unai Emery revealed his pride after coming a whisker away from defeating Chelsea in the UEFA Super Cup final.

The Spaniard's plucky Villarreal side could only be bettered via a penalty shootout in Belfast on Wednesday night, following a Thomas Tuchel masterstroke with his substitutes.

Chelsea's German boss opted to bring goalkeeper Kepa Arrizabalaga off the bench to replace Edouard Mendy as the game spilled over into spot kicks, and was soon rewarded after the former Bilbao man saved the decisive kick.

Unai Emery revealed his pride after coming a whisker away from defeating Chelsea in the final

At the final whistle however, Emery immediately took the chance to talk up the satisfaction he felt at having taken his underdogs to the showpiece fixture.

He told broadcasters on the pitch: 'It's a pride to represent this club, Villarreal and LaLiga on a day like today

'You cannot blame the players for anything because they've made a fantastic effort.'

Kepa Arrizabalaga came off the bench to save two penalties in Chelsea's Super Cup victory

Chelsea's players celebrate with the Spaniard after their shootout victory over Villarreal

Later, when asked about his decision to switch keepers for the shootout, Chelsea boss Tuchel insisted it was all pre-planned.

He said: 'This was not spontaneous.

'We talked about it with the goalkeepers before my first cup game against Barnsley.

'We had some statistics that we prepared and they showed that Willy Caballero is the best in penalty defending and they analysed like a thousand penalties from Willy.

Tuchel said that Edouard Mendy (right) accepted being replaced by Kepa for the shootout

'Second best was Kepa and third best was Edou.

'The analysis and goalkeepers coaches introduced me to the data, we spoke to all three goalkeepers very open and told them this can happen in knockout games.

'If we have a change left that we take this change not for personal reasons but to help the team, to improve the chances as we have this proof of statistic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is meant to be the showcase game of the season, England taking on India in the second Test of a marquee series in front of a full house at Lord’s. Instead chaos reigns.

Not only did England go into this series without key players in Jofra Archer and Chris Woakes through injury and Ben Stokes with mental health issues.

But they also now face the absence of both the twin pillars of their bowling attack for the first time in any home Test in nine years, posing more questions about a schedule that has seen England’s best players starved of red-ball cricket virtually all season.

England's injury crisis has sent them into chaos ahead of their second Test against India

First Stuart Broad damaged a calf during a gentle jog around Lord’s before practice on Tuesday and could be out of the rest of this series.

Then came news that Jimmy Anderson has a tight quad muscle and looks certain to miss this pivotal game against an Indian side who would surely have taken a 1-0 lead at Trent Bridge had rain not washed out the final day of the first Test.

No wonder coach Chris Silverwood had a weary look as he oversaw training on Wednesday before trying to come up with a combination capable of winning this Test.

The revolving doors in and out of England’s bloated dressing room saw Saqib Mahmood arrive to cover for Anderson, 24 hours after Moeen Ali hot-footed it to Lord’s direct from the Hundred.

James Anderson (L) and Stuart Broad (R) have both picked up injuries in training this week

Broad posted a picture of his leg in a cast on Instagram as he begins his road to recovery

Dom Bess, meanwhile, was released from an ever-changing expanded squad in the hope that he just might somewhere, somehow, get a game of cricket.

How did it come to this? It is, sadly, the largely self-inflicted result of a schedule that is not fit for red-ball purpose and a flawed rest and rotation policy that was introduced with the best of intentions but has added to a perfect storm of problems.

Why did anyone think it was a good idea to ask two fast bowlers with a combined age of 74 to try to play back to back Tests having spent more time commentating for Sky and BBC on white-ball cricket over the last three months than actually playing the game?

It is not exactly a surprise that both Broad and Anderson have suffered soft tissue injuries now and England are paying a high price for the ECB’s dereliction of duty in failing to protect and prioritise the most important and lucrative form of the game.

So now England are faced with having to field a makeshift attack, with Craig Overton the more likely replacement for Anderson than Mahmood and Mark Wood set to be the most experienced seamer on his return in Broad’s place.

England coach Chris Silverwood cut a weary figure as he saw his injury crisis unfold before him

The ECB's not-fit-for-purpose schedule makes this injury crisis a self-inflicted wound

And it says everything for England’s bowling predicament that Ollie Robinson has become the banker of their attack in just his third Test and on his return to the Lord’s ground where his debut went horribly sour against New Zealand earlier this season.

Not that the batting can offer England any solace. Take away Joe Root’s momentous hundred at Trent Bridge and England would have been beaten in four days and the captain continues to paper over the huge cracks in the techniques of those around him.

But at least there was some positive news to emerge from Lord’s on Wednesday when it became clear England are ready to throw Haseeb Hameed back into the side almost five years after his three Tests of immense promise against India were followed by a sharp decline that saw him released by Lancashire.

Hameed, at 24, looks certain to be rewarded for his return to form after his new start with Nottinghamshire that has seen him score 1,039 runs at 47.2 in first-class cricket since the beginning of last summer

Ollie Pope is now the banker of England's attack despite his limited five-day experience

Haseeb Hameed has been given an opportunity at the top order thanks to his renaissance

Silverwood has spent the week grappling with his desire to provide ‘one too many chance rather than one too few’ to his flawed top three but it seems he has decided the time is now right to make a change.

The only uncertainty is whether Hameed will come in for Dom Sibley, who England want to somehow discover an ability to rotate the strike and keep the scoreboard moving, or Zak Crawley, who averages 11 since his monumental 267 against Pakistan last year.

Silverwood planned to sleep on that decision and talk to his coaches but the most likely move would see Crawley told to go away and work on a technique that has seen him become far too vulnerable outside off-stump. That is if he can ever find a red-ball game to work on it.

It seems certain England will also leave out Dan Lawrence and Ollie Pope, fit again but no longer an automatic choice and considered to have ‘too many moving parts’ to bat at No3. Pope clearly still has much to prove if he really is to become England’s next great batsman, as was hoped when he made a sparkling hundred against South Africa.

It will be a testing experience for Joe Root and England's loyal fans at Lord's this week

One batsman certain to play is Jonny Bairstow, another who has been in and out of the Test side over the last year and had to prepare for this series by captaining Welsh Fire in the Hundred rather than gaining any proper preparation with the red ball.

‘It’s been an interesting time,’ said Bairstow on Wednesday. ‘On the whole I’m pretty happy with how things have gone for me and my mind-set is in a really strong place at the moment. I’m hopeful and excited about the next four Tests.’

England will certainly need him to be in a good place over five days which will provide the most testing examination of their resources and adaptability.

It will be a testing examination, too, of the loyalty of cricket supporters who are being asked to pay up to £180 for a day at Lord’s to watch a hopelessly under-prepared and weakened England team.

For all the efforts to recruit a new audience by creating a new format in the Hundred cricket is once again treating its existing one with contempt. It can only be hoped England somehow find a way to give them something to savour.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leicester are closing in on the £15million signing of Jannik Vestergaard after agreeing a deal with Southampton for the defender.

The Foxes are attempting to sign at least one centre-back before the transfer window closes and have moved again for Vestergaard, who is in the final year of his contract, after initially targeting him 18 months ago.

Leicester are in the market for defenders due to injuries to Wesley Fofana, who will not play again before 2022 after breaking a leg and damaging knee ligaments, and Jonny Evans, out until at least mid-September with a foot problem.

Leicester have agreed a £15m deal with Southampton for the transfer of Jannik Vestergaard

Leicester were compelled to sign a defender after Wesley Fofana broke his leg in pre-season

Sportsmail reported on August 6 that Vestergaard was one of their main targets. A deal has now been reached after Leicester raised their opening offer of £13m to £14m plus £1m in add-ons and it could be finalised before the Premier League opener against Wolves on Saturday.

Leicester had also been looking at Burnley’s James Tarkowski, another player with one year left on his contract, who has interested them in the past.

Vestergaard turned 29 earlier this month but has the Premier League experience Leicester were seeking after losing Fofana and Evans.

Vestergaard, here facing England's Harry Kane, played a big role for Denmark at Euro 2020

Manager Brendan Rodgers may move for another player in that position before the window closes.

Former England defenders Gary Cahill, who is without a club after leaving Crystal Palace at the end of last season, and Phil Jones are among the names to have been proposed.

Vestergaard joined Saints from German club Borussia Monchengladbach three years ago and has been a regular at the heart of defence. He was also part of the Denmark squad that made the semi-finals of Euro 2020.

Leicester are keen to move on fringe players like Hamza Choudhury and Dennis Praet as they eye a second centre-back and a left-footed attacker. Southampton, meanwhile, are looking closely at options outside England as they try to replace Vestergaard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Rangers fan broke down in tears after phoning talkSPORT in the wake of his side's defeat by Malmo.

The Ibrox club were stunned 2-1 (4-2 agg) and dumped out of the Champions League against the 10-man Swedish side on Tuesday night.

It was all too much to take for one devastated supporter who called up the radio station before his emotions took over, although some believe him to be a Celtic fan on a wind-up.

Steven Gerrard's Rangers were dumped out the Champions League after losing to Malmo

When asked by Jamie O'Hara if Rangers crumbled, he replied: 'Totally, totally mate, totally crumbled.

He then sobbed: 'I cannae (sic) believe it.'

O'Hara then asked: 'Are you crying, Paul? Are you alright?'

Paul managed to hold himself together and replied: 'This was our big chance in the Champions League, they've (Celtic) got Ange Postecoglou, I can see them beating us honestly... I'm off.'

O'Hara and his colleague Jason Cundy then assured listeners that they would be checking back with the caller to see if he was alright.

Paul later called back once he'd collected himself but was still seething at the performance and even called for Gerrard to be sacked.

😡 “He’s got to go mate, he’s got to go.”



😤 “He’s won that league with no fans, look what’s happened when fans are in! We’ve fallen apart against 10 men.”



Paul the #RangersFC fan calls for Steven Gerrard to be sacked as manager! pic.twitter.com/SJMIfsFOUI — talkSPORT (@talkSPORT) August 10, 2021

He said: 'He's got to go, honestly he's got to go. He won the Covid cup, he won the league with no fans in, as soon as we got fans in, look what happened. We fell apart against 10 men.'

Some on social media smelled a rat and believe the Rangers fan was actually a Celtic supporter in disguise.

One listener wrote on Twitter: Mate, he's no Rangers fan! The Covid Cup statement makes that 100 per cent clear! We know who he really supports.'

Another commented: 'Wee hint for you... Paul isn't a Rangers fan'.

Rangers have made a pitiful start to the season after their triumph last campaign ended Celtic's chance to win 10 domestic titles in succession.

The Swedes overturned a one-goal deficit on the night to land a huge win at Ibrox on Tuesday

Gerrard's side won plenty of plaudits for stopping the rot but early signs are not promising this term.

The first leg defeat in Malmo was followed up by a 1-0 loss against Dundee United in their Scottish Cup opener.

And Tuesday's calamity was all the more disappointing with the Champions League play-off round there for the taking.

Rangers had the tie in their hands at the break after Alfredo Morelos had put them level on aggregate and Bonke Innocent was sent off after two yellow cards.

But some shambolic defending against the 10 men allowed the Swedes to score twice and put the game to bed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season is upon us with all the giddy excitement and optimism that brings.

We can expect the usual drama from the self-styled 'best league in the world' where, as we've seen time and time again, anyone can beat anyone.

Manchester City will be looking to defend their title but can expect to be pushed hard by Manchester United, Liverpool and reigning European champions Chelsea. FA Cup holders Leicester City will again be trying to crack the top four, leading a cluster of sides with designs on qualifying for Europe.

Part two of the Premier League report cards sees European champions Chelsea previewed

And towards the bottom, the three newly-promoted clubs - Watford, Norwich and Brentford - will be hoping their Premier League experience isn't a brief one while the likes of Burnley, Brighton and Southampton battle to keep heads above water.

Ahead of the big kick-off on Friday night, we will preview the new Premier League season in four parts, assessing the prospects for all 20 teams. Part Two covers Chelsea through to Leicester.

CHELSEA

Can the champions of Europe stake a claim to become champions of England?

Thomas Tuchel worked wonders to rectify the struggles left behind by Frank Lampard to secure Chelsea a second European title and a spot in the top four. Now it's time to see if the Blues can move up a gear under the German head coach.

The normally free-spending club actually required one position only in the market and that was a centre forward. Last season, the west Londoners struggled to break down opposition with new German attackers Timo Werner and Kai Havertz.

The Blues are building one of the top Premier League squads this term - especially in attack

While a move for Erling Haaland proved too expensive, Romelu Lukaku has all but come in after guiding Inter Milan to the Serie A title and Chelsea have one of the more complete squads in the top-flight.

Lukaku will compete alongside Werner and Havertz for starting spots but do not forget that Hakim Ziyech and Christian Pulisic can turn up on their day as well.

Meanwhile, Mason Mount, N'Golo Kante and Jorginho will be rotated in the midfield two while Callum Hudson-Odoi, Ben Chilwell and Reece James are likely to adopt the wing-back roles.

Can Romelu Lukaku shine for the Blues this season after his imminent £98m move from Inter?

In defence, Cesar Azpilicueta and Thiago Silva will bring the leadership in front of Edouard Mendy - who was one of the standout shot-stoppers last term in his debut season.

Despite having 17 players at the European Championships or Copa America this summer adding to a small coronavirus scare in their pre-season tour of Ireland, this Chelsea squad looks ready to take on the new season.

But a good start is needed as trips to Arsenal, Liverpool and Tottenham await in the first five games of the season - this is the Blues' chance to make an early statement.

CRYSTAL PALACE

It is all change at Selhurst Park as the Roy Hodgson era makes way for the Patrick Vieira revolution.

The comfort of Hodgson's stability has been traded in for a gamble on the former Arsenal midfielder who is still in his very early days as a manager. The two bosses could not be any more different in terms of stature, experience and style.

Patrick Vieira is leading a new era at Crystal Palace after Roy Hodgson retired this summer

The Frenchman arrived at Crystal Palace the day before a dozen players' contracts expired but Vieira has not only managed to keep some on board but also brought in fresh young talent which has brought the average squad age down.

Elder statesmen such as Gary Cahill, Scott Dann, James McCarthy, Andros Townsend and Wayne Hennessy have all moved on. In their places, young defenders Joachim Andersen and Marc Guehi add steel to the back alongside the youthful Tyrick Mitchell, while Michael Olise and Conor Gallagher can bolster the midfield.

There's still experience in the squad through Joel Ward and Christian Benteke, who now needs to show he can produce the goalscoring goods over the course of the season - and not when his contract is slowly running out and needs a pay cheque.

Wilfried Zaha is still a Palace player and will be the talisman up front for the Eagles

Having the fans back at Selhurst Park will be a major boost for the south Londoners this term

Ebere Eze is still a long way back from a serious knee injury so there is even more pressure on the shoulders of Wilfried Zaha to be the killer spark in the final third.

But a major plus for Palace is the return of their supporters. The cluster of Holmesdale Fanatics behind the goal have 18 months of making up to do in terms of noise. Players who have got used to the silence of behind closed doors games will get a nasty shock at SE25.

If you offered Vieira an unbeaten pre-season campaign, capacity crowds on the way, exciting new signings and Zaha choosing to stay at the club by matchday one, he would have certainly taken it when he first walked through the door.

It's time to see if this Palace rebuild is as attractive as it sounds.

EVERTON

The mood at Goodison Park this summer is almost the opposite compared to last year.

After the excitement surrounding Carlo Ancelotti, James Rodriguez and the potential of European football last season, everything has unravelled for the Toffees.

Their progress rescinded towards an 11th-placed finish, Ancelotti jumped ship for a Real Madrid reunion and now James has serious doubts over his future.

Ex-Liverpool boss Rafa Benitez has a lot of work to do to try and win over the Everton fans

In comes a manager the fans do not universally want - which is the complete opposite of what Ancelotti represented - in former Liverpool boss Rafa Benitez, while the pre-season signings of Andros Townsend and Demarai Gray could be smart but are not the big-money household names that arrived last season.

On top of that, pre-season plans were hampered by the absences of Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Richarlison - who both saw their summers dominated by international duty - with the former also struggling with a minor injury this week.

Jordan Pickford had a brilliant summer with England but, if the 4-0 Manchester United friendly defeat is anything to go by, the Toffees goalkeeper still has not shaken off his error-ridden Everton episodes.

The Toffees squad is not as exciting as it was last season but Everton need a good start

The Toffees may be fun to watch due to their promising youngsters coming through. Anthony Gordon should get more minutes this season and this could be the breakthrough season we have been waiting a while for, while keep a close eye on fellow forward Lewis Dobbin.

Benitez and the Everton board have a lot of work to do in the transfer market as a reliance on Calvert-Lewin and Richarlison for goals is not the way forward.

The first six matches are all winnable and the ex-Liverpool boss needs those maximum points if he is to begin to win over his own supporters.

LEEDS UNITED

Leeds have now avoided the Bielsa Burnout for two seasons in a row but now it's time for another alliterative cliche - the second season syndrome.

The Whites were entertaining to watch last season even without the roar of Elland Road behind them but now it's time to see how far Marcelo Bielsa can take this side.

Marcelo Bielsa is taking Leeds into a second Premier League season - this time with fans there

A ninth-placed finish last season with the second-highest points tally from a promoted side since 2004 was a phenomenal achievement. But under the Argentinian coach, progress must be made or it's not worth it.

Can it be done with this group of players? Why not. Patrick Bamford will be eyeing up a bigger goal tally and we should expect more from Raphinha this time around. Expectations are now raised on Kalvin Phillips following his England exploits but he certainly showed the character to handle it at Euro 2020 this summer.

Any normal side would have concerns about a key midfield trio all going over the age of 30, but Stuart Dallas, Rodrigo and Mateusz Klich do Bielsa's Murderball training session every Wednesday, so no issues there.

The likes of Patrick Bamford (middle) and Raphinha (left) are likely to improve on last year

Very little has changed in the Leeds squad so far but that is to be expected, Bielsa does not like to tinker very much. In fact, 10 of the players who ended their debut Premier League campaign on the final day of last season also started Bielsa's first Leeds game against Stoke in the Championship back in 2018.

In terms of transfers, Barcelona left back Junior Firpo has come in following the departures of Ezgjan Alioski and Barry Douglas, while midfield maestro Jack Harrison is now a permanent member of the squad.

Leeds fans should not have any worries in terms of staying up, the real question is whether there could be a European qualification bid on the line. Especially now they can bring their fervent home and away crowds to every game.

LEICESTER CITY

A bittersweet feeling met Leicester City fans' mouths at the end of last season. The FA Cup victory was swiftly followed by another top-four collapse. There was the feeling Brendan Rodgers's side deserved more.

Once again, the Foxes have been excellent in the market and should everything go to plan, Leicester will be in the top six once again come next May.

Brendan Rodgers will be hoping to avoid another top-four collapse at Leicester this season

Patson Daka is an exciting forward signing and even if it takes some time for him to settle in, Jamie Vardy and Kelechi Iheanacho can continue the fine form they ended last season in until he is ready.

Lille's Boubakary Soumare is another coup for the Foxes and could follow in the likes of N'Golo Kane and Wilfred Ndidi as superb midfield finds by the scouting team.

Meanwhile, Ryan Bertrand will bring similar levels of experience to the ones Jonny Evans has instilled over recent seasons, while also helping the likes of Luke Thomas come through.

The James Maddison saga looks like a key moment in Leicester's season already. High hopes are expected for the England midfielder after an injury-hit spell last term - and any late move by Arsenal could see the Foxes resort to either feeling short-changed or panic-buying come August 31.

Keeping James Maddison at the club could be key for Leicester's top-four chances this term

A potential long-term injury to Wesley Fofana is another potential blow. Fellow centre-back partner Evans is also a liability fitness-wise so whether Daniel Amartey and Caglar Soyuncu can hold the fort with Europa League football remains to be seen.

But there's more youthful positivity from the likes of midfielder Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall who may have a breakthrough season in the first team, plus Harvey Barnes is back from injury and with plenty to prove for both club and country.

They have the trophy they craved for in order to make that next step and started off in the best possible way by winning the Community Shield last week... but can Rodgers avoid another collapse in the back end of this season?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Kane’s blockbuster move to Manchester City is expected to escalate once Tottenham face the Premier League champions on Sunday.

Sportsmail understands the two clubs have held talks this week, with Kane due back for training ahead of the new season on Friday.

City – who declined to comment – are believed to value the England captain at around £120million, which would see them break the British transfer record twice in one summer following the capture of Jack Grealish from Aston Villa.

Manchester City are preparing a new £120m bid for Tottenham striker Harry Kane

Pep Guardiola (L) has confirmed his interest in Kane and City will test Daniel Levy's (R) resolve

It is thought that a deal can be struck at that price with additional clauses included for a player Pep Guardiola has been clear on his desire to sign.

Guardiola maintained last week that while City were hopeful of landing Kane, any transfer would be finished before it started if Spurs did not want to negotiate.

Those comments before the Community Shield defeat by Leicester City confirmed the feeling that the saga would drag on this month but the landscape is understood to have altered earlier in the week with the clubs discussing financials.

Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo (centre) has said Kane will be available against City

Daniel Levy has always asserted that he has no desire to sell his talisman, who won the Premier League golden boot for the third time in May.

The 28-year-old, who has lost finals of the League Cup and Champions League at Spurs, is keen for a switch to the Etihad Stadium in a bid to compete for the biggest honours.

Kane is scheduled to return to training with his current team-mates on Friday after a holiday, providing he returns a negative five-day PCR test beforehand.

Kane, pictured here on a different break, went on holiday to the Bahamas after Euro 2020

The striker has been staying at the club’s on-site hotel, The Lodge, since jetting home from the Caribbean via Florida on Saturday.

Kane dismissed suggestions that he refused to turn up for training on August 2, insisting that his late arrival was planned via a public statement.

Meanwhile, City youngster Ivan Ilic has signed for Serie A’s Hellas Verona for a fee that could reach £8.5million.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@John Terry has praised soon-to-be Manchester United defender Raphael Varane and compared him to his former centre-back partner at Chelsea, Ricardo Carvalho.

Varane is currently in Manchester and has undergone his medical, with United now left to officially announce the £42million deal from Real Madrid.

Surprisingly, there have been some experts and punters questioning whether Varane will adapt to the Premier League, but Terry says he expects him to enjoy a fine start.

John Terry has heaped praise on soon-to-be Manchester United defender Raphael Varane

'I think it's a natural one for people to say that it will take time for players to adapt,' Terry told Stadium Astro.

'But when you've played at the level and kind of competition that he's played at – winning the World Cup, Champions Leagues – he'll hit the ground running I'm sure of that.

'I think from the outside watching Man United from afar, that's been the key area I think they've been missing over the last few years so it's good to see them dip into the market and get such a top player.

Terry (above) has predicted Varane to adapt to the Premier League and improve United's team

'I think him and Harry (Maguire) will have a great relationship together. It kind of reminds me of myself and Carvalho, if I'm honest.

'The kind of Rolls-Royce that Varane is and how good Harry is on the ball and aggressive as well.

'So I think they'll be a great combination together and, like I say, it will definitely strengthen them moving forward.

'But Varane is a top, top player and I'm looking forward to seeing how he does in the league this year.'

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer admitted on Friday that Varane's switch was affected by the World Cup winner's time in quarantine, but expects it to be ratified soon.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer admitted Varane's switch has been delayed by his enforced quarantine

'He hasn't trained with us and all the dots over the I's and crossed the T's aren't done yet. Things always happen and take time,' United boss Solskjaer said.

'Unfortunately with the [Covid] isolation, this has delayed things so it's not 100 per cent done yet.

'I can't say he will be involved tomorrow, I can probably say he won't be. The big hold-up was quarantine and isolation.

'He's been in Manchester and it will be done soon.'

Terry compared Varane to Ricardo Carvalho, his long-standing centre back partner at Chelsea

Carvalho, meanwhile, enjoyed six memorable years in the top-flight during his spell at Stamford Bridge, having won three titles and five other trophies there.

Recalling the arrival of the stalwart from Porto in 2004, Terry added: 'Ricky kind of hit the ground running. I think the Portuguese league at the time was very physical and very demanding as well. So when he came in his personality was incredible.

'The only thing I had to do as a player was to kind of pull him back, he used to always go on these mazy runs up the pitch and leave me isolated at the back so I used to have to scream at him to get back.

'But again he was one of my favourite partnerships as a defender at Chelsea and I absolutely love him.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Riyad Mahrez has recalled the hilarious moment an Algerian fan chased down Manchester City's team coach to get a glimpse of his heroes after their 2-1 win over PSG in Paris last season.

Mahrez and Co were on their way to the airport following their triumph over PSG in the first leg of their Champions League semi-final, which saw Mahrez and Kevin de Bruyne both get on the scoresheet back in April.

The spirits were high following their win at the Parc des Princes but their moods were lifted further after the cycling supporter rode up alongside the coach to wave and celebrate with the City players.

Riyad Mahrez recalls how a fan chased down Manchester City's team coach last season

The Algerian fan rode alongside City's team coach after their win over PSG in Europe

The footage is a part of City's new documentary, titled "Together", detailing the final 46 days of last season as they lifted the club's fifth title in a decade and went so close to conquering Europe.

And when asked to recall the incident, Mahrez couldn't but laugh at the fans antics.

'The Algerian guy on the scooter, or was it a bike? Yeah bike. Was funny to be fair,' Mahrez grins.

City star John Stones thumps on the window after watching the fan keep up with the bus

Mahrez recalls how one of the kitmen decided to gift the fan with one of the club's training tops

The unnamed supporter was left thrilled by the encounter after being given a parting gift

'I knew, especially when I knew that he'd seen me, that he was going to follow us all the way to the airport.'

With the fan in hot pursuit, City decided to pull the coach over and handed him a souviner to make the bike-riding fan's day.

'One of the kitmen, I think it was Ally or Mike, gave him a jumper from City,' Mahrez adds.

'He was so happy. You could see that they're good with these little things. Everyone on the bus was laughing and it was a good moment.'

After receiving the training top, the supporter passionately celebrates with team from the pavement, cutching his gift while thumping his chest, much to the delight of Mahrez and Co.

The supporter passionately celebrates with team from the pavement after receiving his gift

In the background, one City player joked that 'you'll never get rid of him now' after he was given the City souvenir.

City would go on to reach last season's Champions League final after comfortably beating PSG again at the Etihad in the return leg, with Mahrez grabbing both goals for Pep Guardiola's side.

However, City's dream of winning their first Champions League trophy in their first European final wasn't to be after they were beaten by Chelsea in Porto, Portugal in May.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@West Ham are still hopeful of completing the signing of Manchester United midfielder Jesse Lingard before the end of the transfer window, coach Stuart Pearce has revealed.

The England international revived his career with a stunning six-month loan spell at the West Ham last season, where he claimed nine goals and five assists in 16 games to guide the London club to a sixth-place finish.

Lingard has since returned to parent club United, where he was involved throughout pre-season, scoring in a 4-2 defeat to QPR. But he was left out of the squad for their 5-1 opening-day win over rivals Leeds, with West Ham still eyeing a deal.

West Ham are still fighting to sign Manchester United midfielder Jesse Lingard this summer

Lingard, 28, claimed nine goals and five assists in 16 games while on loan with the Hammers last season

Pearce, who watched his Hammers side come from behind twice to beat Newcastle 4-2 away in their opening Premier League fixture on Sunday, has admitted Lingard is still very much in their thoughts, though insisting the ball is in United's court.

'We would like him to come and join us. That has been an open secret. He was wonderful last year,' Pearce told talkSPORT.

'The ball is in Manchester United's court. He is contracted to them. We would like him with us, there is no doubt about that.

'He's a special lad and was very good around the players, the players really like him. His ability shone out last year and gave us a great option in our squad.

'You never know, but at this moment in time it looks like he is fighting for a place in the United line-up.'

Though Lingard was left out of the squad against Leeds, Solskjaer - who said the 28-year-old was 'in the plans at the moment' back in July - revealed that is still the case after the victory.

The Norwegian heaped praise on midfield duo Paul Pogba and Bruno Fernandes, who scored a stunning hat-trick, but made sure to outline that others, notably Lingard, will still get their opportunities.

Lingard featured throughout pre-season but was left out of United's 5-1 win over Leeds

‘Don’t forget Jesse Lingard who has re-invented himself and has come back the man that we know he is with the quality. He is going to play a big part as well, Solskjaer said.

‘Of course there could be more rotation. We will be fresher. We will have to have a big and strong squad to be competitive in this league.

‘It’s the best league in the world and we also have to be lucky with injuries, but I am looking forward to working with all these players.

‘We have to work hard and see who is fit and available.'

West Ham have just over two weeks to get any potential deal over the line, with the transfer window coming to a close on Tuesday, August 31.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mesut Ozil has finally opened his goalscoring account for Fenerbahce, eight months after joining the club - and it was his first goal for any side in 18 months.

The former Arsenal and Real Madrid man scored his first and the winning goal for the Turkish side during their 1-0 away win in their Super Lig opener against Adana Demirspor. The playmaker got the second half off to a flying start, recording the only goal of the game after he latched onto a cross from the left to tap it into goal just 11 seconds after the whistle.

The goal was his first since his move to Turkey in January after his seven-and-a-half-year career at Arsenal came to a controversial end.

Mesut Ozil scoring his first goal for Fernabahce 🇹🇷



pic.twitter.com/95MgbqhrKE — BirdieFootball (@birdiefootball) August 15, 2021

Mesut Ozil ended his 18-month goal drought in Fenerbahce's 1-0 win over Adana Demirspor

The playmaker scored his first goal for the Turkish side since his arrival in Turkey in January

The 32-year-old hadn't featured for the Gunners since March 7th 2020 with his last appearance coming in March's 1-0 win against West Ham when he assisted Alexandre Lacazette.

He joined Fenerbahce on a free transfer after his £350,000-a-week Gunners contract was terminated.

Ozil took a severe pay cut of more than £300,000 to terminate his Arsenal contract over five months early and force through his move to his boyhood club.

The midfielder took a £300,000 pay cut to make the move to his boyhood club Fenerbahce

Ozil celebrates scoring the winning goal in Fenerbahce's first game of the season

However, the Premier League side continued to pay 90 per cent of the player's £350,000-a-week salary until the end of June.

Fenerbahce foot the bill for his remaining three years at the club with the total cost working out at £46,700-a-week, according to talkSPORT.

Ozil had been frozen out of Mikel Arteta's team after being left out of both Arsenal's Premier League and Europa League squads for the 2020-21 season.

Ozil's last appearance for Arsenal came in their 1-0 win against West Ham in March 2020

He also became embroiled in a PR war with the club, famously offering to pay Gunnersaurus's wages after the north London side made the mascot redundant.

The German international further sparked outrage in his homeland when he was pictured with Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan in London.

He and international teammate Ilkay Gundogan, both of Turkish descent, made the decision to meet with the controversial head of state on the eve of the 2018 World Cup.

Ozzil sparked outrage after meeting with Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan in London

Ozil then became a scapegoat for Germany's underwhelming performance at the tournament, leading to the Arsenal outcast's retirement from the national team and outburst at the 'racism and disrespect' that came his way.

He failed to get off to a flying start at Fenerbahce only making 11 appearances for the club last season with his only notable contribution coming in the form of an assist in their 2-1 loss against Sivasspor on the final day of the season.

The loss was his fourth defeat in six home games with the Istanbul giants for a return of a sole win.

Ozil failed to get off to a flying start at the Turkish club making only 11 appearances last season

The 32-year-old was involved in three FA Cup victories for Arsenal during his Emirates spell

The midfielder left Arsenal having played 254 matches for the club, scoring 44 goals and recording 77 assists in more than seven years.

He was involved in the 2014 FA Cup final victory against Hull City, which ended Arsenal's nine-year trophy drought, as well as when they defended their Cup crown against Villa a year later.

He also played a part in the Gunners' Cup triumph over Chelsea in 2017, but came up short against the same opponents in the Europa League final two years later.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois has signed a new contract that will run until 2026.

Courtois, who joined from Chelsea in 2018, made his 100th LaLiga appearance for Real in their season opener against Alaves, with his side winning 4-1.

A statement on Real's official website read: 'Thibaut signed his contract renewal at Real Madrid City, accompanied by President Florentino Perez.

Thibaut Courtois has signed a new contract with Real Madrid that will run until June 30, 2026

Courtois was accompanied by Real's president Florentino Perez as he signed his contract

'The goalkeeper remains linked to our club until June 30, 2026. After signing, he received a shirt with his name and the number 2026 as the number.'

Courtois, 29, had three years remaining on his previous contract with Real.

In the 2019-20 season he won the Zamora Trophy for the best goalkeeper in LaLiga having conceded just 20 goals in 34 games.

Courtois helped Real to win the title in the 2019-20 season and has made 100 LaLiga appearances for the club

The goalkeeper is eager to help Real regain the LaLiga title under new boss Carlo Ancelotti

Real won LaLiga and the Supercopa de Espana in 2019-20, with Courtois having also lifted the Club World Cup in 2018.

This summer Courtois featured for Belgium at Euro 2020 as they reached the quarter-finals and he has now represented his country on 89 occasions.

Courtois will be eager to help Carlo Ancelotti's side regain the LaLiga title this season after rivals Atletico finished two points above them last campaign.

Having started out at Genk, Courtois joined Chelsea in 2011 and spent three seasons on loan at Atletico Madrid, which included winning the LaLiga title.

Courtois returned to Chelsea and proceeded to play 154 times for the Blues, winning two Premier League titles, the FA Cup and the League Cup.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liverpool are set to win the race to sign Portugal midfielder Renato Sanches ahead of rivals Barcelona, reports claim.

The 23-year-old is expected to leave French champions Lille this summer, where he was a key player in their title success after reigniting his career following a terrible spell at Bayern Munich.

Lille have set a £40million price tag on Sanches, and Liverpool are in 'pole position' to buy the midfielder given Barcelona's well-documented financial crisis, according to Spanish outlet Mundo Deportivo.

Liverpool are in 'pole position' to make Renato Sanches Jurgen Klopp's second summer signing

Sanches starred for Portugal at Euro 2020 this summer and was crucial to Lille's title success

Premier League fans may remember Sanches during his short period on loan at Swansea from Bayern, where he infamously passed the ball to an advertising hoarding. But he was one of Portugal's top performers at Euro 2020 off the back of his excellent season for Lille.

Should he arrive on Merseyside, Sanches would only be Jurgen Klopp's second signing of the transfer window after Ibrahima Konate joined for £36million much earlier in the summer.

But the Liverpool manager hinted that more signings may arrive before the window shuts on 31 August in a potential late flurry of activity at Anfield.

Speaking after Liverpool's 1-1 friendly draw with Athletic Bilbao, Klopp said: 'I am very happy with the squad, but it doesn't mean that we don't look at the market.

Defender Ibrahima Konate (left) has been Klopp's only major signing of the window so far

Liverpool are also linked with a potential £38m move for Belgian teenager Jeremy Doku (right)

'We have a big squad and there might be something happening until the end of the transfer window, but I cannot say anything about that at the moment.'

Another name being linked with Liverpool is electric young winger Jeremy Doku, who Rennes signed just one season ago for £24m from Anderlecht.

The French side could accept an offer of £38m for the 19-year-old Belgian, according to Dutch media outlet Voetbal24, and Liverpool are considering a move for Doku as a long-term replacement for Mohamed Salah.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@India made history at Tokyo 2020 by winning their first ever track-and-field gold medal thanks to javelin thrower Neeraj Chopra.

The 23-year-old army officer set off jubilant celebrations across the nation's 1.3 billion people as his final throw of 87.58 metres was enough to secure only India's second ever individual gold medal.

What's more, Chopra knew that he'd topped the podium the second he released the javelin. Footage shows him wheeling away in celebration with him arms aloft immediately after his throw.

India's Neeraj Chopra made history by winning the country's first track-and-field gold medal

Chopra, 23, threw a mammoth 87.58 metres in the javelin to beat his rivals and win the gold

Neeraj Chopra won India's first-ever track & field gold medal, and he knew it the second he released the javelin.pic.twitter.com/jOjhyhuNdd — Joe Pompliano (@JoePompliano) August 7, 2021

Some of Chopra's stunning self-confidence likely came from the fact that he was throwing last and therefore knew the distance he needed to take the gold.

But it takes nothing away from what will surely become iconic footage in Indian sport of Chopra celebrating victory well before the javelin had punctured the turf.

'It feels unbelievable,' he said afterwards. 'This is our first Olympic medal for a very long time, and in athletics it is the first time we have gold, so it's a proud moment for me and my country.'

Chopra was so sure he had won gold that he celebrated seconds after throwing his javelin

Fans all across India celebrated Chopra's historic achievement in the javelin competition

Just spoke to @Neeraj_chopra1 and congratulated him on winning the Gold! Appreciated his hardwork and tenacity, which have been on full display during #Tokyo2020. He personifies the best of sporting talent and sportsman spirit. Best wishes for his future endeavours. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) August 7, 2021

The scale of Chopra's achievement is made stark when it is noted that India's only previous track-and-field Olympic medals came in 1900 when Norman Pritchard, the son of a British colonial family, took silver in the 200m and 200m hurdles.

Chopra has been feted by India's biggest stars and ordinary fans since his extraordinary win, which even induced a message from Indian prime minister Narendra Modi.

'He personifies the best of sporting talent and sportsman spirit,' Modi wrote in a tweet. 'Best wishes for his future endeavours.'

Chopra's gold made Tokyo 2020 India's best ever Olympic Games, taking home seven medals in total - one gold, two silvers and four bronzes.

India's first individual gold medal was won by shooter Abhinav Bindra at London 2012.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish, now the most expensive British footballer of all-time, has been pictured getting the train to London with his new Manchester City team-mates after joining the club for £100million.

Grealish, 25, officially completed the move to Premier League champions City on Thursday, having put pen to paper on a six-year deal worth £230,000-a-week in the standout blockbuster switch of the summer.

And it hasn't taken long for him to be thrust straight into the action, with City to compete for the first trophy of the year against Leicester in the Community Shield.

Jack Grealish has been seen getting the train to London with his Manchester City team-mates

Former Aston Villa talisman Grealish, who emotionally parted ways with his boyhood club, revealed that winning silverware was the driving force behind him joining City, and their opening game may allow him to do just that.

It is likely he will play a part in the clash at Wembley this weekend, and Pep Guardiola's squad and coaching staff were seen boarding their train to head down to the capital on Friday afternoon.

Grealish was with the group, and looked to be enjoying his conversation with Benjamin Mendy as he settles in. One photo shows a City supporter asking their newest arrival for a signature, before the train then left.

Grealish was with City's squad less than a day after officially joining the club for £100million

Record signing Grealish looked to be enjoying a chat with Benjamin Mendy at the train station

Grealish was seen leaving City's headquarters yesterday as he closed in on the move, and Sportsmail revealed on Wednesday that the playmaker had started his medical after the club activated a clause in his contract.

With both parties working through the formalities of the jaw-dropping switch, Grealish was escorted around City's training complex in the back of a large black van - and was subsequently photographed.

The interest from City has been evident over recent months, with Sportsmail reporting in March that they were favourites to sign Grealish. The official talks began last week, and the full £100m clause fee was paid in full on Friday.

Opening up on the move, Grealish admitted he felt 'over the moon' and described joining City as 'massive'. He also went on to highlight his ambitions to be successful with the club, and the impact of boss Guardiola.

Grealish will wear the No 10 shirt and his move is the blockbuster switch of the summer so far

After holding his first interviews, Grealish said he moved to City to win the biggest trophies

'It was obviously a difficult few months because I have been an Aston Villa fan for my whole life, but when I spoke to the manager here and you see what type of players they have got here, in the end it was something I couldn't say no to,' he said.

'I am absolutely delighted to be here. Trophies are the main reason why I joined. There are obviously a lot of reasons why I decided to come here.

'The manager has been a massive factor; playing under the best manager in the world was something I couldn't really turn down.

'Obviously the players that we have got here, I think everyone knows how much I admire Kevin [De Bruyne].

Grealish posed alongside Txiki Begiristain after signing the bumper £230,000-a-week deal

Pep Guardiola was also name-dropped by Grealish as another factor behind his hefty transfer

'It is going to become a dream come true to play alongside him. But competing for trophies is something that I wanted to do. It was something I couldn't turn down.'

Guardiola appears to have been left equally delighted after snapping up Grealish, having uploaded a photo on Instagram showing him speaking to the new signing in his office. Naturally, the post sent followers into a frenzy.

Around 60,000 likes flooded in within just 30 minutes of the upload going live, and the caption simply read: 'Welcome @jackgrealish #mancity'.

Guardiola's Instagram post of him and new boy Grealish talking had gained a huge response

Villa were desperate for Grealish to stay, and even offered him a new deal, barely 11 months on from when he had penned his previous one. They also outlined their objective to challenge for the top six this season.

Grealish returned from his holiday in Dubrovnik at the start of the week and, by resuming training, remained respectful. He held talks with sporting director Johan Lange, as well as chief executive Christian Purslow and chairman Nassef Sawiris.

He made 213 appearances for Villa since making his debut in May 2014, scoring 32 goals and picking up 43 assists.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tom Daley put the knitting needles down momentarily to return to the diving board for the individual 10 metre contest on Friday - but couldn't help himself from working on his latest garment in between rounds.

Daley, 27, fresh from his Olympic triumph in the synchronised event with Matty Lee, has spent a whirlwind few days setting about on his knitting projects - including a Tokyo-themed cardigan - but is back in action for the individual event.

The Team GB star made a shaky start to the preliminary round, causing a big splash with his opening dive to score 52.20, but his dives improved as the rounds progressed, easing his way into the semi-final.

Daley earlier revealed that the hobby keeps him 'sane' and it certainly appeared to have an effect on his performances as he came on strong in the final three rounds in Tokyo.

18 of the 29 divers advanced to the semi-finals, with Daley one of two British stars competing in Tokyo, alongside Noah Williams.

Williams, 21, endured a tough day at the office, with two expensive mistakes in the fourth and fifth rounds costing him his his place in the semi-final.

Tom Daley has returned to the diving board to compete in the men's 10metre platform

He was spotted knitting in between rounds on Friday, having revealed that the activity helps keep him 'sane' in high pressure situations. After a shaky start, he went onto finish fourth

Daley has made a Team GB, Tokyo-inspired cardigan during his time in the athletes' village

The 27-year-old has spent a whirlwind few days knitting following his triumph in the synchro

After six rounds, Williams finished with 309.55 points, putting him in 27th position. Daley ended with 453.70 points in fourth position. China's Jia Yang finished top of the standings with 546.90 points.

On his newfound hobby, Daley said on Instagram: ​​'One thing that has kept me sane throughout this whole process is my love for knitting and crochet and all things stitching.

'When I got to Tokyo, I wanted to make something that would remind me of the Olympics to look back on in the future,' Daley said of his cardigan. 'I designed a pattern for the colour work that would signify everything about these games.'

Daley is raffling his Tokyo-inspired knitwear to raise money for the Brain Tumour Charity, with each entry costing £2. The 27-year-old began donating his pieces to the charity last September.

The Team GB hero finished fourth in the men's 10m platform preliminary stage in Tokyo

Meanwhile, it was a bad day at the office for Noah Williams, who crashed out in 27th position

While flaunting another raffle sweater, he teased 'I will be raffling off lots of things over the coming months so keep your eyes peeled.'

Daley finally ended his gold medal wait last week when he and Olympic debutant Lee clinched gold in a nail-biting final in Tokyo. The British pair saw off Chinese favourites Cao Yuan and Chen Aisen by 471.81 points to 470.58.

'I still can't honestly believe what is happening,' Daley told BBC Sport. 'That moment, being about to be announced as Olympic champions, I was gone. I was blubbering.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is how Max Whitlock contends with the magnitude of the moment which is the most unfathomable part.

These Olympics have shone a light on the unyielding psychological demands of gymnastics. Video clips surfaced revealing a Simone Biles too mentally dislocated to land on her feet from uneven bars in a Tokyo gymnasium, where she has been trying to find the self-assurance she lost somewhere along the way.

The margins are so fine and the grip on belief so fragile. All Whitlock had worked towards hinged on a 90-second pommel horse final routine, which a single slip would end.

Scroll down for video

Max Whitlock defended his Olympic pommel horse title by winning gold in the men's final

Whitlock packed his routine full of complexity and was rewarded with a difficulty score of 7.0

WHAT A ROUTINE! 🤩



Max Whitlock sealing his third Olympic gold medal 🥇🥇🥇#bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 1, 2021

He won, retaining his Olympic title with a signature statement of strength. He competed first in the eight-strong field and knew he had to be ‘all in’ and ‘go big’. A routine of optimal difficulty value delivered a points target that none of the rest could match.

But that does not mean fear didn’t stalk him through the long, empty hours leading up to the event. He knew what winning Olympic gold felt like from Rio five years ago, so knew what there was to lose here.

‘What I’ve learned this time is that knowing you have done it before makes it 10 times harder,’ he said. ‘That feeling of winning gold is crazy and you want to experience it again.

‘You are watching athletes coming through, medals flowing in for GB. You can relate to it. And you know your time is coming.’

The dynamics of competing first were complicated. Whitlock heads into competition with three possible routines, performing the one coach Scott Hann, who gauges the other scores, deems necessary for victory.

Whitlock had not posted a score over 15 in qualifying but blew everybody away in the final

Chinese Taipei's Lee Chih Kai (left) took silver, and Japan's Kazuma Kaya (right) won bronze

In Rio, as the penultimate performer, he could make that calculation. Tokyo required a greater level of difficulty, the most challenging routine he had set himself. ‘You battle with yourself in your head,’ he said. ‘I know I can do the routine, I’ve trained for that moment. But you can never put yourself in that situation or that environment.

‘The whole morning, I felt the pressure. You know you can do it but you know how small the margins are.’

There was not a flicker of apprehension as the 28-year-old stepped up to the apparatus. Then he went to work. Mind fixed on working one handle, then another, easing down the length of the apparatus, arms parallel, legs ramrod straight, skills linked, dismount precise.

The embrace with Hann when he was done told you he had achieved what he set out to do, long before his dominant score of 15.583 flashed up. Now, the mental struggle belonged to others.

Whitlock said these Olympics were 'the most pressured environment I've ever been in'

Team Ireland medal hopeful Rhys McClenaghan fell on the horse to finish seventh in the final

There had been talk of Irishman Rhys McClenaghan unseating him but Whitlock’s score forced the 22-year-old to extend himself. The pressure was big. He was one of two who fell.

Whitlock’s wife Leah had told him, ‘It’s gymnastics’ and not a matter of life or death before he headed out here. Their daughter Willow, two, will put this Olympic medal to use, like his five others. ‘Another toy!’

His mind seems clear for another psychological challenge, at Paris 2024, where he imagines an ‘air flair’ manoeuvre of such originality that it might be named after him. ‘The Whitlock,’ he said, smiling. ‘That’s one dream. I’ll give it a go.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brentford have signed DR Congo forward Yoane Wissa from French side FC Lorient for an undisclosed fee.

The 24-year-old has agreed a four-year contract, with the option of an additional year.

Wissa, who last month was allegedly the subject of an acid attack in France, joins the Bees shortly before their maiden Premier League campaign, which kicks off with a London derby against Arsenal on Friday night.

Brentford have signed Yoane Wissa (pictured) on a four-year contract from French side Lorient

Head coach Thomas Frank said on the club's website: 'Wissa is someone who fits many different positions for us. He can play as a winger, as a number 10, and as a striker.

'He has that pace and power which we think is really important to be a threat in behind. He has good ability to take on players and create overloads.

'He also has good pressing abilities; he will need to learn our style of play but he fits the pressing criteria we want from a winger, a striker, or a number 10.

The versatile 24-year-old forward is the Premier League new boy's third major summer signing

'He had one good season in Ligue 2 and one very good season in Ligue 1 and now we look forward to developing him further.

'I'm sure that he will help the team. He is a very good character as well; everyone knows that it is very important for our culture that we only get good characters in.

'He is very keen to come in and help the team and we are very keen to get him in.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The top of Porto's five-star Palacio Hotel was sombre and reflective the morning after Manchester City's biggest night. Finally a Champions League showpiece, only to fall at the hands of Chelsea. Many felt they had not done themselves justice at the climax of a season that saw Pep Guardiola's team send so many records tumbling.

The club's chairman, Khaldoon Al Mubarak, had not been able to speak with Kevin De Bruyne after the defeat. De Bruyne, who left the Estadio do Dragao in tears, was sent straight to hospital after suffering nose and eye socket fractures.

Al Mubarak wanted to relay a message to their talisman - one that he must hope sets the tone for the months ahead. The pair sat down on the hotel's sofas overlooking Portugal's second city. 'I wanted to thank him for the season he'd given this team, for the commitment to the club,' Al Mubarak said.

Manchester City are releasing a documentary on the final 46 days of last season

City won the Premier League but lost to Chelsea in the Champions League final in May

'I wanted to make sure that he remembers that this is how it feels losing a final and with his leadership - he's such an important player for this team - we will be back and that he will win a Champions League for us.'

Guardiola had been given the same message when receiving his runner-up medal from the chairman on the podium the night prior. Al Mubarak wanted to quickly impress on his main protagonists that he knows City have the capabilities to line up as finalists again in Saint Petersburg next May.

That is the goal for Guardiola at a club now more comfortable leaning into its naked ambition of lifting the biggest prize - the only one they are missing. But he will realise that topping last year - romping to the Premier League title, effectively three games from an unprecedented quadruple - is going to be some ask when the circus rolls up again at Tottenham on Sunday.

The Catalan's job has always been a little different to the majority of his contemporaries. City win so much that while evolving tactically will always retain its importance, the attempts to preserve a spirit, to prevent arrogance and complacency, always trump all.

It is why he wants at least a couple of new faces in every summer. A different voice, a player to keep others on their toes. He is of course fortunate to possess the backing of the club to recruit regularly.

At £100million, the most expensive British player ever Jack Grealish is the chosen one this time. Guardiola wants Harry Kane to follow him. It is no mistake that aside from being phenomenal footballers, both targets have pre-existing relationships with those at the club.

The City manager also believes these arrivals help freshen camaraderie. The electronic dartboard will be with them at the hotel before facing Tottenham this weekend, so too the table tennis tables.

The two sky blue banners reading "together" and "we fight 'till the end" - the first of which signed by the players - will hang inside the away dressing room.

City have signed Jack Grealish for £100m and hope to add Harry Kane through the doors

They will mess about in groups playing little indoor games of two-touch to relax. Kyle Walker will bark a stream of consciousness in the hour before kick-off, acting as background music. Ruben Dias will approach the middle of the room to deliver his thoughts. Captain Fernandinho will wait until nearer kick-off.

City are releasing a documentary, titled "Together", detailing the final 46 days of last season as they lifted the club's fifth title in a decade and went so close to conquering Europe.

In there it presents a closeness that belies any personal misgivings over game time that can fester and partly points to why they succeeded in a year of empty stadiums and general indifference across the country.

The wildest scenes understandably came in Europe as they broke new ground. The entire squad jubilantly FaceTimed the injured third-choice goalkeeper Scott Carson sat at home in the moments after beating Borussia Dortmund in Germany.

Nathan Ake later entertained on a white piano at the Radisson Blu hotel over a dinner attended by club legend Mike Summerbee and chief executive Ferran Soriano.

The defender's performance on the keys prompted a rapturous reception. Guardiola has always insisted that those moments are always spent as a group, the South American barbeques after big nights, the parties after silverware.

The documentary shows how Pep Guardiola keeps his successful side on title track

It shows Nathan Ake entertaining on the piano while Guardiola gets fascinated by the formation of geese

There was an afternoon last year that Guardiola became fascinated by the formation of geese in flight captured on camera when reviewing drone footage of training. He enthused about their teamwork to performance analyst Harry Dunn and notices similarities between that and how a squad should behave together. Leaders at the front and those who follow dutifully.

They have to reproduce last season's brilliance all over again and yes, while Guardiola is afforded the very best in every department, there is a real knack to replicating success so often.

Liverpool, Chelsea and Manchester United are stronger than ever and the trick now is to stand up to sustained questions from a number of different angles simultaneously. Al Mubarak's words in the aftermath of Porto suggests they are adamant that staying stationary is not an option.

Together is released on Thursday at 10am exclusively to City+ members for one week before being released globally on YouTube.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newcastle are reportedly in talks to sign Roma midfielder Carles Perez on a loan move with an option to buy.

The 23-year-old Spaniard has made 47 appearances for the Serie A since joining from Barcelona for around £10m back in January 2020.

However, Perez might not get as much game time under new manager Jose Mourinho.

Carles Perez has scored five goals in 47 appearances since joining Roma from Barcelona

Calciomercato have reported that Newcastle have approached Perez over the possibility of joining the club this summer.

Steve Bruce's side are said to have a made a loan offer with the option to buy him on a permanent transfer at the end of the 2021-22 season.

Perez who primarily plays on the right wing, can also play as a creative midfielder or on the left so he would give Newcastle plenty of options.

Newcastle have been tracking Perez since last year and have now reportedly made an offer

Perez might find his chances at Roma reduced under the helm of new boss Jose Mourinho

The Magpies have been monitoring Perez since last year, while Serie A sides Genoa and Torino have also considered the possibility of making a loan move for the Spaniard.

Perez came through Barcelona's youth academy and made 13 senior appearances for the Spanish giants before heading to Italy.

At Roma, he has scored five goals across his one and half seasons in the Serie A.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kylian Mbappe is reportedly 'concerned' over new teammate Lionel Messi, after the Argentine superstar joined Paris Saint-Germain.

Messi was unveiled by the French giants this week after his stunning exit from Barcelona at the end of his contract.

His arrival creates a new terrific trio in world football with Messi teaming up with fellow world stars Mbappe and Neymar.

Paris Saint-Germain confirmed the signing of Lionel Messi after his shock exit from Barcelona

Kylian Mbappe though is said to be 'concerned' by Messi's arrival at the French giants

However, there are already concerns that the three players will only have one year together in Paris, with Mbappe's deal at the club expiring next summer.

According to Gazzeta Dello Sport, Messi's signing has 'bothered' the French superstar, who fears he may be put in the 'shadow' of his two illustrious teammates.

Mbappe has been in the French capital since 2017 after joining the club on a one-year loan deal which turned permanent the following season for a massive £163m.

His contract ends next summer and it is said that Mbappe is expected to announce his decision over his future to the club on Monday.

The 22-year-old has been heavily linked with Real Madrid, while other top European clubs could be interested if he is available on a free.

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi dismissed claims that Mbappe could leave the club this summer.

Speaking at Messi's first press conference at the club, Al-Khelaifi touched on Mbappe's situation.

He said: 'Everyone knows the future of Mbappe. He is a PSG player.

Messi is set to form a deadly attacking trio with Mbappe and former teammate Neymar

Mbappe has just one year left on his current deal at the club with Real Madrid interested

'Kylian is very competitive, he wants to win, he has publicly said that he does not want to leave the team and there are no doubts or excuses of any other kind. Mbappe stays'.

Mbappe did take to social media on Thursday though to welcome Messi to the club.

He shared pictures of him hugging the Barcelona legend with the caption: 'Welcome to Paris, Leo.'

Messi, who signed a two-year contract with Paris St-Germain worth a staggering £1million per week after leaving Barcelona, said he was excited about playing with Mbappe and Neymar - calling them 'the best players' during his press conference.

'It feels great to play with them to play everyday with these great players, and the other players who are here,' he told the world's media. 'I can't wait to train with them. It's great to do it everyday.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea fans are confident they can win the Premier League title after the club confirmed the signing of Romelu Lukaku.

The Belgian striker returns to Stamford Bridge seven years after leaving the club, after completing his £98m move from Inter Milan.

Lukaku scored 24 goals last season to help Inter to the Serie A title and Chelsea supporters believe he can make a similar impact in helping them to their first league title since the 2016-17 campaign.

Chelsea confirmed the signing of Romelu Lukaku from Inter Milan on Thursday evening

Lukaku fired Inter Milan to the title and fans are confident he can do the same with Chelsea

Twitter user Danny P commented on the news: 'To sign a striker at this type of a fee shows so much faith in the future. Big Rom is home and he's about to run wild.'

Daniel Hart replied to Chelsea's video announcing Lukaku on Twitter: 'I think Chelsea have just won the Premier League title 2021/22.'

James Shearman believes Lukaku will make a similar impact at Stamford Bridge to that of Diego Costa, who scored 20 goals in two league-winning campaigns.

He said: 'And with that, Chelsea can win the Premier League title. Fully expecting Romelu Lukaku to have a Diego Costa-like impact at Stamford Bridge.'

Sanju Blue commented: 'He will improve the team so much using his physical strength with his back to goal to hammer home goals and pick out beautiful assists to aid his teammates.

'Last year we didn’t have the fortitude and stamina to steamroll less talented PL teams. Now we can do.'

Diego Costa fired Chelsea to two league titles and one fan feels Lukaku can have the same impact

Frankie G wrote: '#LukWhosBack Welcome home Rom, absolutely buzzing to see you smash up the league for us,' while Nihal G wrote 'Can't keep calm, we finally have a World class striker!!! Welcome back home Big Rom.'

It's not just Chelsea fans who are confident on their chances as Liverpool fan Stephen tweeted: 'This puts Chelsea at the front of the title picture imo, they have what they needed and I think they’ll kick on and win the league this season.'

Former Liverpool and Manchester United striker Michael Owen also got in on the act as he posted: 'This really is a huge signing from Chelsea. They may be the reigning Champions of Europe but it was glaringly obvious how much they needed a top striker. They’ve not messed about, they’ve gone and got one of the best in.'

As well as the positivity of Lukaku signing, there were others who made light of Chelsea spending so much on a player they sold for just £28m seven years ago.

He will improve the team so much using his physical strength with his back to goal to hammer home goals and pick out beautiful assists to aid his teammates.



Last year we didn’t have the fortitude and stamina to steamroll less talented PL teams. Now we can do.#CFC @Chelsea pic.twitter.com/olZ6WDsaxW — Sanju Blue™ (@lifeofsanju) August 12, 2021

#LukWhosBack



Welcome home Rom, absolutely buzzing to see you smash up the league for us. #cfc https://t.co/eFZBR8wulI — Frankie G ⭐⭐ (@FrankieG1985) August 12, 2021

Can't keep calm, we finally have a World class striker!!! Welcome back home Big Rom 💙 #CFC https://t.co/eE1yozMM0A — Nihal G⭐⭐ (@ngtweetz) August 12, 2021

This really is a huge signing from @ChelseaFC. They may be the reigning Champions of Europe but it was glaringly obvious how much they needed a top striker. They’ve not messed about, they’ve gone and got one of the best in @RomeluLukaku9. — michael owen (@themichaelowen) August 12, 2021

Some fans made light of Chelsea spending £97m on a player they sold for £28m in 2014

Lukaku was sold on to Everton before a spell at Manchester United before he joined Inter Milan.

Syd Kerrigan commented with several laughing emojis: '#Chelsea sold #Lukaku for £28m to Everton and are now buying him back from Inter Milan for £97.5m - a £69.5m loss.'

Liam Gray also tweeted: 'Why is nobody talking about the fact Chelsea signing Lukaku for £97m despite having sold him to Everton for £28m doesn’t seem like great economics.'

#Chelsea sold #Lukaku for £28m to Everton and are now buying him back from Inter Milan for £97.5m - a £69.5m loss. 😂😂😂😂😂 — syd kerrigan (@sydkerrigan2018) August 12, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David Probert followed his five-timer at Ffos Las on Wednesday with a treble back at the course the following day. Victory on Hey Teacher in the opener meant Probert had won on six consecutive rides.

Owner Bjorn Nielsen retains full faith in Stradivarius, who will try to win the Weatherbys Lonsdale Cup at York next Friday for the third time. The seven-year-old, trained by John and Thady Gosden, was fourth in the Ascot Gold Cup and Nielsen said: ‘The day he’s beaten when he has his conditions, that will probably be it, but from what I hear he’s still full of it.’

High Definition heads a four-strong entry for Aidan O’Brien in Wednesday’s Group Two Great Voltigeur Stakes at York. The colt has not run since he was the beaten favourite in June’s Irish Derby.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jesse Lingard wants to tell his story. Joined by his brother, Louie Scott, and Alexandros Alexiadis, coach of Greece's Under 17s, the trio are here to explain 'Project Jesse 2.0'. It was March 2020 when they masterminded a plan to resurrect not only Lingard the player, but Jesse the person. He was in a dark place.

There is only so much social media abuse a man can take and his season had amounted to just two appearances for Manchester United. He didn't want to leave his home for fear of being recognised and considered a move to China or Saudi Arabia, away from that spotlight of scrutiny.

Thankfully, with Louie and Alex's support, he remained in England, where a loan move to West Ham saw the '2.0' project pay off.

Here, Sportsmail's Jamie Redknapp speaks exclusively to the England international as he enters a new season in which he intends to show United what they've been missing. Kieran Gill listened in...

Jesse Lingard (pictured above) has opened up to Sportsmail about his mental health struggles

Lingard, 28, admitted he turned to drink to help cope with fierce social media abuse online

Lingard spoke with Sportsmail's Jamie Redknapp ahead of the new season

JESSE: My confidence was shot. You can be that happy-go-lucky guy, bouncing around the training ground, but deep down you're wearing that smile as a mask.

I wasn't playing so I was down. Luckily I had Louie sending me videos from my Under 21 days for United and England. He was trying to make me realise what a good player I'd been.

'Watch this! Watch this!' So I did and thought, 'You know what? I can't throw this away'. It gave me confidence, and that first lockdown gave me a chance to re-evaluate what I wanted in life.

JAMIE: What was it like seeing your brother this way, Louie?

LOUIE: I've watched this kid all my life. There were matches where I had to leave because I knew he wasn't right and I felt helpless. You know when you see a boxer on his last legs, ready to be knocked out? That's what I was seeing and at the same time, the vultures came for him.

Brother Louie Scott (right) and coach Alexandros Alexiadis (centre) planned his comeback

They were picking away. There was a lot of online abuse. I don't look at Jesse as someone to analyse, or someone who needs a new contract. I'm his big brother. I needed to make sure this kid could go on and live his life. He didn't want to go fill up his car with petrol as he didn't want to go out. I felt powerless.

JESSE: I was like that on the pitch. The game was passing me by. I felt like I wasn't there. I was bottling things up and not telling anyone what was going on.

But I remember watching one of the first videos Louie sent me. I rang him straight away and was like, 'Yo! Let's go!' I decided I wasn't just going to sit around. I told him: 'I'm not going anywhere. I'm going to fight and we're going to do it.'

LOUIE: It was a video of him playing for United's Under 21s. He picks up the ball, beats two players, cuts in and whips it just over the top corner. This kid was 4ft 5in in the Under 21s, taking on opponents who were 6ft, beating them, creating.

When I saw that, compared to what he was doing in the United first team, it was chalk and cheese. So it was about hitting that reset button. That's why I was sending him those videos: to remind him of what he could do.

Project Jesse 2.0 helped Lingard's wellbeing

Louie used this whiteboard as motivation

JAMIE: You got so much stick for your 'JLingz' clothing brand, as if you were the first footballer to invest in a venture.

JESSE: I remember the weekend I launched my brand (in December 2018). We beat Fulham. Then the following weekend, we lose away to Liverpool. Suddenly it was: 'Why did you launch your brand the week before such a big game?'

It had nothing to do with that. That was never going to affect my performance. I don't run the brand. I'm not packing clothes to ship out before a game.

LOUIE: 'He's got a brand, he's distracted…' I do all of that! I take care of the brand side of things. That's not Jesse's job. We decided not to say anything. We left it and agreed one day we'd say our piece.

I'm telling you right now: you will not find a player from all of Jesse's years at United who runs more than him. Talent doesn't make you run 12km a game. It comes from within. He is a total professional.

JESSE: At my lowest point, I was thinking, 'I need to get away from England'. Not to Spain, but to China or Saudi Arabia, somewhere to stay out of the limelight and only concentrate on football.

When lockdown came, I wanted to use that to put all of the pieces of the puzzle together and then show people what I could do.

We had Alex on board and he was giving me an analysis of every upcoming opponent of United's, just in case I played. I didn't get the game time I wanted but eventually we got the move to West Ham and that was perfect.

ALEX: Just before Jesse went out on loan, I asked Louie: 'Do you believe your brother will play for England again?' I already knew the answer. It was yes. But the point was to give them that extra motivation and a future target. It was a new start. I saw that Jesse and Louie wanted to succeed and that was the point.

JAMIE: Two decades ago, we had a player at Liverpool called Igor Biscan and he decided to bring in his own fitness coach. Some of the lads were saying, 'What is he doing?' Now I realise it was a glimpse into the future!

Motivational words and phrases like this helped Lingard earn an international recall

Players can hire their own coach — someone who will be honest and feed you the individual information you need. Kudos to you for committing to that.

JESSE: I'd never had that at home before. It really helped.

The West Ham loan deal was confirmed on January 29, 2021. Lingard wanted to face Liverpool on January 31 — a chance to show what he'd been working on in private, with Louie and Alex — but wasn't registered in time.

He debuted against Aston Villa on February 3, scoring twice, and impressed enough to be named in Gareth Southgate's England squad in March. Yet that loan from United to West Ham wasn't without its complications.

JESSE: I spoke to Ole Gunnar Solskjaer at the start of the season and said: 'If I'm not going to get any game time, I need to go on loan.' We agreed to discuss it in December. I'd started two games so I said: 'Boss, I need to go.' He agreed.

There was Newcastle and West Brom, but then my dad got a call from David Moyes at West Ham. He said: 'When I was at United, I let your son go out on loan. It's time to repay the favour.'

I spoke to him and we tried to get a deal done. It was off, then on, then off, then on. It was a rollercoaster. Me and Louie were crying one time because it was off. Then it was on again, so we flew straight down and got it over the line.

JAMIE: Your debut against Villa, you start and score twice. To think at one stage, you wanted to escape to Saudi Arabia. Now you're rocking in the Premier League.

JESSE: When I wasn't playing at United, I was still training like a professional. I wasn't moping about.

I was doing my job, hoping for an opportunity, and by the Villa game, I was raring to go. I was just happy, you know? When you get a happy Jesse, a confident Jesse, you get results.

The attacking midfielder went on loan to West Ham and put in some fantastic performances

LOUIE: It wasn't an overnight thing. I've known Alex for 10 years. We only had training sessions, a game against Luton, and 10 minutes against Brighton to analyse. But it was about setting Jesse up to succeed. Our mantra was 'stay ready' rather than just 'be ready'.

When Villa came along, bang. We were ultra-confident he'd succeed because we knew what he'd put into it. We didn't bring Alex in to start analysing games at West Ham and create pre-match and post-match video reports. We'd already been doing that for a year.

JAMIE: I've seen a picture of a whiteboard in your Stratford flat, Jesse, full of motivational words. Like 'PANAMA', the 2018 World Cup opponents you scored against. Or 'TAKE RISKS', 'HUNGRY' and 'HALF TURN'. Was that your idea?

JESSE: My brother put it up. I woke up every morning and looked at the board. He'd write a new word each night and eventually it was all filled in. Words which meant something to us. 'GET AT HIM,' was one. 'WC18,' as a reminder of that tournament. 'THREE CUP FINAL GOALS,' to mark my FA Cup, EFL Cup, Community Shield finals.

Little things to reiterate what I'd done and achieved. The whiteboard was good. I'll do it again this season. We wrote down a reasonable target of four goals and two assists by the March internationals and we did that. I was enjoying my football and when confident, I'll believe I can score a goal or two a game.

JAMIE: Have you gone back to United a different player?

JESSE: I've walked back in full of confidence. I've come back from a successful loan, player of the month, goal of the month, going away with England. It shows how far I've come. I've been doing well in pre-season. Ole's told me that himself. There's not much more I can do than that.

JAMIE: Do you feel like you have changed as a person too?

JESSE: Definitely. We had times during the bad periods when I started to resort to drinking at night and that wasn't me. My dad's never been a big drinker. My mum's never been a big drinker. I was bottling up so much in my head that I had resorted to drinking to try to ease the pain.

Louie was looking at me and thinking, 'That's not my brother'. I've never been a big drinker, but I was resorting to that for my own peace. When I finally opened up and started speaking to family, it really helped. I owe it to them.

He has now returned to parent club Manchester United and is much more confident and happy

LOUIE: He's in a better place now. As soon as he got back from Mykonos last month and was sent his roster by United, he contacted Alex. 'We've got Derby. Tell me their formations, tell me this, tell me that…'

I'm thinking, 'Analysis for a game against Derby in pre-season?' But he's back on it. He wants to be the best, whether it's in a friendly or in the Premier League.

JESSE: I dread to think about what would have happened if you weren't there. If I was here on my own, in lockdown, where would I be now?

Lingard will miss Saturday's match against Leeds after testing positive for Covid-19 last Wednesday, but should be available against Southampton next weekend. His United deal expires at the end of this season. Talks have not yet opened over an extension but the 28-year-old is calm.

JESSE: I feel good. I'm hoping I can get back to training on Monday. The virus can get to your chest but I've been OK.

JAMIE: That's good. I've got friends who support West Ham and when I told them I was speaking to you, they said, 'Put a good word in, Jamie'. So this is me doing that.

JESSE: (laughs) It worked out perfectly. I couldn't have asked for a better loan. I'll always support West Ham. They'll stay in my heart and I'll retain that bond with them.

JAMIE: No chance of a cheeky return to Stratford?

LOUIE: We've not heard anything. We're just sitting tight. Making a rash decision right now would be very silly.

JESSE: One hundred per cent. I'm not going to rush into anything. What comes will come. I feel like I'm in the driving seat. I'm happy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona wonderkid Ilaix Moriba came within a whisker of signing for Manchester City until his father sought a drastic intervention, it has been revealed.

Moriba burst onto the scene last season under Ronald Koeman and became a fixture in the senior Barca side despite being just 18-years-old.

The all-action midfielder quickly became of the players to watch in La Liga, though his father has now admitted he had to cancel a flight to Manchester two years ago to prevent a move to the Premier League.

Barcelona wonderkid Ilaix Moriba would be at Manchester City if it wasn't for his father

Moriba, who has played at youth level for Spain though is reportedly set to declare for Guinea, had found himself uncertain on whether to wait for a professional deal in Catalonia.

City had placed lucrative terms on the table but the player's father, Mamady Kourouma, decided to take action to keep his son with one of Spain's biggest clubs.

He told Sport: 'With Barcelona, the negotiations did not advance. We met with Txiki Begiristain [City sporting director] and he explained his entire project to us.

Moriba and his father met with City chief Txiki Begiristain (right) who sold them the vision

'We liked it because they bet a lot on him. A few weeks later we had the tickets to travel to Manchester and sign the contract.

'I cancelled it the morning that we had to go there. I wanted Ilaix to be an example and a reference for the next generations of Barcelona.

'His friends were gone. If he stayed, it was proof Barca was betting on the youth players. We managed to reach an agreement where we all came out winning.'

Barca went on to reward Moriba by making him the highest paid star in the academy and fast-tracked him to the senior ranks.

Last season Moriba made 18 appearances in all competitions and scored his first goal in a 2-0 win against Osasuna.

Moriba, seen in action against PSG last season, is currently in a stand-off with Barca over new terms with his current contract set to expire in summer 2022

With two seasons remaining on his senior contract Barca are keen to tie the starlet down, though so far talks have not been productive.

In a recent shock statement Barca president Joan Laporta revealed Moriba can leave after a row over his contract.

Moriba's deal is up in 2022 and the player is understood to be reluctant for Barca to add a release clause greater than £130million into fresh terms.

The Spanish giants are reported to be pushing for Moriba to have a clause closer to the eye-watering £343m which is found within the contract of fellow starlet Ansu Fati.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We got together when we were 15. My dad always said: “Make sure you marry a tall man” and Rob’s probably the smallest person I could have found.

But what he lacked in height he made up for in personality. I knew from the very beginning that I wanted to spend the rest of my life with him.

Our life was perfect. A great marriage, supportive families, three beautiful children. Then Rob was diagnosed with motor neurone disease.

Lindsay Burrow has revealed how her life was turned upside down after her husband Rob Burrow was diagnosed with MND

I couldn’t begin to imagine what was going through his head, but it was him telling me to pull myself together, not the other way around. Rob made me understand that we had a stark choice: either we could waste what time he had left by dwelling on all the things he’d miss out on when he was gone, or we could make as many happy memories as possible.

But sometimes I wonder how I have got through days. How I have got dressed in the morning, how I have found time to eat, how I was still standing up. Carrying on as normal is easier said than done.

Normal would be Rob picking the kids up from school or taking them swimming. Normal would be Rob reading Maya a bedtime story or changing Jackson’s nappy. But Rob can’t do those things any more, so I have to be mum and dad.

She spoke of how she become both a mum and a dad with her husband unable to do everyday tasks, but she insists she is no Superwoman

There was a stage, during the first lockdown, when I had no outside support. Occasionally, I felt like giving up. But when I married Rob, it was for sickness and in health. That might not sound very sexy, but when all the other constituent parts of love are stripped away, it’s all that’s left. When Rob was diagnosed, love was being the best carer to Rob I could be.

It’s important that people reading this don’t think I’m in any way special. I honestly believe that anyone in my shoes would do the same.

Rob might think I’m Superwoman but when you love and care about someone, your priority is to make them happy, whatever the circumstances.

And as long as Rob and the kids are happy, then so am I.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@PSG are reportedly willing to offer Paul Pogba a mammoth £510,000-a-week salary if he joins them on a free next summer.

The Frenchman is in the final year of his Manchester United deal and was linked with a move to the Parc des Princes this summer.

But Lionel Messi's shock switch to PSG stopped any move for Pogba from happening with the club prioritising the Argentine superstar instead.

PSG will reportedly offer Paul Pogba £510,000-a-week salary if he joins them next summer

While a move this summer is now off the cards, PSG are still interested in Pogba and will offer him a huge salary if he joins them when his United contract expires at the end of the season, according to the Independent.

Pogba has been linked with moves to Real Madrid and Barcelona but their well-known and publicised financial issues has left the midfielder to put off a move until he's out of contract – allowing him to move for no transfer fee.

However, the report goes on to claim that PSG would look to outspend their rivals in order to secure his signature, offering the 28-year-old a huge salary in order to join them as they look to build a strong core of Parisians in the squad.

Lionel Messi's shock switch to PSG this month stopped any move for Pogba from happening

PSG boss Mauricio Pochettino could soon have another huge star to manage

PSG used the same tactic in order to sign Georginio Wijnaldum, who left Liverpool this summer and looked certain to join Barcelona before the Ligue 1 giants offered him a contract worth three times more than the Catalan side's.

Pogba got the new 2021-22 campaign off to the flying start on Saturday after he played a pivotal role in United's 5-1 thumping win over arch rivals Leeds at Old Trafford.

While Bruno Fernandes walked away with the match ball and Mason Greenwood caught the eye, Pogba recorded four assists in the win, which left managed Ole Gunnar Solskjaer to sing the midfielder's praises after the game.

'Impressive,' Solskjaer said of Pogba's vision. 'Paul's always got that vision, he's got that quality.

Pogba got the new campaign off to a flying start on Saturday in the 5-1 win over Leeds

Pogba recorded four assists as United ran riot at Old Trafford in front of a sell-out crowd

'I know that the headlines will probably be about Bruno or Paul but this is a team effort and the space Mason creates for Bruno to open up the channels, what everyone does ahead of the goals has been worked on this week.

'But, Paul, I'm very impressed with his fitness levels as well. He's not been with us for too long and he looks fit, ready to go, enjoying his football.

'I love seeing Paul and all these boys smiling when they're playing football.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season kicked off in thrilling style over the weekend, with no fewer than 34 goals scored across the 10 top flight games as any concerns surrounding fatigue from a busy summer were swiftly quashed.

The return of supporters - long starved of live football due to Covid restrictions - made for surreal atmospheres across the country, as we were treated to two six-goal barnstormers, while Manchester United scored five goals to get their campaign off to a flying start.

However, it was not all good news for some sides, with Mikel Arteta's sorry Arsenal bullied by newcomers Brentford, while Manchester City made a poor start to their title defence with a 1-0 loss to a Harry Kane-less Spurs.

Here, Sportsmail dissects the key talking points from a gripping opening weekend of action in the Premier League.

Supporters were treated to a thrilling weekend of action as the Premier League made its return

Tuchel's young guns take their chance

While talk in West London has been dominated by the £98million arrival of Romelu Lukaku and the need to bring in a new defender, Thomas Tuchel has not lost sight of an important factor for Chelsea supporters.

Frank Lampard - restricted by a transfer ban - demonstrated that it is possible to dip into Chelsea's strong youth academy and find talent ready-made for top flight football and Tuchel has placed emphasis on continuing the trend set by the club legend.

Thomas Tuchel showed that he is willing to give young players a chance and he was rewarded

Trevoh Chalobah scored on his Premier League debut and broke down crying in West London

The German acknowledged Trevoh Chalobah's strong display against Villarreal by handing him a first league start on Saturday and was duly rewarded as the 22-year-old defender bagged a stunning goal from distance at Stamford Bridge.

'When I scored, I didn't know what to do. I dropped to my knees. I was crying,' an emotional Chalobah revealed.

While the big-money signings will move Chelsea closer to challenging City, Tuchel is fully aware that bringing through youngsters will have an even greater effect on endearing him to the Blues masses.

Bruno and Pogba DOES work

Man United's hammering of Leeds was made all the better by the presence of Raphael Varane being unveiled before supporters following his £42m signing from Real Madrid.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has long sought an elite defender to partner with Harry Maguire and, on paper, the duo appear ready-made to form a strong alliance.

For a long period of time, the same could not be said for Bruno Fernandes and Paul Pogba. The two superstars have long been viewed as incapable of playing together, given that they operate in a similar creative role.

Bruno Fernandes and Paul Pogba proved that they can play together for Manchester United

Pogba (R) teed up Fernandes (L) twice as the Frenchman got four assists while the Portuguese scored a hat trick in the 5-1 hammering of Leeds United

'I said a few weeks ago after the Crystal Palace game, Fernandes and Pogba is not a midfield that can play together and never will be,' Jamie Carragher said of the pair last October.

However, Fernandes and Pogba have put paid to that theory, with the pair combining twice to great effect in the 5-1 hammering. The Portuguese bagged a superb hat trick while Pogba laid on new fewer than four assists.

Pogba's future has been cast in doubt with his contract expiring next summer, but United fans could be in for a lot of fun watching these two enjoy a full season together.

Villa learn three signings cannot replace one Jack Grealish

How do you replace Jack Grealish? Well, Aston Villa appeared to provide the perfect blueprint with three high-profile signings with the £100m accrued from the club talisman's sale to City.

Emi Buendia, a £40m arrival from Norwich, boasts the creativity to cut through rival defences, £30m man Leon Bailey displays the trickery to beat a man, while Danny Ings has demonstrated time and again that he has top flight goals in abundance.

Yet football has a funny way of going off script, and Dean Smith was left flabbergasted when his side shipped three goals to Watford at Vicarage Road this weekend.

Dean Smith was left fuming after his side were defeated, it will take time for his squad to settle

'I won't accept performances like that in the first half,' the Villa boss fumed. 'We came here to win a football game and do enough to win a football game and we helped Watford on their way.'

Second half strikes from John McGinn and Ings made the scoreline more respectable for the visitors, but having enjoyed such a strong season last time out, Smith will be hoping to find the formula that will bring the best out of his new signings as soon as possible.

Benrahma filling void left by Lingard

West Ham's top six finish last campaign can be attributed largely to the momentum created by Jesse Lingard's arrival, with the loan signing giving David Moyes's side a second wind as they enjoyed a barnstorming sprint to the finish line.

Lingard's return to Manchester United has left Moyes with a gaping void to fill, and the Scot has confidently resolved that the solution to replace their old creative spark lies in his squad.

Said Benrahma demonstrated that he can fill the void vacated by Man United's Jesse Lingard

The £30m signing from Brentford was instrumental in West Ham's comeback at Newcastle

Said Benrahma endured a stop-start debut season in the top flight, with the former Brentford man failing to get the consistent run of game time to demonstrate why the Hammers splashed £30m on the Algerian.

A strong pre-season, in which the 26-year-old scored against the Bees and Atalanta, ensured that Benrahma hit the ground running at Newcastle, with the winger instrumental in stirring a second half turnaround on Sunday.

The West Ham star was on hand to head the visitors level before teeing up Michail Antonio for their fourth goal to put the game beyond doubt at St James' Park. More of the same will go a long way in emulating a top six finish.

'Weak' Arsenal are miles off it, again

Jamie Carragher was forthcoming in his stinging analysis of Arsenal's defending as the Gunners wilted at Brentford on Friday night.

'How do you describe Arsenal's defending here? It's just Arsenal. Weak, bullied, men against boys again,' he said on commentary for Sky Sports. 'New season same old story.'

Deep down, Mikel Arteta will concur with the former Liverpool man's review of his Gunners side. The Spaniard is in the midst of a North London rebuild as he looks to move away from the calamitous defending that has long mired his side.

It was a case of same old Arsenal as the Gunners were humiliated at Brentford on Friday

Jamie Carragher (R) said it was 'men against boys' as Arsenal were defeated to the new boys

Yet this new-look Arsenal defence - containing £50m new boy Ben White - did little to convince that the new season would herald a new era of defensive solidity for the club.

Arteta boldly claimed that he would strive to prove the doubters wrong this season, with no pundits backing the Gunners to secure a top four finish come May.

If their display against the Bees is anything to go by, Arsenal are miles off challenging for Champions League football, again.

New-look VAR a winner on opening weekend

Much-needed and long sought-after changes have been made to VAR this season, with the use of video technology roundly opposed due to a host of farcical decisions last campaign.

The PGMOL have moved to ensure that there is no longer interference for 'trivial issues', with offside calls changed to avoid decisions over marginal infringements while a sterner view has been taken on contact and the awarding of penalties.

It was a good weekend for VAR with referees applying revamped interpretations of the rules

This resulted in a far more laid back approach officials over the weekend, with minimal involvement throughout the 10 Premier League games.

Bruno Fernandes would likely have been denied a hat trick against Leeds had the offside interpretation used last season have been used this season, but for the new rules in which the attacker is given the benefit of the doubt when the two lines overlap.

'It was a much better performance from all the officials in every game and it worked perfectly,' Alan Shearer said on Match of the Day. Long may it continue.

Nuno sends message to Kane with City win

It has not been an easy start to life for Nuno Espirito Santo at Tottenham Hotspur. Largely viewed as the eighth choice for the position, the Portuguese has had to put in the groundwork to get fans on board following his appointment this summer.

He has not been helped by the absence of his talisman striker, either. Harry Kane's failure to report for pre-season training earlier this month in the midst of his transfer saga with City has thrown another conundrum for the former Wolves boss to solve.

Nuno Espirito Santo sent a clear message to wantaway striker Harry Kane on Sunday afternoon

The England captain has been yearning for an exit in what has been a disruptive summer

Kane trained for the first time on Friday and made himself available for selection against Pep Guardiola's side on Sunday.

Knowing what a win would do to get fans onside and kickstart his Spurs tenure strongly, it would have been easy for Nuno to call on Kane to lead the line against the champions.

But the 47-year-old determined that Kane would sit this one out. He cited fitness issues as his justification for the decision, but would have been fully aware of what would dominate had Kane been selected.

And the new boss's instinct was vindicated on Sunday, with Spurs putting in a gutsy, gritty performance not seen since the days of Mauricio Pochettino to defeat City and send Tottenham fans into euphoria.

'Are you watching, Harry Kane?' was the cry from the masses. Nuno has proven that, whatever may be come the close of the window, there is life without Kane.

Tottenham showed they can thrive without their talisman after beating Manchester City 1-0

Don't write the newcomers off yet

Before a ball was kicked the Premier League newcomers had already been written off. Hell had a greater chance of freezing over before Brentford, Watford and Norwich would survive the drop, according to some fans and pundits.

However, all three newbies indicated that they have plenty to bring to the top flight.

Thomas Frank's (L) and Xisco's (R) newcomers had been written off before the season

The Bees arguably produced the performance of the weekend with their 2-0 win over Arsenal as their supporters were sent into sheer bedlam at the Brentford Community Stadium.

Watford sprung a surprise defeat on big-spending Villa as Ismaila Sarr, Emmanuel Dennis and Cucho Hernandez tore through the Villans at Vicarage Road.

Norwich gave Liverpool a good go in the opening 45 minutes at Carrow Road, with the Canaries posing the left side of the Reds' defence questions before Jurgen Klopp's side stepped up a gear in the second half to win 3-0.

They may not be the most fashionable names in the league - or as Thomas Frank describes Brentford, 'a bus stop in Hounslow' - but don't write the newcomers off just yet.

However all three newcomers showed signs that they are well equipped for the top flight

Pep may rue splashing £100m on Grealish

When you spend £100m on a player and break the British transfer record in the process, expectation levels inevitably increase.

All eyes were on Jack Grealish at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium on Sunday. Having come off the bench for the Community Shield defeat to Leicester, Pep Guardiola handed his new signing his first City start in their Premier League opener.

Jack Grealish faded on his Premier League debut with Manchester City against Tottenham

Yet as the game wore on, Grealish's influence faded, with the impressive Japhet Tanganga putting in a monster performance to keep the £100m man and Raheem Sterling quiet on the left.

More pertinently, City's opening day defeat was less about Grealish's subdued display and more about what Guardiola is so obviously missing. Graeme Souness opined that the Spaniard was fortunate to win the title without a leading striker and now that his rivals have strengthened, Guardiola surely cannot go another season without a frontman.

Elsewhere, veteran midfielder Fernandinho appeared jaded in the middle of the park while Benjamin Mendy demonstrated once more that he is not the man to start at left back if City want to challenge.

While his talent is undeniable, Pep Guardiola may rue not spending £100m elsewhere

While Grealish's quality is there for all to see, there must surely be concerns that Guardiola has invested heavily in an area in which he is already blessed with talent, while there are longstanding issues in other departments. Only time will tell whether the City boss will rue not strengthening elsewhere.

Ruthless Liverpool not to be overlooked

Given the big-spending of the likes of City, United and Chelsea, Liverpool have somewhat gone under the radar this summer.

Apart from spending £38.5m to bring Ibrahima Konate in, it has been a strangely quiet summer for Jurgen Klopp. The German aimed a dig at his rivals' ability to splash the cash, comments that were largely consigned as a manager enviously watching on in what could develop into a three-horse race.

Liverpool showed that they still boast the firepower to challenge with a dominant victory

But there is plenty of firepower in this Liverpool side to be a genuine threat this season, and the Reds served a timely reminder at Carrow Road on Saturday.

Diogo Jota was a rare shining light in an otherwise poor campaign last time out, and the Portuguese picked up from where he left off with the opening goal against Norwich, before Roberto Firmino came off the bench to score while Mohamed Salah wreaked havoc with a strong performance in Norfolk.

The Reds host Burnley next up before a crunch clash with Chelsea at Stamford Bridge. Early momentum could go a long way in putting Klopp's former champions well in the race for the crown this season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ravel Morrison is one of football’s great unfulfilled talents yet perhaps Wayne Rooney is the man who finally unlocks his genius.

The former Manchester United wonderkid, now 28, celebrated signing a one-year deal with the Rams – his 12th club – with a glorious strike that set up a 5-3 penalty shoot-out victory for Rooney’s side over Salford. The League Two club are part-owned by Rooney’s fellow United great Gary Neville, who was also at Pride Park to watch his team eliminated.

‘It is my proudest moment as a manager,’ said Rooney, whose Derby side are under a transfer embargo that means they can only sign free agents like Morrison. ‘You look at the situation we are in and the pressure on our young players.

Wayne Rooney breathed a huge sigh of relief after Derby County beat Salford on penalties

Ravel Morrison sent the game to penalties with a long-range stunner on his Derby debut

Louie Watson scored the winning penalty to send Derby through and avoid a huge upset

Derby County players celebrate with their returning fans after advancing through in the cup

Jordan Turnball nodded home from close range after poor defending from a corner by Derby

MATCH FACTS Derby County (4-2-3-1): Allsop; Ebosele, Brown, Forsyth, Williams; Hutchinson (Kazim-Richards 66), Watson; Jozwiak, Morrison (Shinnie 88), Sibley; Stretton Subs not used: Bird, Byrne, Lawrence, Roos, Stearman Goals: Hutchinson (43), Kazim-Richards (73), Morrison (82) Booked: Ebosele, Jozwiak Manager: Wayne Rooney Salford City (4-2-3-1): King; Touray, Turnball, Eastham, Golden; Willock, Lowe; McAleny (Lund 81), Morris, Hunter (Burgess 65); Elliott (Henderson 64) Subs not used: Jeacock, Melhado, N'Mai, Shephard Goals: Turnball (8), Morris (14, 74(pen)) Booked: Turnball Manager: Gary Bowyer Advertisement

‘But we can’t be blinded by this result. We need more players. The Championship is arguably the toughest league in the world and if we get injuries and suspensions, it would be impossible for these young players to cope with that.’

Derby were 2-0 down inside 15 minutes to goals from Jordan Turnbull and Josh Morris. Their young side pulled level through Isaac Hutchinson and substitute Colin Kazim-Richards’ penalty. Morris’ second, also from the spot, put Salford 3-2 up before Morrison levelled eight minutes from the end of normal time. Ryan Allsop saved Salford’s second penalty in the shoot-out from sub Luke Burgess, allowing youngster Louie Watson to secure Derby’s spot in the next round by scoring the fifth.

Derby had a dreadful start when Josh Morris’s corner was flicked on at the near post Ashley Eastham and Jordan Turnbull headed beyond Allsop.

The defender, 26, wheels away in celebration after putting the League Two side in front

Josh Morris doubled the visitors' lead before 15 minutes with a fine effort from long distance

Isaac Hutchinson gave Derby a lifeline with a goal before the break, his first for the club

Colin Kazim-Richards scored from the spot before Morris fired back with his own penalty

And it the 14th minute, Salford doubled their lead as Morris was allowed to drift in from the right and send a 25-yard shot arrowing into the bottom corner.

At that stage it looked bleak for the Rams but they rallied and deserved to force their way back into the game two minutes before half-time, when Isaac Hutchinson fired home from close range. In stoppage time, the crossbar denied Louie Sibley an equaliser.

Derby finally drew level in the 71st minute when substitute Colin Kazim-Richards converted a penalty after Festy Obesele had been hacked down by Ibou Touray.

Yet two minutes later, Salford were back in front with a spot-kick of their own. Craig Forsyth fouled substitute Luke Burgess and Morris beat Allsop for his second of the match.

Just when it appeared Derby’s race was run, Morrison’s free-kick was blocked by the wall and when the ball rebounded to him and he sent a thunderous drive into the roof of the net from 20 yards.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku is closing in on completing his stunning return to Chelsea as he was spotted arriving at an airport prior to a flight to London to finalise his move.

The Inter Milan striker has completed the first part of his medical ahead of his £98million return to Chelsea and dropped a big hint that a deal is close to being over the line.

The Belgian forward was recorded leaving Milan's Columbus clinic on Monday afternoon and appeared to be holding a Chelsea shirt in the back of the car as he was whisked away, in a video published on fcinternews.it.

#Lukaku a Linate, prima della partenza per Londra: “Un saluto ai tifosi dell’#Inter che volevano rimanessi? Manderò un messaggio tra qualche giorno”



��✈️������#Chelsea @FcInterNewsit pic.twitter.com/79kBH5AK1K — Egle Patanè (@eglevicious23) August 9, 2021

Later that evening, Lukaku was filmed arriving by taxi at Linate airport ahead of his flight to the Blues, being greeted by reporters in the process.

When asked whether he had a message for Inter fans, the Belgian responded by saying: 'Greetings to the fans of Inter, did they want me to stay? I'll send a message in a few days.'

He will rejoin Chelsea seven years after his departure for Everton in 2014 and after a terrific season for Inter Milan, where his goals led the Nerazzurri to the Serie A title.

Romelu Lukaku was seen seemingly holding a Chelsea shirt after completing the first part of his medical ahead of his £98m return to Stamford Bridge

The 28-year-old Belgian will rejoin Chelsea seven years after his departure for Everton in 2014

The two clubs have now agreed a fee for Lukaku, 28, who told Italian champions Inter last week that he wanted to join Chelsea.

He is poised to sign a contract worth around £200,000 per week after tax.

Lukaku is also set to overtake Neymar and become the most expensive player of all time in accumulated transfer fees.

His latest switch will take him ahead of the Paris Saint-Germain attacker in combined transfer fees, with the Belgian set to rack up an eye-watering total of £291m.

Inter's financial problems mean they have been willing to let a number of players go already this summer, including Achraf Hakimi and Ashley Young, with Lukaku's departure on the cards for a while as the club looks to balance the books.

He is poised to sign a contract worth around £200,000 per week after tax at Stamford Bridge

Lautaro Martinez has been linked with a move to Tottenham too, with the Scudetto holders seeing some of their key players leave the squad.

Lukaku's first move saw him go from boyhood club Anderlecht to Chelsea for £17m as an 18-year-old, almost exactly 10 years to the day that he returns to SW6.

He then opted to move to Everton for £28m and subsequently joined up with Jose Mourinho at Manchester United in 2017 for £75m.

However, the Belgian fell out of favour during his second campaign at Old Trafford in what was his worst scoring campaign for four years, prompting a move to Italy for £73m in the summer of 2019 - but now he is set to be on the move again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona supporters gathered outside the Nou Camp to pay tribute to Lionel Messi following his departure from the club.

After 21 years and a record 672 goals for the club, Messi, considered by many to be the greatest player of all time, is moving on, with Paris Saint-Germain his likely destination.

Messi was emotional at his farewell press conference on Sunday and many Barcelona fans were eager to thank the Argentine superstar for his enormous contribution to the club.

Barcelona supporters gathered outside the Nou Camp to pay tribute to Lionel Messi

The fans wore Messi 10 shirts as the superstar's glittering Barcelona career came to an end

The supporters were eager to show their support for Messi, who scored 672 goals for the club

One supporter held a drawing of the Argentina international, who is likely to join PSG

Many supporters were wearing Messi 10 shirts, while one fan held a drawing of the 34-year-old.

Other fans held banners, with all of them eager to show just how grateful they are for what Messi has done for Barcelona.

It is expected that Messi will finalise his move to PSG next week, but he will always be associated with Barcelona having enjoyed a glittering career at the club.

Messi wore the No 10 shirt for Barcelona from 2008 until the end of his spell at the club

The fans showed their appreciation towards Messi, who won an incredible 35 trophies

Messi won an incredible 35 trophies during his time at Barcelona, producing many memorable moments.

It had been expected that Messi would remain at Barcelona but that ultimately didn't materialise, with the club no longer able to afford his wages.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@KEIRIN

Up to six riders follow a pace motorcycle – called a derny - for the first three of six laps and then sprint to the finish.

Clancy says: ‘You have six weightlifters, big angry men and women, following a motorbike round with the idea that when they start the sprint, they are all absolutely fresh and ready to go. Then you get 20 to 25 seconds of absolute chaos.

‘It is an exciting event to watch because there are guys and girls who have put four to five years of training into an event that not only gets decided in 20 seconds or so, but is also a big roll of the dice.

‘You’ve got to be in the right place at the right time. You are trying to pre-empt other people’s strategies and positioning. There are many ways you can win a keirin but there is no real obvious one.

‘In 2012, we saw Chris Hoy just get on the front and lead them out but that isn’t going to get it done these days. You’ve got to be canny, hold people up, push people high on the track, and it’s always chaos.

‘The keirin is huge in Japan. It’s like horseracing in Britain, but even bigger. Keirin is the way they gamble out there and there will be a massive focus on it in Tokyo.’

MADISON

Teams of two riders take turns in a tag team points race, with points awarded for lapping the field and for sprints every 10 laps.

Clancy says: ‘There is a lot of history and heritage with it. Big six-day madison events around Europe attract big crowds. It’s not an easy event to follow but it is worth investing a bit of time and watching it closely.

‘It’s very dangerous and it’s highly tactical. You can go for a big heroic lap take or you can keep chipping away on the sprint laps.

'You’ve got to look around and see what the other strong teams are doing. It’s almost like a game of chess.

‘There are a lot of different pieces on the board that are all moving around at different points in time. And you are trying to do that game of chess whilst you are riding at 99 per cent for an hour.

‘If you are having a bad day in the madison, you will just take a kicking from start to finish and get a result that reflects that at the end.’

OMNIUM

Multiple-race event. Scratch race is where riders race over 30 to 40 laps to be the first to finish. The tempo race sees points awarded for winning each lap or lapping the field. In the elimination race, the last-placed rider is knocked out every two laps. The points race sees points earned for sprints every 10 laps or for lapping the field.

Clancy says: ‘From the very first race, you’ve got to be thinking about where your opposition is. It’s not that bad getting a terrible result as long as you are with your opposition.

‘The elimination race, that is just chaos. It is an event in itself. There are crashes and near misses. ‘There’s only one good place to be in that race and that’s in second wheel and everyone wants to be in second wheel. You don’t want to be at the front and you definitely don’t want to be at the back.

‘The omnium comes down to a big points race at the end which is more heavily weighted than the other events. Much like the madison, you’ve got to play that game of chess right when you are already knyeackered from previous events and you are riding your bike round the velodrome for the best part of 45 minutes flat out.’

TEAM PURSUIT

A 4km race between two teams of four riders starting on opposite sides of the track.

Clancy says: ‘It’s four riders, four minutes. You need every single rider to be on form. It’s a bit like a house of cards. If it goes well, it’s a beautiful thing. If you take out one card, the whole thing will come crumbling down.

‘It is not just four riders taking their brains out and going flat out. There is a real art to pace judgement.

‘You’ve got to get out of the gate fast enough to not lose enough time, but for every tenth of a second you go over schedule at the start of the race, you are guaranteed to lose that and more at the back end.

‘There is a lot of science and maths involved in calculating the best line-up, the best turn strategies. It’s all great in theory but it’s easy to get wrong on the day.

‘It’s about holding the right positions, nailing your changes under the lights on the big day. It is exciting at the moment because other teams are taking it to a place it hasn’t been before. The world record has been moved on.

‘There is a big element of man and machine in team pursuit at the moment. It’s not just horse power. There is a lot of engineering, aerodynamics. It’s almost getting to motorsport ways.'

SPRINT

A three-lap race where riders start side by side.

Clancy says: ‘They do a qualifying lap first, then that creates a seeding order. The faster you qualify, the easier it will be to get through the rounds.

‘When you get down to the semis, you get the Usain Bolts of the cycling world lining up for big head-to-head duels, trying to eliminate each other to get through to the gold and silver rides.

‘Again, it’s highly tactical. It is just two guys or girls on the track. They have three laps. They usually spend at least a lap and a half trying to jockey for position, whether they want to be at the front or the back.

‘If they’re at the front, they don’t want to lead the sprint out early because the rider at the back will be getting a massive advantage. The rider at the back will be trying to force the person at the front to panic and go early.

‘It’s basically a lap and a half of bluffing before they get down to business on the last lap.’

TEAM SPRINT

A three-lap race between two teams of three riders starting on opposite sides of the track.

Clancy says: ‘The three fastest riders from each nation line up. In the man one position, you really do just get a weightlifter that is riding a bike. In man two, you’ll get a weightlifter that has got a tiny bit of endurance. In man three, you’ll get a Jason Kenny type that has got a bit of length to his sprint.

‘Trying to think of your line on the track and position on the bike, keeping hunched up and aerodynamic, is not easy on the big day when you have all that pressure and expectation.

‘They are really fighting for every 1,000th of a second. I think that’s what it will come down to this time.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There is one night from Neymar's four years at Barcelona that sums up his time at the Nou Camp and his relationship, on the pitch at least, with Lionel Messi.

They may be good friends outside of football but the Brazilian knew to become the world's best player and win the Ballon d'Or, he would have to step out of his team-mate's shadow.

Luis Enrique's side had just done the impossible and overturned a seemingly insurmountable deficit to beat Paris Saint-Germain 6-1 and knock them out of the Champions League.

Neymar and Lionel Messi were team-mates at Barcelona and were close on and off the pitch

But Neymar needed to leave the Nou Camp to escape Messi's shadow, joining PSG back in 2017

That night in 2017 remains arguably the last truly brilliant European encounter the Nou Camp has seen, given the extent of Barcelona's decline over the last few years.

Neymar, against the team he would join six months later, was unplayable. He had a hand in three goals in the final nine minutes, scoring an outrageous free kick and then a penalty to bring the score to 5-5 on aggregate.

PSG had an away goal, though, so were still going through until Neymar delicately floated a pass over the French side's defence for Sergi Roberto to prod home and seal victory.

It was a vintage Neymar performance but the celebrations at full-time were nearly all about Messi.

The Argentine was the one stood on the advertising hoardings, whipping the fans into a frenzy and soaking in their affection. He was the centre of attention and Neymar just a member of the supporting cast, despite masterminding the win.

Neymar may have arrived in Spain as a Brazilian prodigy with very little experience of playing on Europe's biggest stage but at that point he wanted more. He wanted to be the main man.

Neymar inspired Barcelona's comeback against PSG in 2017 but the spotlight was still on Messi

Luis Suarez, Messi and Neymar were formidable as a trio, scoring goals and winning trophies

After a summer of tension and fraught negotiations, Neymar got his wish and signed for PSG. He now had the chance to lead an emerging force on their journey to winning European football's biggest prizes.

That is not to say that Neymar didn't thrive in LaLiga or enjoy his time playing with Messi. They are still good friends but the Argentine's shadow was just too big to escape in Barcelona.

After completing his complicated £49million move from Santos in the summer of 2013, Neymar enjoyed four very fruitful and trophy-laden seasons at Barcelona.

He scored 105 goals and added 76 assists in 186 games in all competitions. He won the Champions League, two La Liga titles, three Copas del Rey, a Spanish Super Cup, European Super Cup and the FIFA World Club Cup.

Neymar was also a pillar in the devastating attacking trident known as 'MSN' that he and Messi formed with Luis Suarez, who joined a year later than Neymar from Liverpool.

'Friendship and humility is the secret of the MSN's success,' the Brazilian said back in 2015. 'Messi and Suarez are two of my great friends.'

Neymar has struggled with injuries at PSG and is yet to lead them to Champions League glory

But he has enjoyed plenty of success in France and helped PSG maintain their domestic grip

The trio combined to score an astonishing 364 goals between 2014 and 2017 and also provided 173 assists for each other and their other Barcelona team-mates.

But after deciding to swap Barcelona for Paris, it took just months for stories to emerge that Neymar wanted to go back. It was claimed he was in regular contact with Barcelona, pleading for them to correct the mistake he had made.

PSG were not looking for a refund on their shiny new toy, though. He was bought to deliver the Champions League success the Qatari owners craved and they were not going to let the £200m they had spent go to waste.

It also emerged that Neymar was still in regular contact with Messi and Suarez and the trio had their own Whatsapp group. The lure of re-uniting with the pair of them must have been a major factor behind his desire to move back to the Nou Camp.

Messi has also never denied that he would be keen to play with Neymar again. 'He really wants to come back, he has always been sorry he left,' Messi said in February 2020. 'He has done a lot to try and return.'

Messi left Barcelona last week after his contract expired and they could not afford to keep him

They were like a couple of school kids. After PSG beat Manchester United at Old Trafford in December 2020, Neymar once again brought up the prospect of returning to Barcelona and linking up with Messi.

'What I want most is to return to play with Messi, to enjoy myself with him on the pitch again. I want to play again with him,' said Neymar. 'For sure, next year we will do it.'

But not many would have predicted it would take Messi to leave Barcelona and sign for PSG for the duo to be team-mates again.

Neymar appeared to confirm Messi's arrival at PSG on Tuesday, posting 'back together'

Messi's future at Barcelona had been in question ever since the humiliating 8-2 defeat by Bayern Munich in the summer of 2020. His contract at the Nou Camp expired five weeks ago but Barcelona's financial woes and inept leadership created a perfect storm that allowed him to walk away.

It was confirmed on Monday night that, after signing £1m-a-week deal, Messi will be part of a frightening front line with Neymar and Kylian Mbappe at PSG that has the potential to eclipse the achievements of 'MSN'.

Neymar could barely contain his excitement and appeared to jump the gun by confirming his reunion with Messi before PSG had the chance to.

He posted a photo of them together alongside the caption 'back together' on Instagram, complete a red and blue heart and flame emoji.

Their combination with Mbappe promises to be fascinating. That's if the Frenchman doesn't leave before the window shuts.

In 'MSN' Messi played on the right, Neymar and the left and Suarez through the middle. The Brazilian is likely to continue on the left but Mbappe possesses the pace and ability to run in behind that can create space for Messi to do his best work.

Mauricio Pochettino also has the option to play a frightening 4-2-3-1 with Angel Di Maria on the right, Messi at No 10 and Mbappe a lone striker. What a terrifying prospect for the rest of Ligue 1.

Neymar and Kylian Mbappe can now form a devastating attacking trio with their new colleague

PSG chief Nasser Al Khelaifi (left) will hope Mauricio Pochettino can achieve European glory

Neymar left Barcelona to be the main main somewhere else. But maybe his desire for the spotlight has subsided for desperation to finally win the Champions League in Paris.

His time in France has been blighted by injury after injury. He has not played more than 20 league games in any of his four seasons in the French capital and last season only managed 17 goals.

Speaking in his unveiling on Wednesday morning, Messi said about Neymar: 'I know him well. I can't wait to play with the team-mates that I have, we have the same objectives.

'We were apart before but I think we are better together. Neymar was one of the reasons I came here.'

It is now Pochettino who faces the daunting task of cramming all the pieces into one, functioning team. Neymar and Messi have got their wish of a reunion, now they must deliver the European glory that PSG brought them back together for.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Frank expressed his amazement after Brentford secured their first top-flight win since 1947, saying it is incredible that a ‘bus stop in Hounslow’ is top of the Premier League.

Chants of ‘we are top of the league’ rang around a packed Brentford Community Stadium on Friday night as Frank’s side, which included nine Premier League debutants, bullied Mikel Arteta’s Arsenal.

Sergi Canos scored the first goal of the new season, beating Bernd Leno with a low drive after 22 minutes. Christian Norgaard completed the scoreline in the 73rd by applying the finishing touch to a long throw-in which was poorly defended by Arsenal.

Thomas Frank was left speechless after Brentford beat Arsenal on their top-flight return

Sergi Canos scored the opener as the newly promoted club had a dream Premier League debut

Brentford’s players and staff celebrated their win with a full-time lap of honour, and Frank said: ‘What an atmosphere. In a way I'm speechless. For our fans they can dream.

‘We're No 1 in the Premier League and that's a fantastic story. We're just a bus stop in Hounslow. We're not supposed to be here, so we've got to celebrate every win, but we also want more.'

Goalscorer Canos said: ‘This is amazing. I’ve been dreaming about scoring the first goal here in the stadium and all these people deserve it. We deserve it. We go again next week. I’ve got all of my family in Spain watching the game. For me, for my family, for this club, it’s a step forward.’

Arsenal, whose season is being documented by Amazon Prime, were missing both Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette due to illness. In their absence, they struggled to trouble Brentford’s defence. Jamie Carragher described it as ‘men against boys’ on commentary, adding: ‘New season, same old story.’

Frank battled to get the club out of the Championship and is now aiming at top-flight success

The underdog side stunned the Gunners by doubling their lead through Christian Norgaard

Arteta said: ‘I’m disappointed. I don’t think we deserved anything different. They scored from a long throw-in and we didn’t have enough presence in the box. A lot of young boys were doing everything they can.'

Arsenal face Chelsea next weekend. On Aubameyang and Lacazette, he added: ‘I don’t know (if they'll be available for the next game). What I can control and help, I’ll put all my enthusiasm and work into that.’

This performance and result is bound to strengthen Arsenal's determination to make signings before the summer's transfer window closes.

When introduced in the 59th minute, Bukayo Saka received a standing ovation from both sets of supporters, following the abuse the England winger received on social media after the Euro 2020 final.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United's ability to now compete for trophies on all fronts will see Paul Pogba extend his stay at Old Trafford, predicts Paul Scholes.

Pogba, who has previously attracted interest from Paris Saint-Germain, Juventus, Real Madrid and Barcelona, is out of contract at the end of the 2021-22 season.

Discussions over a new deal between United and Pogba's agent Mino Raiola have not resulted in an extension but Scholes believes the quality of United's squad will convince the Frenchman to stay.

Paul Pogba is predicted to extend his contract at Manchester United by Paul Scholes

United's strength in depth and ability to contend for trophies is what Scholes thinks will be key

The former Manchester United midfielder thinks Pogba can 'add a lot' to this season's team

'I think he'll stay,' Scholes told Premier League Productions on Saturday night.

'I think he will. When he was playing a couple of years ago in a team that wasn't quite functioning as well as this one looks like it might do, and with the amount of attacking players he's got, the ability he's got, I think he'll add a lot to this team.

'I think he'll end up signing a new contract.

'If this team carries on in this manner, progressing like it is – I don't want to get too excited – but it's a team that can go on and win trophies and that's what he wants to do.'

Pogba dominated against Leeds United and matched a record with four assists in one game

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer gave Pogba 'freedom of roam' against Leeds and it paid off handsomely

Pogba showed all his qualities in the season opener when he produced four assists in United's 5-1 rout of Leeds.

He managed just four league assists in the past two seasons and has often been criticised for a lack of consistency during his second go-round at United.

Boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer knows he will need Pogba at his best to take the challenge to champions Manchester City in the title race this season.

Asked to comment on Pogba's performance, Solskjaer told BT Sport: 'I've had a great relationship with Paul all the time, today was just about "go out there and enjoy yourself", we gave him the freedom to roam.

'All the best players want to feel our trust in them and confidence. He can create moments out of nothing and I was impressed with his fitness.'

Pogba lifted the League Cup and Europa League in 2016-17 after rejoining United from Juventus but the £89million midfielder has failed to win any silverware since.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nico Ali Walsh, the grandson of former heavyweight champion and boxing legend Muhammad Ali, defeated Jordan Weeks by technical knockout in his professional boxing debut on Saturday.

Middleweight fighter Ali Walsh is the son of Robert Walsh and Rasheda Ali Walsh, Muhammad Ali's daughter. The 21-year-old signed a deal with Bob Arum's Top Rank Boxing in June ahead of his first professional fight in the U.S state of Oklahoma.

Ali Walsh, who wore trunks made for his famous grandfather in the 1960s, knocked down his opponent Weeks midway through the first round before the referee stopped the fight at 1:49 of that round.

Nico Ali Walsh, grandson of boxing legend Muhammad Ali, has won on his professional debut

The 21-year-old defeated Jordan Weeks via a first-round technical knockout in Oklohama

Nico Ali-Walsh will be wearing a pair of his grandfather Muhammad Ali’s trunks from the 1960s when make his pro debut tonight. #FrancoMoloney3 | TONIGHT | 10 PM ET | ESPN and @ESPNPlus pic.twitter.com/KRYwrKNpMt — ESPN Ringside (@ESPNRingside) August 15, 2021

'Obviously my grandfather, I've been thinking of him so much. I miss him. It's been an emotional journey,' ESPN quoted Ali Walsh as saying.

'I think me and him (Weeks) made a little bit of history tonight. This lived up completely to my expectations.'

Muhammad Ali, nicknamed 'The Greatest', died in June 2016. His record-setting boxing career, unprecedented flair for showmanship and controversial stands made him one of the best-known figures of the 20th century.

Walsh wore the same boxing shorts designed for his legendary grandfather in the 1960s

The American is the son of Ali's daughter Rasheda Ali Walsh, the pair hugged after the fight

Ali Walsh pictured with his legendary grandfather, The man dubbed 'The Greatest' died in 2016

Ali Walsh, who is trying to follow in his grandfather's footsteps into professional boxing, said Muhammad Ali was 'the greatest fighter who lived'.

'It seems like a lot of pressure; to me, it's just my grandfather,' said Ali Walsh, who grew up in Las Vegas.

'He's the greatest fighter who ever lived - maybe the greatest person,' Ali Walsh said.

'I'm never wearing these trunks again,' he added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi was given a huge ovation by the Paris Saint-Germain supporters after he was unveiled at the Parc des Princes on Saturday evening before his new side's first home game of the season against Strasbourg.

Messi will line for the French side this term having completed a stunning free transfer from Barcelona over the summer on a two-year-deal.

The Argentine, however, was not included in the squad for the match, which was Mauricio Pochettino's first Ligue 1 game of the season.

Lionel Messi takes the applause from Paris Saint-Germain fans at his pre-match unveiling

Messi (right) was unveiled to supporters before kick-off along with fellow new signings (from left) Achraf Hakimi, Georginio Wijnaldum, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Sergio Ramos

Ahead of the clash with Strasbourg, Messi struggled to hear a pre-match host on the pitch as the PSG supporters led chants for him inside the Parc des Princes

Lionel Messi is presented to the PSG fans ��



(via @PSG_English) pic.twitter.com/AtIE1o9pUg — ESPN FC (@ESPNFC) August 14, 2021

Messi took to the field pre-match along with fellow new recruits Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Achraf Hakimi and Georginio Wijnaldum, with all of them wearing 'We are Paris' t-shirts.

After walking out to a raucous crowd and taking in the amount of adulation from the supporters, he addressed the home fans who unveiled banners welcoming the former Barcelona star.

'It has been a very special week for me,' he said. 'I want to thank everyone for the reception since I arrived in Paris. It has been truly incredible. I feel very happy and excited.

'I hope together we can enjoy this year and make it a great year for us. I am very excited about everything.'

Messi teased supporters before his unveiling with a thumbs up behind a tunnel curtain

The former Barcelona star then made his way out onto the pitch to huge cheers from fans

The Argentine arrives at the Parc des Princes following a stunning free transfer from Barcelona

As expected, Messi was not named in the match squad after coach Mauricio Pochettino said this week that the 34-year-old is not yet fully fit.

Italy goalkeeper Donnarumma and veteran defender Ramos were also not included. Hakimi and Wijnaldum were selected to start.

Pochettino said in his press conference: 'As for when we might see Leo Messi, it is his second day of training after a month since he played the last game at the Copa America.

'We will take it step by step, get to know each other and have him feel fit and comfortable so that he is able to make his debut when he is fully fit.'

Supporters led jubilant chants for Messi as they welcomed him to the French captial

Ramos greets his new PSG team-mate Messi with an arm around the shoulder pre-match

Messi then thanked supporters for the welcomes he had received following his transfer

Messi trained with his PSG team-mates throughout the week as they prepared for their first home game of the season.

However, the 34-year-old has not played a competitive fixture since winning the Copa America, his first international trophy with Argentina, in July.

Therefore, Pochettino did not risk introducing Messi into the squad too soon as he will want to avoid any unwanted injuries.

So, for that reason Messi will sit patiently on the sidelines as he wait his turn to make his debut for the French side who will be desperate to win French top flight this term having been stunned by Lille last season.

Messi joined PSG this week on a two-year contract with the option of extending it by another year after Barcelona said they could not afford to keep him because of LaLiga's financial fair play rules.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trainer Andrew Balding says the decision to test Alcohol Free's stamina reserves in the Group One Juddmonte International Stakes at York's Ebor meeting on Wednesday is a 'shot to nothing'.

Balding also revealed the filly, who carries the colours of owner Jeff Smith, is likely to stay in training next season.

Alcohol Free, winner of the Coronation Stakes at Royal Ascot and the Sussex Stakes at Glorious Goodwood, has never raced further than a mile and the International is a mile and a quarter.

Andrew Balding says Alcohol Free will stay in training next year if she still enjoys racing

She is up against the likes of Aidan O'Brien's French Derby and Eclipse Stakes winner St Mark's Basilica and Balding said: 'The likelihood is that if Alcohol Free is still enjoying racing she will stay in training next year. We will learn from this race what her campaign may be next season.

'It could open up a whole lot more options but the International is on the limit of her stamina expectations. It's a shot to nothing and if she doesn't stay she doesn't stay.'

Smith said: 'She was going away at the end of the Sussex Stakes and she had to make up a lot of ground in the final furlong. She picks up like a champion and if she doesn't stay, so what? No harm will come to her.'

Alcohol Free being ridden Oisin Murphy at the Qatar Sussex Stakes at Goodwood in July

Balding, who has already won over £3million in prizemoney in what is shaping up to be his best season, leads the Trainers' Championship by more than £300,000 from Charlie Appleby. That advantage was extended when Balding won the Listed Denford Stakes at Newbury yesterday with William Buick- ridden Masekela, who edged out Bayside Boy by a neck.

The £4.7m prizemoney on offer at York's four-day Ebor meeting could mean the championship table looks very different by next Saturday but Balding will send a strong squad to York.

In addition to Alcohol Free, Balding plans to run unbeaten Sandrine in the Lowther Stakes, Spanish Mission in the Lonsdale Cup, Alounak and Tribal Craft in the Sky Bet Ebor Handicap and, possibly, Berkshire Shadow in the Gimcrack Stakes.

Balding is also planning to run the unbeaten Sandrine in the upcoming Lowther Stakes

Meanwhile, Richard Hannon-trained Mojo Star, the Derby second, easily broke his duck in the opening maiden at Newbury and now heads to next month's St Leger as a 12-1 shot.

The feature Group Two BetVictor Hungerford Stakes was won by William Haggas-trained Sacred, who sliced through the field to beat Lanequash by a length under Tom Marquand on her first run since finishing unplaced in the 1,000 Guineas at Newmarket in May.

Owen Burrows-trained Hukum is likely to target international races potentially including the Breeders' Cup in the US after he won the Geoffrey Freer Stakes for the second year running.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Floyd Mayweather chose not to knock-out Logan Paul in their multi-million-dollar exhibition fight in June because he didn't want to hurt the YouTuber-turned-boxer, according to his cousin.

Dejuan Blake, who has been part of Mayweather's boxing entourage since 2002, said despite calls from the wider boxing world and his own team to teach Paul a lesson and lay him out in the ring, the legendary fighter decided to let him go all eight rounds.

The pair took to the ring in a lucrative exhibition bout at Miami Gardens in Florida in June that Mayweather claimed he earned $100million (£72m) from what was his first fight since retiring in 2017.

Floyd Mayweather let YouTuber-turned-boxer Logan Paul to go all eight rounds in their fight

Mayweather's cousin Dejuan Blake (left) said the fighter didn't want Paul to get seriously hurt

The fight was widely criticised as damaging to the integrity of boxing, and the 44-year-old Mayweather failed to put 26-year-old Paul on the canvas. Last month promoter Eddie Hearn derided the Mayweather-Paul fight as the 'biggest joke I have ever seen'.

But Blake defended his cousin's actions in the ring, where at one point Mayweather is seen to be holding a seemingly exhausted Paul. Many people at the time claimed Mayweather was just seeking to prolong the fight and earn maximum dollars from it.

Blake, however, explained that Mayweather's main desire was not to cause Paul too much harm.

Mayweather appears to be holding an exhausted Paul up during their fight in Florida in June

Both boxers made a fortune from the exhibition with Mayweather claiming he pocketed $100m

'Once again, it's an exhibition, like Floyd said, he's not a boxer, why would he want him to get hurt and not be able to go home and talk to his family,' Blake told The Sun.

'One punch could change the game, why would he want to hurt him like that?'

Paul and Mayweather traded many verbal, and some physical, blows in the build-up to the bout, which Blake admitted led to many calls for the greatest pound-for-pound fighter of his generation to put upstart Paul in his place.

'A lot of people said, "You should knock him out for all the s*** he's talking",' Blake said.

'But at the end of the day, Floyd loves the sport that he's been involved in, but he also hates what comes with the damage that comes after the sport is over.'

Floyd Mayweather and Logan Paul's bout has been labelled as 'the biggest joke' by Eddie Hearn

Blake also celebrated Mayweather's continuing popularity with a new generation of fans who are followers of the likes of Paul and other YouTuber-boxers such as KSI.

'Floyd is closer to his 50s than he is his 20s and he was able to capitalise on that generation, that youth, that young crowd,' he said.

'It was a great experience, a great event. We did great numbers for a non-professional fight, it was a success.'

Paul is now in talks over a potential fight with UFC legend Anderson Silva.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Lineker has questioned 'how on earth' Barcelona have managed to let Lionel Messi slip through their fingers.

The Catalan giants confirmed that Messi will not be staying at the club 'because of financial and structural obstacles' just days after hinting at a new long-term deal.

Lineker is among those who have taken to social media to question Barcelona's thought process and flag their concern for LaLiga.

Lineker questioned 'how on earth' Barca have managed to let Messi slip through their fingers

The Catalan giants confirmed that Messi (above) will not be staying at the club 'because of financial and structural obstacles' just days after hinting at a new long-term deal

Lineker took to Twitter to say: 'How on earth have they got themselves in to this predicament? Mess que un club.'

Lineker also responded to a Tweet which read: 'I don’t see Messi leaving Barca. It’s all in the statement. Player and Club reached an agreement but ‘Spanish Liga regulations’ means there are obstacles. Over to you LaLiga if you want to have the best player in the world still in this league.'

The BBC pundit agreed with such a statement and replied saying: 'Could be a lot of truth in this. Tens of millions around the world watch and are interested in LaLiga (not all of them obviously) because of #Messi.

While Piers Morgan shared his delighted the news, claiming Messi's withdrawal from Barca will free up Harry Kane for a move to his beloved Arsenal.

He Tweeted saying: 'Actually, this makes perfect sense.. Messi to City..... Kane to Arsenal (he wouldn't even have to move house, and he's a Gooner at heart).'

Club statement. How on earth have they got themselves in to this predicament? Mess que un club. https://t.co/0OFFHn4ItU — Gary Lineker 💙 (@GaryLineker) August 5, 2021

Could be a lot of truth in this. Tens of millions around the world watch and are interested in @LaLiga (not all of them obviously) because of #Messi. https://t.co/wftEMcGHQ6 — Gary Lineker 💙 (@GaryLineker) August 5, 2021

Messi was in line for a fresh long-term deal, albeit on lower pay terms. Now, however, the Catalan giants have confirmed the agreement is dead due to economic and structural obstacles (Spanish LaLiga regulations).

Issuing a shock statement on Thursday evening, Barcelona said: 'Despite having reached an agreement between FC Barcelona and Leo Messi and with the clear intention of both parties to sign a new contract today, it cannot be formalized due to economic and structural obstacles (Spanish LaLiga regulations) .

Actually, this makes perfect sense..

Messi to City.....

Kane to Arsenal (he wouldn't even have to move house, and he's a Gooner at heart) — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) August 5, 2021

'Given this situation, Lionel Messi will not continue linked to FC Barcelona. Both parties deeply regret that the wishes of both the player and the Club cannot finally be fulfilled.

'Barca would like to thank with all its heart the player's contribution to the enhancement of the institution and wishes him the best in his personal and professional life.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Welsh Olympic boxing champion Lauren Price received a hero's welcome as she returned to her hometown village of Ystrad Mynach.

Price, who defeated China's Li Qian to win gold, was reunited with her grandmother, who hugged her, while cheering crowds lined the street.

The 27-year-old was overcome with emotion as she cried upon being given a rapturous reception.

Olympic boxing champion Lauren Price was emotional as she returned to Wales

Price, who defeated China's Li Qian to win gold, was reunited with her grandmother

Crowds line the street in Ystrad Mynach as Welsh Olympic boxing champion Lauren Price is reunited with her nan.



Read today's top stories here: https://t.co/4ozTbgdN8L pic.twitter.com/R9SlAjKGbK — Sky News (@SkyNews) August 11, 2021

She also showed off her gold medal to the crowd.

Price succeeded in the women's middleweight final as she produced a dominant display.

She had previously beaten Dutch boxer Nouchka Fontijn in the semi-finals.

Price showed off her gold medal as she received a hero's welcome in Ystrad Mynach

Fans lined the street to greet the 27-year-old as she was praised for her success in Tokyo

Following her success in Tokyo, Price revealed that she has held talks with promoter Eddie Hearn about the possibility of turning professional, but says that she is keeping her options open.

As reported by BBC Sport, Price said: 'I've had a lot of people message me - obviously the big man as well, Eddie Hearn, stuff like that.'

Price also outlined her ambition to defend her title at the next Olympics in Paris in 2024.

Price succeeded in the women's middleweight final as she produced a dominant display
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On a summer’s night six years ago in front of 470 souls at Whitley Park in North Tyneside, Ivan Toney made his debut for Newcastle United Under 23s.

The consensus? Nowhere near first-team standard, and not ever likely to be. It was an opinion that barely altered during the course of his three years at the club.

Sportsmail was there for that 1-1 draw with Blackburn, in which the 19-year-old missed an early chance. We did not disagree with the idea of Toney being a useful player to have around the youth set-up, but little more.

Ivan Toney has taken the long route to becoming the leading striker at a Premier League club

Graham Carr was Newcastle’s chief scout at the time.

‘I saw him just along the road in the first team at Northampton at 16 years old, so I knew all about him,’ Carr tells us from his Northampton home.

‘He had something, a nice physicality for one so young, but I wasn’t banging down the door saying, “We have to sign him”.

‘But Northampton were struggling financially and I took a call from Lee Charnley (Newcastle’s managing director) asking would I pay £250,000 for Toney. It was a no-brainer. We only had Adam Armstrong coming through as a striker, and I thought it was worth a chance.

‘But I would be telling lies if I ever thought he would go on to achieve what he has done.’

The Brentford marksman has had to overcome his fair share of setbacks to reach the top flight

What Toney has achieved is 82 goals in three years with Peterborough and Brentford. His tally of 31 in the Championship last season means the 25-year-old will line up on Friday night as a Premier League player when the Bees kick off the campaign at home to Arsenal.

It will be his third top-flight appearance, with the previous two cameos for Newcastle remembered only for him losing the ball in the closing stages of a 3-3 draw with Manchester United in 2016, very nearly leading to a goal.

Toney, it is said, feels let down by his lack of opportunity at Newcastle, where he was sent on loan six times.

For Carr, there is regret. ‘Look at him now, he is a colossus. I am so pleased for the lad.

‘But I look at him, and Armstrong going to Southampton for £15million this week, and I think, “They could have been playing for Newcastle now”.

Recruited by Newcastle as a teenager, Toney was shipped out on loan on six occasions

Peterborough United landed the striker for £300,000 and from there he has skyrocketed

‘Ivan just never got a chance. Steve McClaren was manager when he signed and then it was Rafa Benitez. He was more worried about winning games, like most managers are these days. A lot of young players in the Premier League have to go away to come back.

‘Ivan has certainly done that and he’s proved a lot of people wrong.’

One person Toney has proved right is Barry Fry, the director of football who took him to League One Peterborough from Newcastle for just £300,000 in 2018. He sold him to Brentford for £10m last summer, although the Magpies did have a 30 per cent sell-on clause.

‘I tried to buy him when he was down the road at Northampton but Graham Carr was always sniffing around and got him cheap,’ says Fry.

He has picked up back-to-back golden boots and is expected to sparkle in the Premier League

‘But Newcastle didn’t play him, he never got a chance, they loaned him everywhere. He didn’t feel like he belonged. He needed a place, so I got in touch with Newcastle and we agreed a deal.

‘I told Ivan we loved him and wanted him here, but we were his stepping stone.

‘Brentford wanted him in January (of 2020) and he wanted to go. His Dad, who is built like a brick outhouse, stormed in to say he wanted his son to go, but we weren’t letting him.

‘We were flying at the time. If we’d got into the Championship, it’s worth £15m. We said he can go if we don’t go up, but the season was curtailed by Covid-19. We’d have p***ed it! But we always had that agreement with him.

‘There was interest from a host of top-flight clubs, including West Ham and Spurs. I was talking to the owners of Premier League sides, saying, “You’ve got to buy this guy, he’s cheap at £10m”. They were all, “Nah, nah, it’s a big jump to the Premier League”. But it ain’t.

Toney now arrives on the biggest stage of all with a point to prove with the newcomers

‘He’ll score goals wherever he is, and he’s not only a goalscorer, he’s a goalmaker. Not only that, he’s the best defender in the team. When he comes back for corners, he heads them out 99 times out of 100.

‘He’s also a great leader in the dressing room. He won the Golden Boot with us. He won the Golden Boot with Brentford. I wouldn’t be surprised if he won the Golden Boot in the Premier League.

‘He will keep going because he’s got hunger, desire and determination.’

Those were qualities Toney possessed all along, he just needed a chance to show them.

On Friday night, he will have the biggest stage of all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Wilshere says he is not any closer to finding a new club after he left Bournemouth at the end of last season.

The 29-year-old midfielder only joined the Cherries in January but did not extend his deal on the south coast, which came about after six months without a club following his release from West Ham last summer.

This week, the ex-Arsenal man told talkSPORT that 'nothing has come up yet' in terms of finding a new club, but stressed this time he was 'waiting for the right opportunity.'

Jack Wilshere says he is not any closer to finding a new club after leaving Bournemouth

The 29-year-old (left) was speaking to talkSPORT about the lack of clarity with his future

Asked about his future, Wilshere said: 'I've actually had a good pre-season. I've been training with a club just to keep myself fit. I'm in a good place, physically. I'm 29.

'I'm waiting for the right opportunity to come up, to be honest.

'But, having said that, nothing has come up at the minute and there's nothing happening. I don't know the answer to that question to be honest.

'I'm just waiting. I don't really know how long I can wait, I don't really want to wait as long as I did last time when I left West Ham in the summer, and then I didn't get a club until January when I went to Bournemouth.

Wilshere has 34 England caps to his name but his career has taken a turn for the worse recently

'I don't really want to wait that long [again]. So, hopefully, something will happen sooner rather than later.'

Wilshere played 18 times for a Bournemouth side who reached the Championship play-offs last season.

He also has 34 England caps to his name but his career has taken a turn for the worse in recent years due to a lack of fitness and numerous injuries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer revealed that he gave Paul Pogba the freedom to roam against Leeds, with the midfielder responding by producing four assists in an emphatic 5-1 victory at Old Trafford.

United commenced the new campaign in impressive style, with Pogba playing a prominent part in proceedings.

The midfielder has frequently been criticised for a lack of consistency during his time at United, but he was full of confidence against Leeds.

Paul Pogba provided four assists as Manchester United secured a 5-1 victory at home to Leeds

United manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer says he gave Pogba 'the freedom to roam' against Leeds

Pogba matched the Premier League record for the most assists in a single Premier League game.

In each of the past two seasons, Pogba only managed five assists in the entirety of the Premier League season.

Asked to comment on Pogba's performance, Solskjaer told BT Sport: 'I've had a great relationship with Paul all the time, today was just about 'go out there and enjoy yourself', we gave him the freedom to roam.

'All the best players want to feel our trust in them and confidence. He can create moments out of nothing and I was impressed with his fitness.'

Pogba set up all three of Bruno Fernandes' goals, with his midfield partner praising him

Bruno Fernandes scored a hat-trick, with Pogba setting up all three of his goals, while the Frenchman was also the provider for Mason Greenwood's effort.

Fernandes spoke highly of his fellow midfielder after the game.

He said: 'People discuss about the quality of Paul but the quality of him is not under discussion. We know we can expect this kind of performance from Paul.'

Rio Ferdinand, meanwhile, believes that Pogba and Fernandes showed their quality by coming alive when United needed them most.

Ferdinand said: 'Pogba, four assists, he didn't look like someone's who's unhappy. When the game went a bit flat, Pogba and Fernandes came alive.'

Pogba will hope that he can produce performance of such quality on a regular basis this season as he looks to help United challenge for the Premier League title.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leeds fans blasted Manchester United duo Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford before their clash at Old Trafford, chanting that the pair 'let the country down' after they both missed a penalty in the shootout as England were beaten in Euro 2020 final by Italy.

Footage shows hundreds of Whites fans in one of the Old Trafford concourses chanting 'Sancho and Rashford, let the country down, Sancho and Rashford, let the country down' before the Premier League encounter kicked off.

Sancho, Rashford and Arsenal's Bukayo Saka have all been targets for vile racist abuse online after they missed in the shootout this summer, which saw the trio receive unwavering support from the British public immediately after.

But while Manchester United welcomed back capacity crowds to Old Trafford on Saturday, the build up to the game was marred by violent clashes between the two sets of fans in the city centre, which saw chairs and bins used as weapons in ugly scenes.

The two clubs are historical rivals and are playing against each other in England's top-flight with fans for the first time since 2004.

With the pandemic keeping fans away from stadiums last season, the two meetings between the two sides was without a crowd, keeping the rivalry on the pitch.

Leeds fans gather in the concourse at Old Trafford as some in the centre of the crowd chant Man United duo Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford ‘let the country down’

Rashford (left), Sancho (centre) and Bukayo Saka (right) all missed penalties in the penalty shootout which saw Italy beat England in agonising fashion

However, as fans made their way to the Theatre of Dreams on Saturday morning, tempers boiled over between the two sets of rival supporters resulting in violent clashes outside cafes and restaurants.

The 21-second clip, uploaded to Twitter, saw hooligans use bins and chairs as weapons as one lone police officer frantically tries to separate those involved using a baton.

A man standing inside the shop says: 'Good job we're in here. Oh my god.'

Greater Manchester Police have confirmed no arrests have been made as of yet and are working with local premises to identify those involved in the violent clashes.

Manchester United and Leeds fans were involved in violent clashes in Manchester city centre

Footage shows fans using bins and chairs as weapons during the ugly scenes in Manchester

A spokesperson from Greater Manchester Police said: 'Patrols in the city centre have been made aware of some isolated incidents of disorder at premises in the area.

'We're working closely with those premises to support licensees at the early signs of any disorder and negate it as swiftly as possible.

'Our priority is to escort people to the stadium in a safe manner and to ensure minimal disruption for the wider public. No arrests have been necessary at this stage.'

Another video shared online shows the moment a police van arrives to a brawl which has spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

A group of men exchange blows during brawl ahead of Man Utd and Leeds clash Saturday

A man can be seen in footage online hitting a football fan repeatedly with a bin

The groups of men eventually disperse as a police officers arrives to the scene

Men can be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the skirmage, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring.

Today is the first time in 17 months that Old Trafford will be at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans.

But scenes of the brawl have put a dampener on the otherwise celebratory return of the Premier League.

It comes after police on Friday pleaded with fans to behave responsibly, announcing that 200 officers would be on duty across Manchester.

Chief superintendent Stuart Ellison, Greater Manchester Police's gold commander for public order operations, said: 'It feels like a long time since we last had capacity crowds, but we have worked on hundreds of events in the past and our priority this weekend remains the same.

'The Premier League starts with Manchester hosting the biggest game of the weekend, 70,000 fans returning to Old Trafford to see Manchester United hosting Leeds United.

'That's just one of four matches on our patch on Saturday afternoon.

'Our officers are working extended hours this weekend to help keep the public safe. All that we ask is that you behave responsibly so everyone can enjoy themselves.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Back in May, Joe Root — not long turned 30 — reflected on his career and quietly suggested: ‘The best is still to come.’

Perhaps he envisaged a day such as this: the sun out at Lord’s, a blue-riband Indian attack, the crowd in the palm of his hand.

For the second Saturday in succession, and for the fifth time this year, he scored a hundred of exquisite poise, scarcely erring as he earned his side an improbable lead in this engrossing second Test.

Joe Root scored another Test century as he once again anchored England against India

A jubilant moment for the England skipper as he completed his fifth Test century of the year

Root also surpassed the personal milestone of 9,000 Test runs during the afternoon session

When Jimmy Anderson was bowled by Mohammed Shami’s final ball of the evening, Root was still there on 180, having done as he pleased for nine hours. He walked off to Indian congratulations. With two days to go, England — all out for 391 — lead by 27. There may be twists to come.

It would be wrong to say he had fought an entirely lone battle, as he did to keep England afloat at Trent Bridge. Rory Burns had already made 49, and there was a long-awaited half-century from Jonny Bairstow, plus walk-on parts for Jos Buttler and Moeen Ali. Others are taking their captain’s cue.

But Root’s ascent to greatness recalls Ernest Hemingway’s line about how one of his character’s became bankrupt: ‘Two ways. Gradually, then suddenly.’

In 2021 alone, he has scored 1,244 Test runs; next for England is Burns on 363. Root’s average is 69; next is Burns on 33. The time will come when his team will have to do it without him. But it seems unlikely to be soon.

James Anderson was bowled out on the final ball of the third day as England led by 27 runs

Anderson appeared to be in verbal confrontation with India players following his dismissal

By the end of another absorbing day, he had taken his Test average back above 50, and changed the course of the game in that special way of his: always alert, never violent, finesse rather than force.

He had 48 at the start, 89 at lunch, 132 at tea, and never looked rushed, even when ramping Mohammed Siraj for four late on. The only pity was that just one Indian fielder — the good-natured Ajinkya Rahane — had applauded his century.

In tougher conditions at Nottingham, Root’s second-innings hundred effectively saved the game, holding India at bay on the fourth day before rain ruined the fifth. Here, he has given England a chance of victory after they twice looked out of contention.

First, he caught Virat Kohli at slip late on the first day, triggering an Indian collapse eventually worth eight for 97. Then, he walked out to bat after tea on the second to face a hat-trick ball from a pumped-up Siraj. Perhaps the only advantage of batting in England’s top order is that you learn how to handle a crisis, and few handle them more adeptly than Root.

Jonny Bairstow made 57 before gloving a ball by Mohammed Siraj through to slip catcher Kohli

Kohli was delighted to take the important wicket of Bairstow after his partnership with Root

This was his 22nd Test hundred, putting him level in the English pantheon with Wally Hammond, Colin Cowdrey, Geoff Boycott and Ian Bell. Only Kevin Pietersen (23) and Alastair Cook (33) lie ahead. Almost unnoticed, he became the second Englishman, after Cook, to pass 9,000 Test runs. He is collecting records like an LP fanatic.

Bairstow said: ‘To do what he’s done, to go into second place among leading run-scorers in the history of the English game is very special, to pass 9,000 Test runs in this game is extremely special, to score another 180 not out at Lord’s... I’ve run out of superlatives, to be honest.

‘It’s great to see him in the form that he’s in, and it’s awesome to be out there with him enjoying every single moment of it.’

It seems odd now to think of the recent concern about Root’s conversion-rate of fifties into hundreds — especially as four of this year’s five hundreds have been 180 or more. But he used lockdown well, studying all his Test dismissals from the last few years, and resolving to play the ball as late as possible, in the manner of New Zealand’s Kane Williamson.

For once, he found a sturdy ally, batting through the first session with Bairstow, his fellow Yorkshireman, after England had resumed on 119 for three in reply to India’s 364. Bairstow went into lunch with his first Test half-century in two years and 20 innings. With the pitch flat and swing negligible, Kohli might even have been tempted to give a couple of overs to ‘Jarvo’, a spectator who walked out after the interval wearing an Indian shirt and had to be removed by four unimpressed stewards.

India's total of 364 had looked daunting but a useful morning for England has given them hope

So India were grateful when Bairstow fell into Siraj’s short-ball trap, getting into a tangle on the pull and looping a simple catch to Kohli at slip. With the second new ball imminent, it was careless cricket. England still trailed by 135.

A sharp single took Root to his seventh hundred against India — equalling Cook’s England record — only for Buttler to be bowled for 23 by one that nipped back down the slope from Ishant Sharma.

Ali walked out into the best batting conditions of the match for his first red-ball innings in this country since a county game at New Road in September 2019. Showing commendable restraint for a player who on Monday had battered a 28-ball 59 for Birmingham Phoenix in the Hundred, he helped Root to tea and beyond.

At 341 for five, England were eyeing a decent lead. But Ishant was starting to find his rhythm: Ali poked to first slip for 27, Sam Curran to second for a golden duck.

After a maiden from Ravindra Jadeja to Ollie Robinson, Root thus faced up to a hat-trick ball for the second time in the innings. Again, he played it with ease. Siraj finally won an lbw shout against Robinson, before Mark Wood helped England into a lead, only to be run out by Jadeja’s bullet arm.

Bumrah struck Anderson on the helmet in an over riddled with four no-balls, but Root eked out another 20 for the last wicket as the shadows lengthened and Indian tempers shortened. His brilliance may yet ensure a grandstand finish.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Deontay Wilder's trainer Malik Scott recalls sparring with Tyson Fury during the early days of the Gypsy King's career.

Scott - who was a prominent heavyweight fighter at the time - flew out to Belgium to spend a week training with Fury in 2013.

However, Scott only last 'a few rounds' after a strong 'right hook' busted his ear and forced him to head home early.

Deontay Wilder's trainer Malik Scott recalls sparring with Tyson Fury back in 2013

However, Scott only lasted 'a few rounds' after a strong 'right hook' from Fury busted his ear

Scott - who is in charge of Wilder's trilogy fight against the Gypsy King on October 9 - spoke about his experience with Fury in a Q&A on Instagram.

The former heavyweight boxer said: 'I flew to Brussels, Belgium alone.

'Boxed Fury a few sessions, he was very good and mobile for a big man. Big personality but you could tell he was missing a screw or two - for the better, if that makes sense.

'The first session we sparred I got hit by a right hook around my guard and it clogged my eardrum up.

As a result, Fury (above) and his team gave Scott a train ticket and sent him back home

Scott has since hit out at Fury, claiming he shouldn't brag about 'busting' his eardrum

'We boxed eight rounds that day, after that we did two more sessions throughout the week and my ear just got worse and worse.

'So I decided enough was enough because I was still an active fighter at the time, so I told Peter [Fury] that would be it for me.

'They paid me my money, gave me a train ticket and I wished them luck and the rest is history.'

However, Scott has since hit out at Fury, claiming he shouldn't brag about 'busting' his eardrum.

He said: 'You're a 260lbs man that can fight, you bust my eardrum the first time we sparred.

'That's not something to brag about, you can fight, that's what you do…The first day he bust my eardrum, then I come back and boxed him the next day.

'Then the next day it happened, I couldn't hear and I couldn't continue to box, this s*** happens in boxing.'

Scott, 40, is in charge of Wilder's trilogy fight against the Gypsy King on October 9

Fury and Wilder's first fight in December 2018 ended in a thrilling draw, while the second fight saw the Briton lay on a savage beating of the previously undefeated American

Scott's Q&A about the British boxer came ahead of Wilder's showdown with Fury in October.

Wilder's bout with the Gypsy King was originally scheduled for July 24. However, Fury tested positive for coronavirus, forcing the trilogy fight to be rearranged for early in October.

Nevertheless, both athletes will be eager to get the fight underway after an extra two months of training.

Fury and Wilder's first fight in December 2018 ended in a thrilling draw, while the second fight saw the Briton lay on a savage beating of the previously undefeated American in February 2020.

However, The Bronze Bomber has since claimed that Fury cheated during their second fight in Sin City, alleging that Fury had an 'egg weight' concealed in his glove, that his water was spiked, and that his ring walk outfit was too heavy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona president Joan Laporta says the cause of Lionel Messi leaving the club was a debt of £1.15billion run up by his predecessor Josep Bartomeu.

Laporta gave a two-hour press conference yesterday in which he outlined the gravity of the financial situation at the Nou Camp and accused Bartomeu of telling lies.

‘As of March 21, 2021, the debt was €1.35bn,’ revealed Laporta. ‘Bartomeu was plugging holes in the short term and mortgaging the club in the long term. That leaves us a dramatic inheritance.’

Joan Laporta has revealed that Barcelona's debts have now plunged as low as £1.15billion

The Spaniards have lost Lionel Messi as they were financially unable to re-sign him this month

Messi left on a free transfer for Paris Saint-Germain last week after the club, player and La Liga were unable to come to an arrangement to keep him at Barca. Bartomeu — who was replaced by Laporta in March — later released an open letter defending his administration and criticising his successor.

But Laporta said: ‘Bartomeu’s letter is an effort to justify management that is unjustifiable. It is an exercise in desperation. I have read the letter carefully and it is full of lies.

‘They are responsible for everything until March 7. They will not escape their doing.’

Defender Gerard Pique accepted a pay cut to allow new signings Memphis Depay and Eric Garcia to play in Barca’s 4-2 win over Real Sociedad on Sunday, with Laporta saying that wages represent 103 per cent of the club’s income.

But the president does believe the situation is reversible after securing a loan of £470m at an interest rate of 1.1 per cent.

‘The situation is dramatic, but we have good news,’ he said. ‘The strategic plan based on our credibility and experience, on the assets that Barca have, makes this situation temporary.

And Laporta has lifted the lid on the full extent of Barcelona's alarming economic crisis

‘I think that in a couple of years, the club’s economy will be healthy.

‘We are not scared at all. We are highly motivated and positive and morale is high. It’s a big challenge but we are capable of overcoming it.’

Laporta had earlier revealed that Messi's new contract would have taken the club's wage bill to account for 110 per cent of their ann ual revenue, a figure the league would never accept.

Sergi Roberto, Jordi Alba and Sergio Busquets are expected to follow suit with Pique and accept a pay-cut to help the club.

Laporta said Pique's move was 'admirable' and that Sergio Aguero's registration issue is not yet resolved, while admitting that the squad will have to take another pay cut having already done so at the height of Covid.

Laporta said that the squad will need to take another pay cut to help ease the burden

He praised the 'admirable' Gerard Pique for already agreeing to a secondary reduction in wage

'We are happy to have resolved with Pique the issue (of registering new signings),' he said via Dermot Corrigan. 'To reduce salary is very admirable.

'In Kun's case it is not yet resolved, but we expect other captains to act like Pique.

'The squad already reduced salaries due to COVID. Now we ask for a second effort, first response is surprise as nobody likes to lower their salary.

'But given the situation they are starting to understand and we trust we can resolve it as soon as possible with captains, then other players.'

Laporta also took aim at Bartomeu once again, after the former president claimed in a letter that Barcelona's economic crisis is the fault of the current chief.

Laporta also responded to claims from Josep Bartomeu (rght) that the crisis was his own fault

The 59-year-old said of Bartomeu's claims, as reported by The Spanish Football Podcast: 'Full of lies. An effort to justify unjustifiable management. An exercise in desperation.'

Despite the concerning financial update, Laporta remains positive that the club will 'come through this' with a viable strategy in place to survive the crisis.

'The situation is dramatic, but we have good news,' he said. 'Our strategic plan, and the experience we all have, gives us credibility. I am convinced that we will come through this.'

Reports in Spain last week also revealed that Barcelona still owe Messi £33m in loyalty bonuses, despite the Argentine joining PSG.

Laporta was the subject of criticism from Barca fans at their first game against Real Sociedad

The bonus - worth a total of £66m - was part of Messi's old contract and the club had paid the first half of the sum in February and are due to pay the remaining £33m this summer.

Laporta was among those targeted by some fans in the team's Spanish league opener on Sunday, when they defeated Real Sociedad 4-2.

There were banners outside the Nou Camp criticising Laporta and accusing him of not doing enough to keep Messi.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liverpool captain Jordan Henderson is set to commit his long-term future to the club after reportedly agreeing to a new deal in principle with the Reds.

Henderson has entered the final two years of his contract and was frustrated at the beginning of the summer when talks about extending his stay petered out.

But after successful talks with Liverpool's higher-ups, Henderson is expected to put pen to paper on a new three-year deal with the option to extend it by another year based on how many appearances he makes, according to The Athletic.

Liverpool captain Jordan Henderson is set to commit his long-term future to the club

The report goes on to claim that Henderson has not yet put pen to paper on a new deal but is expected commit his long-term future to the club after fears that a deal wouldn't be reached.

The Athletic have also claimed that manager Jurgen Klopp played a pivotal role in 'turning around a complicated situation'.

Klopp was keen to avoid a repeat of Georginio Wijnaldum's situation, which saw the midfielder move to PSG after a breakdown in talks.

The impasse initially led Atletico Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain to believe there was a chance of prising Henderson away from Anfield.

Jurgen Klopp (left) played a pivotal role in keeping the veteran midfielder at the club

It is also claimed that the impasse was not about money, rather about Henderson's role in the team and how the owners viewed the 31-year-old.

However, after successful talks, Henderson is expected to follow a number of his team-mates in signing a new deal.

Liverpool have been busy renewing the terms of a number of key players and Van Dijk on Friday followed the lead of Trent Alexander-Arnold, Fabinho and Alisson Becker, as well as rising star Harvey Elliott, of committing his future.

Klopp has been intent on keeping Henderson at the club and the German made it clear that he expects the 31-year-old to follow Van Dijk and Co at some point.

Virgil van Dijk put pen to paper on a new four-year deal expiring in 2025 last week

'It is important (to find a solution) but it will happen,' said Klopp. 'We will sort it, however it will be. We will sort it. No doubt about that. It will get sorted. I spoke to him (on Thursday) and it looked like that (he was in good spirits), yes.'

Van Dijk's new deal runs to June 2025 and Klopp – who sanctioned his £75million acquisition in January 2018 – put his progress and reputation into perspective when simply saying: 'Wow! Imagine what it would cost to buy him now!'

The Holland international made his long-awaited return from injury in the 3-0 win over Norwich on Saturday, with Klopp adding: 'After that obviously very difficult last year that he is back on track, trains with the team and prepares for hopefully a very successful future at this club. Absolutely great, great news.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi knows the order of his priorities ahead of a sensational move to PSG, reportedly putting a clause in his contract which allows the icon to miss Ligue 1 games for Argentina call-ups.

The forward is in Paris finalising a free transfer from his crumbling boyhood club, Barcelona, after announcing his emotional Nou Camp exit at a teary press-conference last week.

Messi has now reportedly completed his medical ahead of signing on a two-year deal, according to Sky Sports, which includes a telling detail.

Lionel Messi is inches from completing his move to Paris Saint-Germain from Barcelona

Despite his sensational move the forward already plans on prioritising his nation Argentina

Within the 34-year-old's contract PSG have agreed he can leave for Argentina qualifiers, or even friendlies, even when they overlap with French league games, according to TyC Sports.

Messi clinched the Copa America this summer, finally lifting the international silverware to match Cristiano Ronaldo's Euro 2016 glory and hushing fans who had questioned his ability when he plays for Argentina.

The World Cup is the final empty slot in his otherwise perfect trophy cabinet, a title Ronaldo has never managed.

Qatar 2022 is likely to be Messi's final World Cup for his nation, so it's no wonder he wants to be present for each meet-up on the road to next year's tournament.

Messi lifted the Copa America this summer and is now setting his sight on the World Cup

MESSI'S CALENDAR Saturday, August 14 – 4:00 p.m PSG vs. Racing Club of Strasbourg Friday, August 20 – 4:00 p.m Brest vs. PSG Sunday, August 29 – 3:45 p.m Reims vs. PSG Thursday, September 2 – (TBC): Venezuela vs Argentina Sunday, September 5 – (TBC): Brazil vs Argentina Thursday September 9 – (TBC): Argentina vs Bolivia Sunday, September 12 – (TBC): PSG vs. Clermont Sunday, September 19 – (TBC): PSG vs. Lyon Advertisement

PSG already had a lethal attack but a trio of Messi, Neymar and Mbappe is mind-blowing

The icon will have little interest in the Ligue 1 title PSG have won nine times and are annually expected to clinch at a canter, with a fifth Champions League title the big prize for both the player and club.

PSG have been desperately chasing European glory since Qatar Sports Investments took over the club in 2011, coming closest in 2020 when Bayern Munich beat them 1-0 in front of an empty stadium.

A front-three of Neymar, Kylian Mbappe and Lionel Messi, playing in front of players like Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Gini Wijnaldum and Marco Veratti, should be enough to finally lift the big-eared cup next year.

Messi's move is inching closer and closer to being signed, with his Antonella and their three children, Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three, all seen in Paris on Tuesday.

The player's lawyers have been pouring over PSG's contract and have given the go-ahead, and the club have already posted a Tweet teasing Messi's arrival.

Barcelona's greatest player emerged in a PSG face mask as he left the hospital and made his way to his hotel to finalise paperwork.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Novak Djokovic’s withdrawal from the main warm-up event to the US Open has added to the pall of uncertainty that is hanging over tennis.

The 34-year-old Serb may go into a potentially historic edition of Flushing Meadows with minimal preparation after pulling out of next week’s Western and Southern Open in Cincinnati.

He joined Roger Federer on the absentee list after reporting that he was taking longer to recover from his embarrassing Olympic exit than expected.

Novak Djokovic will miss a US Open warm-up event to recover from his Olympic Games misery

Djokovic did not specify whether that was related to the shoulder injury he cited as the reason for withdrawing from his mixed doubles bronze medal match in Tokyo.

His decision has increased the ambiguity around the upcoming Grand Slam, as New York battles an ongoing rise in Covid cases driven by the Delta variant.

‘I am taking a bit longer to recover and recuperate after quite a taxing journey from Australia to Tokyo,’ said Djokovic, who threw racket-throwing tantrums during his failed singles campaign in Japan.

‘Sadly, that means I won’t be ready to compete in Cincinnati this year so I’ll turn my attention to the US Open.’

One of the few certainties around tennis in the post-Wimbledon period is that Federer turned 40 on Sunday.

The Serb (left) lost against Pablo Carreno Busta (right) in the bronze men's singles match

The Swiss legend has yet to declare whether he will play at the US Open. However, he is known to be determined to play less than two weeks later at the Laver Cup event in Boston — which is his brainchild and operated by his management company.

The ‘Big Three’ are tied on 20 Grand Slam titles each with Djokovic going for the calendar Grand Slam, but it looks like Rafael Nadal will not be giving up the race without a fight.

Even Nadal’s fitness is unsure. Having elected to give himself a long American summer after missing Wimbledon and the Olympics, and having played in Washington DC, he pulled out of the Canadian Open with a foot injury on Tuesday night.

Rafael Nadal also revealed on Tuesday he would be pulling out of the US Open warm up event

Posting a video on Instagram, the Spaniard said: 'Hey Toronto, I am very sorry that I will not be able to play this year. I am not ready for it. I feel bad but I tried hard. You know how much I love this event. I've had great memories over all these years and I really hope to be back.'

Another intriguing aspect about the US Open is that, unlike at previous Grand Slams, there may be advantages for players who have been fully vaccinated. Nadal and Federer have publicly stated that they have had the jab, but Djokovic — who has strongly hinted that he is sceptical about vaccines — has declined to say what his status is.

From the middle of this month, New York will be the first city in the US to begin a programme requiring anyone wanting to use an indoor gym, or a therapy room, to provide proof of being fully jabbed. The same rules will apply to those wishing to eat inside a restaurant.

Rafael Nadal could be one of the best prepared and is currently at the Canadian Open

Exactly how this will be enforced on-site for players — many of whom are yet to be vaccinated — is not clear, but there could be implications for how they warm up and prepare.

Despite the rise in local Covid cases, the US Open is hoping to operate at 100 per cent crowd capacity and there appears no danger that the event will not go ahead — unlike this month’s prestigious New York Auto Show, which has been postponed.

However, restrictions are being readied for areas such as media press conferences. And, according to a US Open spokesperson, all players are now being ‘encouraged’ to stay at Manhattan’s huge Inter-Continental hotel. Unlike at Wimbledon, where competitors were ordered to stay in one central London ‘bubble’ location, that is not expected to be compulsory.

Yet, as with all things Covid, government-dictated rules can change quickly. The ATP Tour have abandoned their autumn tournaments in Asia, and Indian Wells in California will now host an elongated Masters event in October.

Meanwhile, Cam Norrie’s hopes of dislodging Dan Evans as British men’s No 1 were dashed last night in Toronto after he lost in the first round to Olympic silver medallist Karen Khachanov 4-6, 7-5, 4-6. Norrie needed to make the last eight to usurp his compatriot.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Given his status as one of Europe’s leading goal-getters, the proposed club record fee and the transformative impact he could have on Chelsea, the subject of Romelu Lukaku would have been an expected one for Thomas Tuchel.

There was a straight bat from the German when asked about the imminent £98million deal ahead of Wednesday's UEFA Super Cup clash with Villarreal, though he had spoken glowingly about the Inter Milan striker earlier.

‘I’m absolutely not in a position to announce anything and I will refuse to talk about it because we are in a press conference before a European final,’ he said. ‘It’s clearly not the moment for personal discussions of our squad.’

Thomas Tuchel has remained tight-lipped over the impending arrival of Romelu Lukaku

Lukaku, 28, is on the cusp of rejoining Chelsea in a huge £98m move from Inter Milan

Antonio Rudiger was also keen not to say too much about ‘someone who is not a Chelsea player’.

But having faced his future teammate as an opponent, the centre back said: ‘He is a top-class striker and obviously someone who loves to score goals.

‘He is very strong and he showed that in Italy in the past two years. He has done very well over there and also for his national team.’

Tuchel’s preference was to discuss the squad he has now and what they have to achieve before Lukaku returns to Stamford Bridge. Namely, winning the UEFA Super Cup for the second time when they face Europa League winners Villarreal in Belfast.

While the real stuff starts against Crystal Palace on Saturday, Tuchel was firm in how he will approach this match — with some of his stars, including Thiago Silva, Jorginho and Mason Mount, yet to feature in the Blues’ pre-season following the Euros.

#Lukaku a Linate, prima della partenza per Londra: “Un saluto ai tifosi dell’#Inter che volevano rimanessi? Manderò un messaggio tra qualche giorno”



��✈️������#Chelsea @FcInterNewsit pic.twitter.com/79kBH5AK1K — Egle Patanè (@eglevicious23) August 9, 2021

Antonio Rudiger has excited at the prospect of playing with Romelu Lukaku at Chelsea

‘It’s a competitive match,’ he said. ‘It’s not only about sharing minutes, it’s about the first title that we want to win.’

Winning the Champions League has given Tuchel’s group a taste of victory they want to sample again, as soon as possible.

Midfielder Mateo Kovacic said: ‘Chelsea are used to competing for trophies every year and this young team have shown that we can achieve great things.

‘We’re not going to stop there. We are hungry for titles and we need to compete for our first of the season.’

Chelsea’s clear upturn in form following Tuchel’s January arrival, capped by their Champions League triumph, has raised expectations of what they might be capable of this season.

‘It doesn’t feel like pressure because this is what we demand of ourselves,’ said Tuchel. ‘I demand to get better every day and be the best coach I can be.

‘I want to lead by example, to come into Cobham with energy, ready to continue the journey together. It has just started and hopefully it will be a long journey.

Rudiger has faced Lukaku previously and is looking forward to linking up with the Belgian

‘Does anybody have a recipe of how to do better after a Champions League victory? I don’t know. The courage now is to face the challenges, step up and keep on demanding.

‘We have to rebuild the same spirit that put us in the position to get these results. There are a lot of different tasks to fulfil and the most important is that we don’t lose sight by thinking too much about pressure and expectations.’

Managing all of his players — which he totalled at 42, including returning loanees — during pre-season was initially a little complicated for Tuchel.

In time, and with his thoughts expressed to the board, he hopes to be left with just the ones he needs. As well as one or two additions, like Lukaku, who can keep the competition in his squad at a level healthy enough to push Chelsea towards more silverware.

‘It is about what someone can bring to the group without disturbing them,’ Tuchel said.

‘At the same time keeping people on their toes, so they aren’t in the comfort zone. That stops people reaching their top level.

‘It’s about keeping everybody on the front foot and in a bit of a state of insecurity where everybody really has to fight for their place.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Premier League has introduced new anti-discrimination measures to be implemented this season.

All 20 clubs have agreed to enforce new League-wide punishments, including bans, for any individual found to have behaved in a discriminatory or abusive way towards players, staff, officials, stewards or fans attending a Premier League match.

The sanctions will cover behaviour conducted both in person and online and will include permanent bans from attending all Premier League matches.

Premier League has introduced new anti-discrimination measures to come in for this season

Premier League chief executive Richard Masters said: 'The Premier League and our clubs condemn all forms of discriminatory and abusive behaviour.

'The commitment from all clubs to enforce League-wide bans demonstrates there is no place for discrimination of any kind in football and we will continue to work together to fight all forms of prejudice.

'Football is a diverse sport, which brings together communities from all backgrounds. We call on fans to come together with us and our clubs to help tackle discrimination by challenging and reporting abuse wherever they see it.'

The announcement came on the day Twitter shared an overview of its analysis of 'the abhorrent racist abuse' directed at England players after the Euro 2020 final defeat by Italy.

It found that the United Kingdom was 'by far' the main origin of the posts.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham fans displayed a banner in support of Arsenal star Bukayo Saka following the nightmare ordeal he went through at the end of Euro 2020.

The 19-year-old missed the decisive spot-kick as England were defeated on penalties by Italy in the final.

Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford also missed and all three were subject to racial abuse following the game.

Bukayo Saka of Arsenal acknowledges the fans in attendance as he is applauded onto the field

Spurs hosted Arsenal in their final pre-season friendly on Sunday and the Tottenham fans showed their support for Saka.

The youngster replaced Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang in the second half and was greeted with a standing ovation and a round of applause.

Tottewnham proceeded to edge out their rivals Arsenal 1-0 thanks to Son Heung-min's late winner.

Both sides hit the woodwork in the opening period, Tottenham through Dele Alli and Arsenal through Alexandre Lacazette, but neither team could make their dominance count when on top.

With the game petering out in the second half, Son came up trumps for Spurs after striking low past Bernd Leno to his left to give his side a 1-0 lead in the 79th minute.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There was no fairytale ending this time for Matt Walls to go with his omnium gold, but still a silver medal at the end of a hard-fought madison.

The newly minted Olympic champion teamed up with his housemate, Ethan Hayter, to produce a brilliant last sprint just as their chances looked to be slipping away.

With double points on offer, they pipped the French to second place.

Britain's Matthew Walls (left) and Ethan Hayter (right) celebrate their madison silver medals

They finished second behind Denmark with a late sprint pushing France into bronze position

British duo Ethan Hayter and Matthew Walls took silver in the madison at the Izu Velodrome

‘I thought we were racing for bronze,’ admitted Hayter, aware of the attack from behind in the closing minutes of cycling’s frenetic relay race, in which one rider ‘hand-slings’ the other into the race before he then takes a breather.

‘I was looking up at the board with two laps (before) the last sprint. I saw a four-point lead over the Belgians and thought we have to beat them.

‘But it’s so hard to keep track of what’s happening. I thought it was bronze. Silver and bronze are both great, aren’t they? And we were actually closer to winning than I thought. We could have made up some points but I think the Danes would then have ridden differently. They were the stronger pair.’

If there is any nation the Brits would not have wanted to lose gold to it was the Danes — and vice versa — after the rancorous background of the last week.

It started with Team GB and others registering protests against Denmark for the use of kinesiology tape and aero-resistant undervests and escalated after a heavy crash between Dane Frederik Madsen and Britain’s Charlie Tanfield. The Danish rider fumed: ‘F*** them.’

WARNING: OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE IN BELOW TWEET

Regardless of that subtext, Lasse Norman Hansen and Michael Morkov deserved this victory.

For Britain it was their 11th cycling medal at these Games, inside or outside the velodrome, with more plunder hopefully awaiting overnight, with Laura Kenny gunning for a sixth career gold medal in the women’s omnium and Jack Carlin due to fight for honours in the keirin. So early talk of the Izu track being a graveyard for Britain’s cycling legacy appears to have been premature.

Hayter’s first Olympic medal comes after a dark year of injuries — including a broken back almost a year ago. But the 22-year-old has so much potential that his former team-mate Ed Clancy described him as the ‘next Bradley Wiggins’.

The British pair (yellow helmets) launched a late sprint finish to leapfrog France into second

The British riders perform a slingshot handover during the madcap 200-lap madison race

Post-race, Hayter spoke of the pressure of a discipline in which there are so many moving pieces: ‘I’ve sworn in every interview since the race ended but I’ve cooled off now. You do a lot of team pursuit training and it’s a four-minute event. You get half an hour into a madison and think, “Jesus Christ”.’

South London-born Hayter and Oldham-born Walls, who live in Gatley, near Manchester, started with gusto, winning the first of the 20 sprints before falling behind to the Dutch after the 12th contest.

‘We played it quite clever in the middle,’ said Hayter. ‘With 100 laps to go I was suffering, and when one person starts to suffer they make it harder for the other person. Matt started to suffer, probably from me. We both went through a bit of a rough patch.

‘But when I saw 35 laps to go I said to Matt: “I’m actually starting to come around a bit here. We can go for these last few sprints and push for something”.’

It was nervy just watching the concluding action, fearing a Belgian raid, but Walls and Hayter pounced at the right time.

‘I waited, waited, waited and on the last straight fully committed,’ added Hayter. ‘knowing we’d get across the Belgians and win a medal if everything went right.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leicester suffered a huge blow ahead of the new Premier League season after Wesley Fofana was stretchered off with a suspected broken leg following a horror tackle in their 3-2 pre-season win over Villarreal.

The 20-year-old was scythed down from behind by Villarreal forward Fernando Nino Rodriguez mid-way through the second half when Leicester were cruising 3-0 ahead.

Fofana screamed in agony and was quickly tended to by medical staff, as his fellow Foxes players appeared shaken by the nature of the injury.

Wesley Fofana has suffered a suspected broken leg in Leicester's friendly versus Villarreal

Fofana (right), 20, was subjected to a horrendous tackle by Villarreal forward Fer Nino (left)

A long delay saw Fofana receive oxygen on the pitch before being wheeled away on a stretcher. Should the injury be as serious as it is feared, the Frenchman could miss the whole of the upcoming season.

Fer Nino, having somehow escaped a red card for the horrendous challenge, made matters worse by scoring the first of Villareal's two goals on the night, to a ringing chorus of deafening boos from the 17,000 Leicester fans in attendance.

Fofana has established himself as a firm favourite with the fans and manager Brendan Rodgers, making 38 appearances in all competitions for the Foxes last season.

After receiving treatment on the pitch, Fofana was eventually wheeled off on a stretcher

A photo emerged online of Fofana looking very distressed on a stretcher with an oxygen mask

Leicester players Ryan Bertrand (left) and Caglar Soyuncu (right) are shaken by Fofana's injury

Fans were quick to leap to Fofana's defence online, with the majority furious at Fer Nino committing such a horrendous challenge in a pre-season friendly.

'That tackle on Fofana is absolutely sickening and in a pre season friendly no less,' wrote one irate Twitter user.

Another called on Fer Nino to be banned from football for a year and said he was an 'absolutely disgusting player', while others also called for action to be taken against the Villarreal forward.

'That was on purpose. LCFC please do something. He didn’t even get a card,' wrote @ljvyas on Twitter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Even the riot police clad in RoboCop body armour were on their tiptoes, batons lowered and mobile phones raised, trying to capture Lionel Messi as he emerged into the glare of the Paris sunshine and a watching world.

This is the good stuff, the bits that separate football from finance. Such as the boy balanced between the bars of a signpost like an Olympic gymnast, his dexterity affording him the perfect vantage point. Or the less graceful grown-up hoisting himself up a lamppost like the closing-time jester. He, too, got his reward.

That was a view of Messi, stepping on to the stage outside Parc des Princes just moments after his official unveiling as a Paris Saint-Germain player, which had ended in a raucous — not to mention bizarre — chanting of his name by an enthusiastic associate of the club.

Lionel Messi greets the hordes of fans that came to see him after signing for PSG

Messi joined the French giants after his shock exit from Barcelona at the end of his contract

But on the streets outside, the hush before the gush of hysteria as the Argentine superstar came into sight provided the most electrifying sense of anticipation.

Fireworks and flares eventually reduced visibility and, like the magician he is, Messi was soon gone as if in a puff of smoke.

That was when joy made way for division, scuffles breaking out for reasons unknown involving what looked like ultras or, to be more apt, idiots. A gang of them turned on the police who used pepper spray in retaliation. From Messi to messy.

In the space of just a few minutes on the narrow Rue du Commandant Guilbaud running parallel to PSG’s home ground, a handful of the worshippers had regressed into warriors hellbent on trouble.

But that sudden contrast does, in some way, reflect the conflict in emotion of Messi’s transfer from Barcelona to this Qatari-funded state project, whose distortion of football’s finances made them the only viable suitor for a player who will earn a salary of around £34million.

As we had waited earlier for Messi to appear in the stadium’s media auditorium just before 11am, a seasoned journalist of these parts remarked: ‘There isn’t much romance, is there?’ And there isn’t. Diego Maradona to Napoli, this is not.

Joy made way for division as there were scuffles among some PSG fans in attendance

PSG fans tear down a security barrier during the Lionel Messi presentation by the stadium

The Messi-branded coffee mugs on the top table were an immediate reminder of the want to feed from the cash cow that is PSG’s new prize product.

But then the man himself walks in, his three young sons, wife and father in his shadow, and you remember that, for all of the misgivings, this is a genius we should enjoy for every last minute of his playing career, be that Paris, Preston or Pluto.

The counter argument to the scepticism, presented here by PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, is that we should focus on the positives of the club’s spending rather than the negatives.

Some may consider him to be right — if PSG can afford Messi, good luck to them.

But Messi, of course, would rather still be in Barcelona. He did not try to mask that during his 35-minute press conference, even if he was sitting alongside paymaster Al-Khelaifi.

Each of his early answers touched the extremes of both happiness and sadness, as if heart and head were caught in a civil war.

‘My exit from Barcelona… it has been a very hard moment,’ he said. ‘Everything that has happened to me this past week has been strange, hard and emotional. I cannot forget what I lived and experienced in Barcelona. This week has been ups and downs.

Messi did not downplay his sadness at the way that he was forced to leave Barcelona

‘But the moment I arrived here I felt happy. My only will now is to begin training and to begin this new moment in my life.’

And you do believe Messi, even at 34, when he says his enthusiasm is as fervent as when he was a child.

To be only a few yards from him — as close as most defenders get — and to listen to him speak for half an hour or so is to recognise a genuine human being. It remains about more than money for him. It just so happens that PSG guarantee silver as well as the likelihood of silverware.

It was telling when he said: ‘My goal and my dream is to win the Champions League again. I think Paris is the best place to achieve that. I’m going to be playing with the best players, it’s very nice.’

Not as nice as it will be for his team-mates, who have been gifted the greatest player of their generation.

It took Gustave Eiffel two years to build his tower in this city. Messi’s contract would suggest he has the same amount of time to scale a similar height and return PSG’s first Champions League trophy.

Fail to do that as part of a front three — alongside Neymar and Kylian Mbappe — and the verdict will indeed be one of failure. To outsiders, PSG will never be valiant in defeat, especially not now.

Messi aspires to help Paris Saint-Germain to their first Champions League trophy

In that respect, there is a degree of fascination, if not romanticism, in the story that is about to unfold.

We will, however, have to wait for the first instalment. Messi is not match fit and three times he used the word ‘impatient’ when discussing his readiness for action.

It was, in the end, the growing impatience of his children in the front row that perhaps prompted the club’s communications chief to call time on their father’s media duties.

And while he would never betray such an emotion in front of a press pack to whom he is nothing but generous and respectful, you got the impression it was a relief for Messi.

The six-time Ballon d’Or winner has always preferred to do his talking with his feet. And while there is a lot of noise around this move to Paris, perhaps we should just embrace the sweet sound of Messi on a football pitch while we still can.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea have reportedly accepted Roma's offer of £34million for striker Tammy Abraham - but have included a buy-back clause as part of the deal.

As reported by goal, Abraham has spoken to Roma manager Jose Mourinho but has yet to agree personal terms with the Italian club.

Arsenal have also been heavily linked with the 23-year-old, who found himself out of favour with Chelsea boss Thomas Tuchel last season.

Chelsea have accepted Roma's £34m bid for Tammy Abraham and have inserted a buy-back clause in the deal

Despite Abraham being made surplus to requirements at Stamford Bridge, Chelsea have insisted on a buy-back clause to give them the option to resign their academy product for a fixed fee in the future.

Tuchel admitted some responsibility for Abraham's 'unhappiness' at Chelsea and said he 'completely understands' if he wants to leave the club for regular game time.

Speaking ahead of Wednesday night's European Super Cup final against Villarreal, he said: 'Tammy is right now in the squad. He was clearly not happy with the last half a year, he has reason not to be happy and maybe it is also my fault to not push him and not trust him on the level of some other players.

'The situation is what is our plans, does he fight his way back into the team or does he want to change club to have a better chance to be a regular starter which I completely understand.

'It is a normal situation until the window is closed, we constantly evaluate the situation but there is no news now and he is in training today and available to be in the starting 11 or come off the bench.'

Roma boss Jose Mourinho is eager to secure the signing of Abraham, with Arsenal also linked

Abraham is poised to leave Chelsea, with the Blues set to bring in Romelu Lukaku from Inter

Roma's general manager Tiago Pinto is eager to secure the signing of Abraham quickly, with Arsenal still chasing his signature and Mourinho in need of a new striker after Edin Dzeko flew out this afternoon for his Inter Milan medical.

Dzeko is set to complete his move to Serie A rivals Inter in the coming days in a move worth £4.5m, replacing Chelsea-bound Romelu Lukaku.

Abraham showed promise in his first full season in the Chelsea first-team, scoring 15 times in the Premier League in the 2019-20 campaign and was joint-top scorer last campaign despite his lack of minutes.

Capped by England on six occasions, he is eager to play regularly as he looks to get back into Gareth Southgate's squad.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British boxing royalty David Haye will be making a professional comeback to the ring at the age of 40, according to reports.

Boxing legend Haye – a former heavyweight and cruiserweight world champion – has been penciled in to return for a bout on the undercard of Oscar De La Hoya's big return at the age of 48 against Vitor Belfort.

Haye will go up against Joe Fournier in the famous Staples Center in Los Angeles in September and, according to reports via ESPN, producers Triller have now stated that Haye vs Fournier will be an eight-round contest at heavyweight.

At the age of 40 David Haye is reportedly ready to return to the boxing ring in September

Haye hung up his gloves in 2018 though has kept himself in remarkable shape ever since

Triller staged Mike Tyson's exhibition against Roy Jones Jr last year, and have shown a willingness to bring the big names of the sport back so that fans can see them in action one final time.

The report adds that Haye vs Fournier will be sanctioned by the California State Athletic Commission, meaning it will stand as a real bout on his professional record and will not be an exhibition.

On the same evening Anderson Silva will also face Tito Ortiz in the same format, Triller co-founder Ryan Kavanaugh has confirmed.

The event is set to take place on September 11 and will be a full pay-per-view package for fans wanting to witness it.

Haye's last fight came against his rival Tony Bellew, who won their rematch fight in May 2018

In 2018 Haye officially announced his retirement from the sport, following his re-match defeat against fellow Englishman Tony Bellew.

At the time Haye said he was 'ready to close this chapter in my life' but 'this is not the end of my story - it's simply the start of something new'.

Haye became European cruiserweight champion and went on to win the WBC, WBO and WBA world titles before stepping up to heavyweight.

Since hanging up his gloves 'the Hayemaker' has kept his body in extraordinary condition, and regularly keeps fans up to date on his progress in health and fitness via social media.

Joe Fournier is two years younger than Haye and the duo are known to be good friends

Haye and Fournier, 38, are known to be friends, with Fournier having previously boxed on one of the Brit's undercards back in 2016.

Fournier is an entrepreneur who initially moved into the nightclub industry and then became a pro boxer later in his career.

He made his debut in 2015 at the age of 32, and built up an unbeaten record competing mainly in the Dominican Republic.

Fournier had one victory in Belgium which was subsequently ruled a no contest after he tested positive for sibutramine - an appetite suppressant which has been discontinued in many countries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi has trained with his new club Paris Saint-Germain for the first time after completing his sensational switch - and also shared a moment with team-mate Kylian Mbappe as they prepare to take to the field together.

The all-time great walked out onto the pitch for the first time since Argentina's Copa America final triumph earlier this summer, and was put through his paces at PSG's Camp des Loges training complex today.

In the footage shared by the club on Instagram, Messi was seen sprinting down the pitch and carrying out some drills on his own. Despite only arriving in Paris on Tuesday, he is reportedly already desperate to feature this weekend.

Lionel Messi has taken part in his first training session at PSG since joining the club this week

Premiers pas et premier entraînement au Centre Ooredoo ! ✔️ #PSGxMESSI pic.twitter.com/fPjMbjM7YA — Paris Saint-Germain (@PSG_inside) August 12, 2021

His return from downtime was marked with simple exercises, with Messi's workload set to gradually increase while he gears up for the new season. The run-out caught on camera saw him race towards some cones and high-five a coach.

'I've been out of action for around month and I need to get physically ready. I hope to be ready as soon as possible, because I can't wait to play,' Messi admitted during his official unveiling at the Parc des Princes.

According to Marca, Messi was keen to hit the ground running in France and make a positive impression. He did just that after reporting to the club's facility almost two hours early, at 9.15am, to take in his new surroundings.

Kylian Mbappe met new team-mate Messi before training and posted a photo on social media

RMC in France have even claimed that the clearly-eager Messi wants to be a part of PSG's squad for their league fixture against Strasbourg this Saturday, despite his lack of a pre-season after returning from his holiday.

It is said Messi wants to be starting games as soon as possible, although the club's coaching staff would prefer him to work on his sharpness first.

The same outlet suggests his keenness may be a 'publicity stunt' to allow him to prove his desire to start work immediately after his move.

Meanwhile, before training he was also introduced to the squad, including his strike partner Mbappe. The young ace shared a photo of them greeting each other on his own Instagram account, with the caption: 'Welcome to Paris, Leo.'

Messi was officially unveiled by PSG this week after his sensational departure from Barcelona

The prospect of both players linking up, along with talisman Neymar, is a tantalising one for PSG supporters, and is likely to put to rest any speculation linking Mbappe with a big-money move to Real Madrid in this window.

Messi, who has signed a two-year deal with PSG worth a jaw-dropping £1million per week after leaving Barcelona in a shock exit, said he is relishing the chance to play with both attackers, and called them 'the best players'.

'It feels great to play with them, to play everyday with these great players, and the other players who are here,' he told reporters during his press conference. 'I can't wait to train with them. It's great to do it everyday.'

Messi also got the chance to talk with old foe, and now PSG team-mate, Sergio Ramos, with the pair embracing in the gym before catching up in their new surroundings.

Ramos has even told the Argentine that he and his family that they can move in with him if they get tired of staying in a hotel.

Messi embraces Sergio Ramos as the two rivals start their next chapter as PSG team-mates

Messi got the chance to catch with his old foe Ramos and share a laugh with the defender

According to El Pais Ramos has already told Messi if he doesn't want to stay in a hotel he is welcome to bring his family to Ramos' house.

Messi is currently staying in the hotel Le Royal Monceau where all PSG's big signings stay while they find permanent accommodation.

The hotel on Avenue Hoch is just off the Champs Elysees and Ramos was there briefly when he signed but is understood to have moved to the same Neuilly-sur-Seine area where Angel Di Maria and Marquinhos live.

Ramos had his run-ins with Messi during the Argentine's 16 seasons at Barcelona and the house sharing offer is the first episode in a new chapter of their relationship.

And it appears likely that Messi will have to wait for PSG's Ligue 1 clash against Reims on August 29 to make his bow, despite his own reported wish to play sooner, and he will continue building back his fitness in the meantime.

After his emotional exit from boyhood club Barcelona, Messi begins his new chapter in Paris

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi welcomed Messi after sealing the switch in a matter of days

His expectations are set high, after he openly claimed he has moved to Paris to target a fifth Champions League win - while refusing to admit whether his new team are the favourites to lift the trophy.

'The best teams in the world have not won the Champions League, it's a special competition,' he said. 'My objective is to lift another Champions League and I'm at the right place to do it.'

Club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi came out fighting while unveiling the mercurial forward, and insisted that no Financial Fair Play rules have been broken. Messi's contract is said to be worth around £30m a year.

PSG insisted that UEFA's Financial Fair Play rules will not be breached by the signing of Messi

'Regarding the financial aspect, I will make it clear - we know the rules of FFP and we will always follow the regulations,' he said. 'Before we do anything, we check with commercial, financial and legal people. We have the capacity.

'If we sign Leo, it's because we can, otherwise we would not have done it.

'What Leo brings to the club is huge, which you can see just outside (the stadium, where thousands of fans had gathered). He is a big asset. I hope Leo will not ask for a raise of salary, but what we have is fantastic.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bruno Fernandes is targeting another huge goal haul after helping Manchester United to make a 'statement' by hammering hapless Leeds 5-1 at Old Trafford on the opening day of the Premier League season.

United finished a distant second to Manchester City and failed to win a trophy despite Fernandes' 27 goals last season, and the Portugal powerhouse believes their five-star showing is a sign that they can rectify that barren run this time around.

Speaking to BT Sport, Fernandes praised United for having the right 'mentality' and said: 'Every season I want to be better than the last one.

Bruno Fernandes has already collected a matchball this season – but he wants to achieve more

The midfield marvel was on inspired form with a treble in a 5-1 opening day victory over Leeds

'With every goal and performance I want to do better. I have started with three goals but there is a long way to go.

'The team is growing up and now we try to do better. The statement today was against Leeds and the next game will be against Southampton [at St Mary's on Sunday], so we will focus game by game. We can do something with this mentality.'

With four assists, midfield partner Paul Pogba was the only man with a case for rivalling Fernandes' man of the match display, and Fernandes knows that the pair's success is central to United's hopes.

'We know the quality of Paul – that is not for discussion,' he said of United's record signing.

Fernandes offered praise to assist machine Paul Pogba after the France star set up four goals

United suffered agony in the Europa League final as they finished last season without a trophy

'We know what he can do and we saw that today. He is working for us and we know he can make this performance.'

Fernandes has been impressed by United's new arrivals, including centre-back Raphael Varane – whose signing was confirmed on Saturday – and England livewire Jadon Sancho.

'We know the quality of the players who come in now,' he reflected. 'The team was already good and we saw that last season, even though we did not achieve the trophies.'

Striker Marcus Rashford was the only other United player to notch more than 20 goals last season, scoring 21 times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Roma have reportedly finally made progress in their pursuit to sign Chelsea striker Tammy Abraham this summer.

Jose Mourinho has been keen on bringing the 23-year-old to the Stadio Olimpico, though Abraham himself has not been fully convinced.

Arsenal have also been linked with Abraham as they look to bolster their attacking options.

Tammy Abraham has had a breakthrough in discussions over a move to Serie A side Roma

La Repubblica as per Football Italia have now suggested there has been a 'breakthrough' in discussions after Abraham spoke to Roma boss Mourinho.

It was previously reported that Roma had offered Abraham the No 9 shirt, regular playing time and a £4m salary.

It's now said that the club are willing to offer him a salary worth just over £5m in their efforts to get him ignore Arsenal's interest.

Director Tiago Pinto is in London after face-to-face negotiations with Abraham, who spoke to Roma manager Mourinho also over the phone.

Chelsea have already reportedly accepted Roma's offer of £34million for striker Abraham - but have included a buy-back clause as part of the deal.

Abraham did have some doubts over a move to Italy, with his family supporters of Arsenal and unsure over leaving London.

Roma boss Jose Mourinho has spoken to Abraham over the phone about a potential move

It would be a blow for Mikel Arteta as Arsenal are also keen to sign the 23-year-old striker

Chelsea's approval means the decision is in the British striker's hands with the transfer window shutting at the end of the month.

Although he has been included in the matchday squad for Chelsea's opening game of the season against Crystal Palace, Abraham has fallen down the pecking order at Stamford Bridge.

His hopes of game time at Chelsea have not been helped by the club's £98m signing of Romelu Lukaku from Inter Milan.

Edin Dzeko left Roma to fill the void left by Lukaku at Inter, meaning Mourinho is determined to land a striker by the end of the summer transfer window.

Arsenal's Alexandre Lacazette is seen as a potential alternative should Abraham decide not to move to Italy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Juventus are struggling in their pursuit of Sassuolo midfielder Manuel Locatelli after reportedly remaining unable to agree a deal after the first meeting.

There is an impasse over the price tag for Locatelli, who has caught the eye of several teams from around Europe after Euro 2020, and further talks are planned.

Goal have claimed that another summit will take place next week instead, with Juventus hopeful of finally reaching an agreement over the finances.

Juventus are struggling to buy Sassuolo and Italy star Manuel Locatelli with more talks planned

Locatelli has been a target for Juventus for a number of months, it is believed, and the Italy international is also keen to make the move to Turin.

So far, however, Sassuolo have remained steadfast over their asking price of €40 million (£35m), with the Old Lady currently unwilling to match it.

Sky Sport Italia believe that their proposed deal was worth €35m (£29.8m), but there is also speculation that Juventus may look to take him on loan.

Locatelli has caught the eye of several clubs around Europe after impressing during Euro 2020

As a result, Sassuolo have reportedly baulked at one of the clauses not being an obligation to buy if Juventus qualify for the Champions League.

But Juventus vice-chairman Pavel Nedvev has insisted that their valuation is 'appropriate' after the club tabled their bid.

'We spoke to Sassuolo and we made our offer, which we believe is appropriate for the current climate, with the way finances and the transfer market have been affected by Covid,' he told Sport Mediaset.

'We are convinced this is a good offer and it is the right one. We are always confident, naturally in negotiations there are things that must be clarified and resolved. When you want a player and that player wants you, it's clear.'

Juventus vice-president Pavel Nedved has insisted the club's valuation of Locatelli is a fair one

Locatelli has also courted interest from the Premier League, with Arsenal confirmed to have made a bid of their own earlier this summer.

Giovanni Carnevali, Sassuolo's CEO, revealed that the offer was made by the hierarchy at the Emirates, although Juventus remain firmly in the driving seat.

Carnevali told Sky Sport Italia: 'Tomorrow we'll have a direct contact with Juventus for Locatelli. He wants to join Juve.

'We'd be happy to sell Manuel (Locatelli) to Juve, but they need to pay the right fee.

Arsenal have also tabled an offer for Locatelli (left) but Juventus remain firmly in pole position

'Arsenal made a bid to sign him and also a new English club is now in the race'.

Carnevali also issued a warning to Locatelli's suitors, telling them they must wrap up negotiations in good time, otherwise the 23-year-old will not be allowed to leave.

Speaking to Gazzetta dello Sport, he said: 'We're waiting for the right bid for Locatelli. If it doesn't arrive, he'll stay here.

'We're not going to sell our best players later in August.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liverpool have hit out at sections of their fanbase following reports that 'homophobic chanting' was directed at Chelsea loanee Billy Gilmour during their 3-0 win at Norwich on Saturday.

The club reacted to a tweet posted by one of the club's fan groups, 'Kop Outs', which represents the LGBT+ community, who reported abuse aimed at the Scotland midfielder.

Kop Outs posted: 'Great result today marred by homophobic chanting by some of our fans targeting Chelsea loanee Billy Gilmour. If you can't support without resorting to bigoted nonsense, you don't understand YNWA [You'll Never Walk Alone].'

Norwich City's Billy Gillmour was reportedly targeted for homophobic abuse by Liverpool fans during the Reds' 3-0 victory at Carrow Road

The fan group posted the message having quoted a 2019 tweet from another equality organisation, 'Kick It Out', in reference to a 'rent boy' chant - which according to them has long been targeted at the west London club.

After the match, Liverpool referred to Kop Outs' tweet with a statement on the social media platform.

The club said: 'The chant is offensive and inappropriate - a message we have repeatedly communicated alongside Kop Outs.

Liverpool fans reacted after the match to a Tweet posted by fan group Kop Outs

Kop Outs referred to a 'rent boy' chant while claiming abuse was directed at Gilmour

'We urge supporters to remember the inclusive values of the club and to refrain from using it in the future.'

Liverpool Supporters Union Spirit of Shankly tweeted in response to the news later on Saturday night: 'Solidarity with our LGBT+ supporters & affiliates!'

Kick It Out have long campaigned for football supporters to stop making the 'rent boy' chants, previously stating: We are absolutely clear, the chant is homophobic and must be treated as such.'

Diogo Jota, Roberto Firmino and Mohamed Salah were all on target for Jurgen Klopp's men at Carrow Road as they comfortably defeated one of the Premier League's newly promoted sides.

Fans reacted with anger at the abuse aimed at Gilmour, with one supporter claiming that the slur indicated there was still much to be done to drive out homophobia from the game while praising Liverpool's statement.

Gilmour is currently at Norwich City where he is on loan from Chelsea this season. Pictured, Chelsea's Stamford Bridge stadium

They said: 'Glad you've said this but the fact that so many (particularly younger) fans don't see why that chant is homophobic shows there is still so much work to do in combatting the rampant homophobia in football.'

Other supporters claimed that the abuse lead to offending supporters being banned from football grounds as part of a zero tolerance approach on discrimination, saying: 'Anyone caught being homophobic should be banned from the ground. There needs to be zero tolerance on all forms of discrimination.'

One fan focused on Gilmour having to suffer abuse having only just started his career, with the 20-year-old having only made his senior debut for Chelsea in 2019.

They wrote: Shame LFC fans, Such a young upcoming player going through all these sorts of things. It’s [sic] absolute disgrace. #NoToHate #kickitout.

Meanwhile Norwich fans welcomed Liverpool's statement, saying: Thankyou for calling this out. Sorry about the few of our fans being idiots too, but was a great first match back.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ronaldinho has backed Paris Saint-Germain to finally clinch the Champions League while Piers Morgan believes the French giants will recoup the huge salary paid to Lionel Messi following the superstar's arrival at the Ligue 1 club.

Messi, 34, was officially announced as a PSG player on Tuesday after joining for free from Barcelona, with the Argentine bidding an emotional farewell to the Spanish club after a 21-year stay.

The 34-year-old landed at Le Bourget airport on Tuesday afternoon and was greeted by hordes of PSG fans who had been camped out since early morning to welcome the player they, and the rest of Europe, had believed would see out his career at Barcelona.

Celebrities and fans have reacted to Lionel Messi's huge move to Paris Saint-Germain

The 34-year-old has signed a two-year deal following his emotional exit from Barcelona

Messi had been spotted earlier in the day wearing the PSG kit and will have the No 30 shirt

Waving to his new supporters and wearing a Paris T-shirt, the Argentine looked ecstatic just two days after the tears over his Barcelona farewell.

His capture completes an incredible summer for PSG in which they have signed Messi, Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Georginio Wijnaldum on free transfers.

And Messi's former Barca team-mate Ronaldinho - who also played for PSG - has backed the French side to lift the Champions League, a prize they have long sought.

'It's a great joy to have played in these two clubs and now see my friend wearing this shirt, may there be many moments of joy Leo!!!' he wrote on Twitter.

'I'm also very happy with my partner @SergioRamos on the team and a super cast, I'm smelling Champions huh hahaha'.

Messi joins a host of high-profile names to arrive in Paris this summer, including Sergio Ramos

Messi's former Barca team-mate Ronaldinho has backed PSG to win the Champions League

Former GMB host Piers Morgan believes PSG will recoup Messi's huge salary on shirt sales

Messi was pictured holding a No 30 shirt upon his unveiling at the Parc des Princes, and PSG have already sold out of their home shirts with the name and number on the back.

Former Good Morning Britain host Piers Morgan said that the French club will recoup the mammoth £25-30million per season salary they are paying Messi through shirt sales.

'PSG will get their Messi money back in shirt sales in six months. Great business,' he tweeted.

Meanwhile, fans have had their say on PSG's all-star attacking trio of Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe expected to wreak havoc on all manner of defences this season.

Messi joins Neymar (left) and Kylian Mbappe (right in a star-studded attack for the French side

Football fans have labelled PSG's new star-studded attack as 'crazy' after Messi's move

Messi and Neymar will reunite after their time together in Barcelona. The duo worked superbly in tandem with Luis Suarez to win the Champions League in 2015 and will hope to do the same again with Mbappe in tow.

'This could be the last year we see the greatest footballer ever play at the peak of his powers, and now he’s alongside Mbappe & Neymar instead of Braithwaite & Dembele,' one fan said. 'Watch every match you can, drink every second in. You’ll not see another Lionel Messi in this lifetime.'

'Wow... Messi, Neymar and Mbappe... what a front three,' another fan posted. 'That is normally a FIFA/Football Manager line up'.

Another fan wrote that supporters should cherish seeing Messi with Neymar and Mbappe

Another fan joked about goalkeepers being on edge when facing PSG's front three. 'Goalkeepers when they realise PSG will line up with Neymar, Mbappe and Messi,' they posted with a GIF of a Man United fan nervously drinking a beer.

'Messi, Neymar and Mbappe almost seems unfair,' another supporter wrote. 'Crazy'.

Messi's move to PSG ends one of the greatest eras enjoyed by a footballer, with the Argentine almost singlehandedly leading Barcelona to its glories of recent years.

The 34-year-old is now 'excited' to get started with PSG as Mauricio Pochettino's star studded team set about conquering Europe this season.

Messi said on Tuesday night: ‘I am excited to begin a new chapter of my career at Paris Saint-Germain. Everything about the club matches my football ambitions. I am determined to help build something special for the club and the fans.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham have officially unveiled the signing of defender Cristian Romero from Atalanta in a deal worth £42.5million.

As reported by Sportsmail, Romero was understood to have been the first-choice target of Fabio Paratici, Spurs' director of football, after impressing in Serie A.

Romero and his agent Ciro Palermo jetted into London on Thursday to wrap up the switch, and Tottenham have now announced their fourth signing of the summer.

Tottenham have officially announced the signing of defender Cristian Romero from Atalanta

Romero spent one season on loan with Atalanta from Juventus, and the former took up their option - believed to have been worth £13.5m - to sign him permanently.

That allowed them to make a hefty profit as Romero has since been handed the No 4 shirt at Tottenham and is expected to drop straight into their backline.

Having told the club that he wanted to leave, Atalanta accepted the restructured offer from Tottenham, with the finishing touches taking place on Friday.

Romero, voted as the best defender in Serie A last season, joins Spurs in a deal worth £42.5m

Spurs have made Romero their fourth signing of the summer and handed him their No 4 shirt

His dazzling campaign in the top-flight in Italy saw Romero voted as the best defender, and it is Spurs who have won the race for his signature.

He opened up on the move at the airport to Italian media before jetting into England, and revealed that the 'project' pitched to him was the decisive factor.

'I thank them [Tottenham], from the first day they were interested in me, the project they have for me I liked and so for this I chose Tottenham,' Romero told Sky Italia.

'Now I have to answer on the pitch, but first I want to thank all of Bergamo and Atalanta and all my team-mates.

Speaking at the airport before jetting to England, Romero spoke highly of Tottenham's 'project'

'The coach who made me grow in a way that I never thought, I say thank you to everyone.

'I am happy to have made a right choice again, I am very happy for the year I did at Atalanta.

'I thank all of Bergamo, I am sorry to leave it but I have to think about my career and I hope this is a good choice.

'I have to continue to grow and do so, I have to think about doing well now.

Romero told Atalanta that he wanted to leave and the club accepted Spurs' restructured offer

'It's been an incredible year for me, I never thought I'd get to this level.'

Atlanta have been quick to replace outgoing Romero - with Juventus confirming they had sent Merih Demiral out on loan to the Major League Soccer club.

Meanwhile, Tottenham remain locked in talks over a £15m move for Bologna centre back Takehiro Tomiyasu as they look to build again after Toby Alderweireld's exit.

It is also understood that they are fielding offers for Davinson Sanchez, who remains an option for Sevilla.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some Olympic horses in Tokyo are being distracted by decoration of a sumo wrestler right next to one of the jump fences, according to the Games' riders.

Each of the fences is decorated with unique artwork that relates to a part of Japanese culture. For example, one fence dedicated to Tokyo's skyline and another pays tribute to the Japanese crane creature which brings luck, longevity and fidelity.

However, the tenth showjumping fence contains a statue of a sumo wrestler which the horses are confusing for a real person, according to Team GB athlete Harry Charles.

Olympic horses are being distracted by a statue of a sumo wrestler next to one of the fences

Team GB's Harry Charles (above) claims the statue (right) is scaring some of the animals

The 17-year-old British rider told the Associated Press: 'I did notice four or five horses really taking a spook to that. As you come around, you see a big guy's (butt).

The tenth fence, called the Sumo Tower and the Wrestler, stands at 1.62 metres tall and is the joint-tallest fence that horses and riders have to clear at the Tokyo Games.

Charles himself may choose to blame the decorative artwork for his performance on Wednesday as his horse Romeo 88 failed to clear four fences and the British teenager had to retire before the end of his first round.

Riders are greeted with the rear end of the sumo wrestler when they come round one corner

Meanwhile, Scott Brash fared slightly better in the individual showjumping event on Wednesday, enjoying an impeccable first round on board Hello Jefferson but a time fault cost him his medal chances.

Brash did, however, pay tribute to the artwork present on the fences at this summer's Olympic Games, despite his team-mate Charles' concerns.

The 35-year-old added: 'You know it's going to be colorful coming here. You know it's going to be decorative. And it's beautiful, you know?

'It's fantastic. That's what makes it a championship. If it was just plain old jumps, it'd be just like any other week.'

Each of the fences at Tokyo 2020's equestrian park pays tribute to Japanese culture

However, not everybody shared that positivity as Israel's Teddy Vlock describing the sumo wrestler on fence ten as ghost-like who is prepared to charge at you.

'It is very realistic,' the 23-year-old said. 'It does look like a person, and that's a little spooky.

'You know, horses don't want to see a guy, like, looking intense next to a jump, looking like he's ready to fight you.'

The decorative artwork on the fences did nothing to distract Team GB's Ben Maher, 38, who put in a sensational jump-off performance on Wednesday to bring the individual showjumping gold back to Great Britain.

Israel's Teddy Vlock described the sumo wrestler right next to fence No 10 as ghost-like

The wrestler did not put off Team GB's Ben Maher (middle) who took the individual showjumping gold

Tasked with defending Nick Skleton MBE's gold medal from Rio 2016, Maher waited for all 29 riders to go first before jumping last to finish third in the opening round.

In a dramatic jump-off involving the top six riders, Maher recorded a time of 37.85 seconds in the jump-off which ended up being 17 hundredths of a second faster than his closest rival Peder Fredricson from Sweden.

It is Maher's first Olympic gold medal since London 2012 and Team GB's fifth equestrian medal of the current Tokyo Games so far, with the team jumping event still to come.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal have officially confirmed the arrival of defender Ben White from Brighton, with the centre back joining on a five-year deal.

The Gunners agreed a £50million fee with the Seagulls to snap up the highly-rated 23-year-old earlier this month after backing up his fine loan spell with Leeds with another impressive campaign for Brighton last season.

He is Mikel Arteta's third senior signing of the summer after sealing deals for full back Nuno Tavares from Benfica and midfielder Albert Sambi Lokonga from Anderlecht.

Arsenal have confirmed the signing of Brighton centre back Ben White on a long-term deal

Gunners boss Mikel Arteta (L) was keen to bolster his back line after a disappointing season

White admitted he is 'buzzing' to be at Arsenal in his first interview as a Gunners player

Sorry we're late...



Traffic was a nightmare 😉 pic.twitter.com/sO1T9981Rw — Arsenal (@Arsenal) July 30, 2021

The England international has been handed the No 4 shirt, previously given to William Saliba, who will be spending this season on loan at Marseille after struggling to earn the trust of Arteta.

Speaking about his move, White told Arsenal's website: 'Obviously I've known for quite a while and it's taken longer than I thought it would, but I'm buzzing to be here.'

He added: 'I don't think I needed too much convincing. Obviously Arsenal speaks for itself and I spoke to the gaffer a number of times during the summer. I got good vibes and the way the gaffer wants to play, I think I can produce quality in this team and hopefully get Arsenal back.

White's agent Alex Levack said the huge move was a just reward for the 23-year-old. 'I could not be prouder of a more genuine and hardworking individual than Ben. He deserves all the plaudits and I cannot wait to see what the future brings', he said.

White's agent Alex Levack said the huge move was a just reward for the 23-year-old

White has been handed the No 4 shirt previously given to French defender William Saliba

His displays earned him a call-up to England's Euro 2020 squad, although he did not feature

Gunners boss Arteta meanwhile added: 'Ben was a top target for us and it's great that we've completed his signing.

'Ben has been educated with two very good clubs, Brighton and Leeds, in recent seasons. He has benefitted well from two very good coaching set-ups and has shown with both Brighton and on loan with Leeds what a strong talent he is.

'Ben is an intelligent defender who is very comfortable with the ball at his feet and his style fits perfectly with us. And of course, he is still young, so his age and profile fits with what we are building here. We are all looking forward to Ben being central to our future long-term plans.'

Technical director Edu also said: 'Ben has been a key target this summer. He has so many qualities which make us so excited he's joining us.

'Ben's a young English player with a great future. He's very strong defensively, good on the ball with a great passing range. We're delighted Ben's signed and we look forward to him growing with us.'

The Gunners confirmed he would now take part in training with his new team-mates ahead of the weekend's game against Chelsea but it remains to be seen if he will be involved in the pre-season friendly as part of The Mind Series.

He is the third senior summer signing after Albert Sambi Lokonga (L) and Nuno Tavares (R)

White, who made his name playing on loan with Leeds United in the Championship in 2019-20, made 39 appearances for Brighton last term after being thrown straight back into Graham Potter's squad following his stand-out spell at Elland Road.

He ensured the team stayed in the Premier League once again and helped keep 12 clean sheets and earned a call-up to England's preliminary Euro 2020 squad. He didn't end up making the final cut of 26 players, but was a late call-up after an injury to right back Alexander Trent-Arnold.

He did not feature at the competition and had been enjoying some time off in Mykonos before returning home to complete the biggest move of his career.

White underwent his medical during the week before being officially unveiled as an Arsenal player.

White started his career with Southampton before being released aged 16 and joining Brighton in 2014. He was loaned out three times before getting his first-team shot - and was playing in League Two with Newport County as recently as 2018.

The Gunners did not confirm if White would take part in the weekend's friendly against Chelsea

Arsenal have been eager to bolster their back line after David Luiz left on a free transfer and Saliba was sent out on loan again, and White will be hopeful of nailing down a regular spot under boss Arteta.

A poor season saw the team finish in eighth place, although they actually had the third-best defensive record in the division, with just 39 let in - and the presence of White can give them an even more solid foundation to build upon.

The Gunners are still hopeful of strengthening their defensive unit further and are targeting Sheffield United keeper Aaron Ramsdale.

The Blades currently value him at around £32m, a price Arsenal are unwilling to pay, but Sportsmail understands they have made a bid £18m plus add-ons up to £26m.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trainer Hugo Palmer changed tactics on Ebro River and it paid off as the 12-1 shot landed the Group One Phoenix Stakes at the Curragh.

The Shane Foley-ridden winner had been beaten in his three starts since streaking home in the Listed National Stakes at Sandown in April. But Ebro River, who is owned by Al Shaqab Racing, relished being allowed to stride on by Foley as he fought off Dr Zempf by three-quarters of a length with favourite Go Bears Go a further head back in third.

Victory was made sweeter for Palmer because Ebro River is a son of the trainer's 2016 winner of the 2,000 Guineas, Galileo Gold.

Shane Foley rode Ebro River to victory at the Group One Phoenix Stakes at Curragh on Sunday

Ebro River is a son 2016 winner of the 2,000 Guineas Galileo Gold, also trained by Hugo Palmer

It was also Palmer's first Group One win since Galileo Gold landed the St James's Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot in 2016.

Palmer, who said the Galileo Gold connection had filled him with a 'father's pride', added: 'The plan was to ride him differently and let him use his stride.

'James Doyle couldn't ride Ebro River but he has been a big part of this horse's development.

'We talked about what do. We've been trying to get him to settle in behind and he is actually much happier in front. Sometimes you have to let horses do what they want rather than fight them.'

The Middle Park Stakes at Newmarket in September is Ebro River's likely next target. But Palmer said the jury was out on whether the colt would be a sprinter or step up to a mile to become a 2,000 Guineas contender. Palmer said: 'He is not all about this year. He will have a three-year-old career as well'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rio Ferdinand believes that Chelsea will feel they will be able to compete with Manchester City for the Premier League title this season.

Having won the Champions League last season, Chelsea lifted further silverware on Wednesday as they beat Villarreal on penalties to win the UEFA Super Cup. Romelu Lukaku is set to join from Inter Milan and Ferdinand was full of praise for the winning mentality that Thomas Tuchel's squad possess.

Ferdinand stressed that given the impact Tuchel has made there will now be greater expectation on Chelsea to be successful.

Rio Ferdinand believes Chelsea will feel they can win the Premier League title this season

Ferdinand stressed that after their success Chelsea will be expected to achieve further glory

Speaking on BT Sport, Ferdinand said: 'The big difference for them this season is what's expected of them now. There wasn't an expectancy last season, there is now, because they've got their hands on two trophies - they've won the Champions League and now this.

'The winning mentality we've been talking about - you can see it's in the building. There is a real good sense of brotherhood within that squad. This team now are expected to compete for the Premier League and all the big trophies.'

Chelsea finished fourth in the Premier League last season, some 19 points adrift of champions City.

Eni Aluko believes that the expected arrival of Romelu Lukaku could prove to be a key factor

Eni Aluko, however, feels that the signing of Lukaku could give Chelsea the edge in the title race, especially if Manchester City are unable to bring in Harry Kane.

Aluko said: 'For me Lukaku is huge. Man City still have a question mark up front. I think that's the edge Chelsea are going to have. If Harry Kane doesn't come in, I think will push Chelsea to the wire.'

Joe Cole concurred, with the former Chelsea player adding that Lukaku will help Chelsea to pose a threat from set-pieces.

Cole said: 'City have to go and get Kane now. Chelsea's top scorer last season was Jorginho with seven in the Premier League, Lukaku's not going to score less thna 20 unless he gets injured - his record suggests that. He's 28 and in his prime.

'Also, Chelsea are going to be a real threat from set pieces. They're building this team where you can't see any weaknesses.'

Chelsea prevailed on penalties against Villarreal in the Super Cup, with goalkeeper Kepa, who was brought on as a substitute, proving the hero. The game had finished 1-1 after extra-time, with Hakim Ziyech putting Chelsea ahead before Gerard Moreno levelled.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain could be forced to sign Napoli defender Kalidou Koulibaly to cover the void left by Sergio Ramos following the news of his injury.

Ramos picked up a calf injury after joining the French giants on a two-year deal earlier this month. As a result, he has been ruled out of their pre-season friendly against Sevilla on Tuesday 27.

Therefore, the Ligue 1 side could move for Koulibaly - who they believe could not only down the fort during Ramos' absence but become an excellent partner for former Real Madrid defender.

Paris Saint-Germain could be forced to sign Napoli defender Kalidou Koulibaly this summer

Ramos ended his 16-year association with Real Madrid earlier this month and had opened to pull on his PSG for the first time against Sevilla.

However, the veteran defender will have to wait to make his debut after picking up another injury.

PSG are reluctant to rush Ramos' return given his history of injuries - having only made 21 appearances in all competitions across the entire campaign last season and only seven in the year of 2021.

Therefore, according to Gazzetta, PSG could make a move for Napoli defender Koulibaly - who is valued at £43million.

The move would be to cover the void left by Sergio Ramos following the news of his injury

However, PSG believe he will become an excellent partner for former Real Madrid defender

As it stands, Koulibaly has two years left on his contract, but he has frequently been linked with a move away from Napoli in recent years.

Having signed from Genk in 2014, Koulibaly has made 283 appearances for Napoli and helped the club win the Coppa Italia in 2020.

However, Napoli are said to be keen to cash in on defender this summer and could open to offers from the French giants.

Signing Koulibaly would add to what has already been a busy summer for PSG with goalkeeper Gianluigi Donnarumma joining on a free transfer following his departure from AC Milan, while Georginio Wijnaldum and Achraf Hakimi have also signed.

The Ligue 1 giants also landed Lionel Messi - signing the former Barcelona star in a two-year deal worth a staggering £35million a season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Burnley have made an offer of £13.5million for Maxwel Cornet and are now able to speak to the Lyon left-back.

As reported by The Athletic, Burnley manager Sean Dyche is eager to secure the signing of the 24-year-old and the Clarets have made the best bid for Cornet so far this summer.

If Cornet does depart then it would provide Lyon with funds that could be used to sign Xherdan Shaqiri from Liverpool.

Burnley have made an offer of £13.5m for Maxwel Cornet and have permission to talk to him

Burnley manager Sean Dyche is eager to bring in Cornet as he looks to strengthen his squad

Cornet is also capable of operating on the left side of midfield and has featured prominently for Lyon over the past year and a half.

The Ivory Coast international has just under two years remaining on his contract at Lyon.

Having started his career at Metz, Cornet made the switch to Lyon in 2015 and has proceeded to make 251 appearances for the club.

So far in this transfer window Burnley have brought in defender Nathan Collins from Stoke for £12million, while Wayne Hennessey and Jacob Bedeau have also joined the club.

If Lyon sell Cornet then they could have sufficient funds to bring in Liverpool's Xherdan Shaqiri

Shaqiri, who could leave Liverpool before the closure of the transfer window, is also reportedly the subject of interest from Lazio.

Last season Shaqiri was restricted to just 14 Premier League appearances for Liverpool.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From my perch on the sofa, I can see my two daughters, Macy and Maya, running riot in the garden. My little boy, Jackson, is playing by my feet. It’s just right for kicking a ball around with your son.

But I’ll never kick a ball around with Jackson. I can’t even reach out and touch him, let alone leap from my perch, toss him over my shoulder and charge headlong into the garden. And I can’t even burble, let alone tell him I love him.

I try to live in the present as much as possible. Savour each moment. But I can’t help looking back. Sometimes, I picture myself as I was, that speedy kid with the wicked swerve and sidestep. I find it difficult to comprehend that my body was ever able to do those things. The same body that struggles to get off the sofa, feed itself or send a text.

Rob Burrow has given an emotional insight into his battle with MND in a brand new book

And it all started with the word ‘consistency’. I was presenting an award at a Leeds Rhinos dinner and had to make a little speech but I couldn’t get the bloody word out.

Kev Sinfield, my old Rhinos captain, asked if anything was up with me. A couple of the other lads thought I’d been drinking.

I was also struggling to get out of bed and nodding off on the sofa at 6pm, like an old fella. I didn’t think much of it, even when my arms started twitching. I was under quite a lot of stress. Things were a bit rocky with my coaching job at Leeds and we were in the process of moving house. I thought it might have had something to do with my medication for post-career aches and pains.

But my wife Lindsey insisted I ask the Rhinos doctor about it. When an MRI scan and blood tests came back clear, we were quite optimistic. We were laughing and joking on the way into the clinic for the second consultation with the neurologist.

But he said: ‘It’s not good news. I’m sorry to tell you it’s motor neurone disease.’

He is grateful to see his children enjoying life - watching them running around with a smile on their faces gives him a glimmer of hope

‘Are you sure?’ I replied.

‘We wouldn’t be telling you unless we were,’ he said.

The rest of that consultation is a blur. I don’t remember Lindsey asking how long I had to live. I don’t remember the consultant saying I had a year or two.

I do remember asking if Lindsey was OK. She had a bit of a cry and we cuddled. Then I said: ‘Thank God it’s me and not you or the kids.’

When I phoned my parents to tell them the news, Dad hit the deck. I could hear Mum sobbing uncontrollably in the background. At home Lindsey also collapsed in the hallway.

It wasn’t a pretty scene. There’s not much pretty about MND. Then we took the girls swimming and tried to act normal.

We wanted to tell the kids before that Christmas, in the hope that it might clear some of the gloom. When Lindsey started explaining that daddy was ill, Maya looked up and said: ‘What are you telling us this for? It’s boring.’

Burrow recounted the day of his diagnosis and the pain he and his family have since suffered

With that, she went back to playing with her toys. That lifted the fog but it soon descended again.

One evening, I gathered Macy and Maya in my arms and hugged them against my chest, harder than I’d ever done, before taking Jackson upstairs for a feed. I pictured him on his first day of school, looking smiley and proud as punch in his smart new uniform. I pictured him on a rugby field. I pictured us walking hand in hand towards Headingley.

It was a collage of the impossible, my own personal movie reel of things that would never happen. Tears rolled down my cheeks as I rocked Jackson to sleep.

Having said all that, we now have had a strict no-crying policy at home, at least for the adults. I can hear Lindsey downstairs now, making breakfast for the kids. Soon she’ll drag me out of bed before showering me, getting me dressed, helping me down the stairs, giving me my medication and feeding me. Then she’ll start her day job, which during the coronavirus pandemic meant doing virtual physiotherapy consultations from home. Later in the day it’s the same routine in reverse.

Things started deteriorating fast in March 2020, just three months after my diagnosis. That’s when Lindsey’s role changed. Almost overnight, she went from being a wife to my full-time carer.

I’m too weak to make myself a coffee. Just turning in bed is murder. It’s difficult watching Lindsey do so much. It makes me feel worthless.

But Lindsey’s constantly cracking the whip, being the bossy wife. She told me off once for not communicating enough with the kids. But it isn’t easy, because they’re like little streaks of lightning, running all over the house. By the time I’ve typed ‘How was your day?’ in the machine I was using and pressed ‘Play’, they’ve disappeared. Moments to connect are constantly slipping through my grasp, because they don’t last long in children’s heads.

Burrow has struggled with everyday life such as making a coffee or turning in bed

More and more, I’m separate from what’s going on around me. I absorb everything, but I’m not really a part of it. For example, it’s about 10 metres from my perch on the sofa to the door leading on to the garden. But one afternoon, when Lindsey’s brother was kicking a ball about with Jackson, it seemed like 10 miles.

It was like looking through the bars of a prison cell. But the kids can lift me, too. The upside of this is that I am always there. I spend so much time with them. When the lockdown rules loosened and I didn’t have to shield as tightly, we headed to the caravan park in Primrose Valley, where Mum and Dad used to take us when we were kids.

When I watch Jackson charging around the fields, happy as Larry, I can see myself. It’s two for the price of one, creating new memories while reliving my childhood.

The other day, someone said to me: “Is it on your mind that this might be the last family holiday you ever have?”

To be honest, I hadn’t given it a thought. There might not be much treatment for MND, but when I watch my kids running around with big smiles on their faces, giggling and screaming and hollering, it feels like I’ve been cured.

On a rugby field I was always quick, with a wicked swerve and sidestep. When you see me in old home videos, I look like a wind- up toy or a spinning top. If it seems like I’m slightly out of control, that’s because I was.

My brain didn’t always know where my legs were taking me. Luckily, my opponents didn’t know either. I’d pop up all over the field, as if by magic, and cause mayhem. I beat a lot of tackles and scored a lot of tries. The problem was my size. Every week, I was the smallest player on the pitch.

When I was scouted by Leeds Rhinos, people said I was too small. When I joined the Rhinos academy, people said I was too small. When I made my Rhinos first-team debut, people said I was too small. When I was first picked for my country, people said I was too small. I completely understand it. If someone else my size had tried to make it in rugby league, I’d have written them off in a heartbeat: “Not a chance. Ridiculous. Try becoming a jockey”.

He remembers the speed and footwork he was blessed with during his time with Leeds Rhinos

One coach said I would need a “bloody big heart” to make it. A match official once mistook me for a ball boy. When someone asked Leeds coach Daryl Powell if he had ever seen a smaller player he said: “Only in the Under 10s”.

But it didn’t stop me. I had a fabulous career and perhaps one of the clips people watch most was typical of what I could sometimes do. I had already won four Super League Grand Finals with Leeds when we lined up against Saint Helens at Old Trafford in 2011 but I was hungry for more. Life had been difficult as coach Brian McDermott had told me he no longer saw me as a starting player. I had been used most often off the bench and had seriously thought about leaving the club.

As usual, it was windy and drizzly in Manchester and the game soon settled into a typical showpiece arm-wrestle. It was 2-2 when I was introduced, after about 25 minutes. To say I was desperate to do something special is an understatement. And a couple of minutes later, having received a pass just inside the Saints’ half, I saw my chance.

Rhinos fans will know exactly what happened next; the rest of you will have to look it up on YouTube. But here’s the gist of it.

Burrow is worshipped by Rhinos fans - especially for a moment of magic vs St Helens in 2011

I noticed one of their defenders was slow in turning, creating a gap, so I decided to go for it. That’s the way I ran my game. I was always instinctive. I stepped off my left foot, headed straight for the biggest guy, went round him, before ducking under another defender’s arm. I was now on autopilot.

I sidestepped Saints full-back Paul Wellens, putting him on his backside, and managed to skip out of an attempted tap-tackle. But I still had three or four defenders closing in. I remember thinking: “I’m going to have to duck again, otherwise I’m gonna get smacked”.

I did get dragged down close to the line but I had enough momentum to slide over. What a moment.

The game was actually level again with 10 minutes left so I thought it was time to rip up the playbook and freestyle again. This time I was just inside our half when I got the ball. I went on a lateral run, before straightening up and throwing a dummy and setting up a try for Ryan Hall.

Having already won the Harry Sunderland [Man of the Match] Trophy in 2007, I now became the first player to win it unanimously, with all 37 judges voting for me.

He is refusing let MND make him quit and vowed to fight 'tooth and nail' against the disease

I’d be a liar if I said it didn’t feel like a big two fingers to Brian McDermott but there was no point in dwelling on all that. I’d just won my fifth Grand Final with Leeds and would win three more before I was done.

It wasn’t so much that I ignored the naysayers, it’s more that I didn’t really hear them. When they said I was too small, it went in one ear, out the other. I suppose you’d call that focus.

And that’s how I am now, 100 per cent focused. Every day MND tries to convince me to quit — tells me I’m too small, that I don’t have what it takes — but I refuse to listen.

MND picked on the wrong bloke, just like opponents on the rugby field always picked on the wrong bloke. Thought they’d run over me, trample me to dust.

I can’t keep dodging the disease for ever, but I won’t stop trying. I’m not thinking about the full-time hooter. I’m still fighting tooth and nail. That’s how it has to be.

Adapted from TOO MANY REASONS TO LIVE by Rob Burrow with Ben Dirs, published by Macmillan at £20. © Rob Burrow 2021. To order a copy for £17.80 (offer valid to 22/8/21; UK P&P free on orders over £20), visit www.mailshop.co.uk/books or call 020 3308 9193.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bordeaux winger Samuel Kalu collapsed on the pitch before making an astonishing recovery and even playing on for several minutes before he was substituted.

The 23-year-old Nigerian dropped to the ground just five minutes into their Ligue 1 clash with Marseille amid soaring temperatures at the Stade Velodrome.

There was instant concern for Kalu as players from both sides called for medical attention.

There was concern for Samuel Kalu as he collapsed when forming a defensive wall

The players on the field called for medical attention after his collapse in the soaring heat

Players from both Bordeaux and Marseille formed a human shield around the 23-year-old

Miraculously he recovered and even played on before he was substituted after 14 minutes

The players then formed a human shield around Kalu as he was being treated on the field in scenes similar to what was seen when Christian Eriksen suffered a cardiac arrest in Demark's Euro 2020 opener against Finland.

Thankfully, Kalu made a remarkable recovery and was able to get up to his feet.

He was walked off the pitch by his teammates while holding an ice pack against his head.

Even more astonishingly, Kalu then returned to carry on playing despite what had just happened.

Common sense seemed to prevail though as the matter was taken out of his hands when he was substituted for Remi Oudin.

The Nigerian was given a standing ovation by those in attendance for his brave attempts to play on following his collapse.

Kalu (right) collapsed previously in a training session with the Nigerian international team

The cause of the incident is not yet known but it is not the first time he has collapsed on a football pitch.

Kalu collapsed during the Nigerian team's training session during the African Cup of Nations back in 2019.

That particular incident was described at the time as a result of 'severe dehydration'.

His collapse for Bordeaux brought back memories of Eriksen's collapse during the Euros.

Eriksen’s life was saved when CPR was administered to him on the pitch and his heart was re-started with a defibrillator before he was taken to hospital, where he recovered after undergoing heart surgery.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Inter Milan midfielder Christian Eriksen has sent a touching video message to a nine-year-old girl to wish her well ahead of an operation that will see her fitted with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).

Eriksen underwent a similar procedure earlier this year, just days after his sudden cardiac arrest while playing for Denmark against Finland in their opening Euro 2020 group stage match. He was revived on the pitch.

Now thankfully on the road to recovery, Eriksen has taken the time to record a short clip for Evie, in which he has explained he is sure she will 'get back to normal life very quickly afterwards', because 'I know I did'.

Christian Eriksen (left) has sent a message of support to a young girl (right) before she undergoes the same heart surgery he went through earlier this year

Nogle gange bliver man #endelafnogetstørre… Via Sociale Medier, kom jeg i kontakt med denne søde engelske famile, med... Posted by Kasper Lynge Esmann on Monday, August 9, 2021

Evie, a young girl from England, idolises Eriksen, and her family had tried to contact the former Tottenham man. When their efforts proved fruitless, Kasper Lynge Esmann from Denmark wrote a letter to the Danish Football Association.

Eriksen then replied with the heart-warming message, where he shared his kind words for Evie and wished her all the best for the future.

'Hi Evie, it's Christian,' he said. 'Thanks for the lovely letter, I just read it through tonight. I hope you are feeling comfortable and confident going into the operation.

'It's never fun to be in hospital, but I'm sure the doctors know what they are doing and they will help you.

Eriksen 'is in excellent physical and mental condition', his club Inter Milan recently revealed

Eriksen returned to Inter's training ground and was treated to a warm reception by team-mates

'I'm sure you will get back to normal life very quickly afterwards, I know I did. I'm sure it'll be the same with you.

'I just wanted to wish you all the best and hopefully maybe we'll see each other in the future.'

Kasper admitted he was left with tears in his eyes after receiving a text with the video, which he then sent on to Evie's mother, Nicci. She has revealed her family have been 'overwhelmed' by the support.

The midfielder suffered a cardiac arrest during Denmark's Euro 2020 tie with Finland in June

'The post was shared nearly 500 times and reached a lovely man in Denmark, named Kasper, who helped to get this message to us,' she posted on Facebook.

'What an amazing man you are Christian Eriksen, thank you so much for fulfilling Evie's wish. Kindness is everything. Thank you everyone.'

Meanwhile, Eriksen returned to Inter's training ground this month for the first time after collapsing in harrowing scenes earlier this summer. The Serie A club have revealed he is 'in excellent physical and mental condition'.

It is not yet clear whether Eriksen will be able to play football again, but he has been continuing his recovery in Copenhagen after being released from hospital.

Eriksen has been continuing his recovery from his harrowing cardiac arrest in Copenhagen

He shared a reassuring picture taken from his hospital bed and told his followers he was 'fine'

During his visit to the complex, Eriksen was seen being greeted by his team-mates. He hugged Lautaro Martinez, Milan Skriniar and new boss Simone Inzaghi, and was given a rousing round of applause in the gym.

Eriksen, and Evie's, ICD will regulate any further disturbances in their heartbeats. It is a small device connected to the heart by wires through the veins, and sends an electrical pulse to correct irregular rhythms.

Following six days of treatment in hospital, Eriksen was discharged, and Morten Boesen, Denmark's team doctor, stressed the importance of the procedure.

'This device is necessary after a cardiac attack due to rhythm disturbances,' he said.

It is not yet clear whether Eriksen will be able to play football again following the incident

'Christian has accepted the solution and the plan has been confirmed by specialists nationally and internationally who all recommend the same treatment.'

The day after Eriksen's cardiac arrest, Boesen revealed that the playmaker was 'gone' before being brought back to life on the pitch.

'We did cardiac resuscitation, it was cardiac arrest,' he said. 'How close were we? I don't know. We got him back after one defib so that's quite fast.

'We don't have an explanation why it happened.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Si Woo Kim set an unwanted PGA Tour record as he ran up an astonishing 13 at the par-three 11th on the final day of the WGC-FedEx St Jude Invitational on Sunday.

Kim went from five over par to 15 over in just one hole, and his score was the highest on a par-three in a regular PGA Tour event since at least 1983, when the Tour began its enhanced statistical coverage.

The 11th hole at TPC Southwind in Memphis is of similar design to the iconic 17th at TPC Sawgrass, a venue which holds special memories for Kim following his Players Championship victory in 2017.

Si Woo Kim shot five balls into the water and scored an astonishing 13 on a par-three hole

But the South Korean will not look back on the 155-yard 11th hole with much fondness after he put five balls in the water, beginning with his initial tee shot which drifted too far right of the green.

Kim’s next four shots from the drop zone just 96 yards out all found the water before he managed to find dry land with his 11th shot, which settled in the rear rough. He chipped to a foot and completed an excellent up-and-down to avoid a 14.

Kim finished 29 shots adrift of the trio of Abraham Ancer, Sam Burns and Hideki Matsuyama who finished 16 under par to go to a three-way play-off. Mexico’s Ancer prevailed on the second play-off hole to clinch his first Tour victory.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jurgen Klopp faces an anxious wait for news on Andy Robertson's fitness after the Liverpool left-back hobbled away from Anfield with a worrying ankle injury on Sunday.

The Reds were 1-0 up against Athletic Bilbao in a pre-season friendly when Robertson went in for a challenge on Alex Berenguer by the corner flag.

There was a loud clatter as they players collided, with the Scottish star left rolling around in agony clutching his ankle.

Andy Robertson hobbled off injured on Sunday as Liverpool took on Athletic Bilbao

The left-back challenged with Bilbao's Alex Berenguer and came off worst in the Anfield game

Robertson's absence for the start of the season would be a massive blow to Jurgen Klopp

Naby Keita was his closest ally when the challenged happened, and the midfielder instantly leant down to check on his team-mate.

The rest of the Liverpool XI strolled over too as Robertson buried his face in the turf, later walking off slowly with his weight on two physios.

The star looked almost shell-shocked as he hobbled away, clearly in a searing pain and he passed by Klopp in the dugout en-route to the physio room.

The Liverpool boss issued an update post-match: 'We don't know obviously at the moment how serious it is.

Footage of the Robertson injury



pic.twitter.com/qeM9DaL0wx — Anfield Central (@Anfield_CentraI) August 8, 2021

Jurgen Klopp will be desperate for good news on his star left-back ahead of the season start

'It was pretty painful, that's why Andy went off. He got the ball on the front of his foot then twisted his ankle.

'The pain settled already but we can't say anything further without further assessment tomorrow. He will have a scan and then we will know more.'

Berenguer survived the challenge fine enough to score an equaliser in the second-half, tucking home Inaki Williams' cross to leave the scores at 1-1 at full-time.

Klopp has been haunted by defensive injuries in the last 12 months, and won't fancy a fresh one with the 2021-22 Premier League campaign less than a week away.

Liverpool's title defence collapsed last season after long-term injuries to Virgil van Dijk and Joe Gomez in the early matches led to a nightmare selection crisis.

Robertson's injury will be a worry for Klopp, who admitted it looked 'pretty awful' for the Scot

Absentees piled-up with Joel Matip and Fabinho also enduring periods on the sidelines, with Jordan Henderson and Under 23 players like Nat Phillips having to step-up at centre-back.

The Anfield side were also knocked-out of the Champions League in the quarter finals by Real Madrid, and Klopp will want all his available first-choice stars to help them get back on track this season.

They'll start their season on Saturday with a trip to Carrow Road to play newly promoted Norwich.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A German modern pentathlon coach has been thrown out of the Tokyo Olympics for punching a horse during competition.

Kim Raisner was trying to assist German athlete Annika Schleu as she battled to control Saint Boy ahead of her showjumping round in the women's event on Friday.

Athletes are given only 20 minutes to bond with an unfamiliar horse before their round and Schleu, who had been leading the field, was in tears as she came into the ring.

Saint Boy, who had already proven a tricky ride for his first athlete, bucked and refused to trot around the course, with a number of people on social media raising concerns about the way Schleu and Raisner were treating the horse.

German modern pentathlon coach Kim Raisner disqualified for punching her athlete's horse

Germany's Annika Schleu failed to control her horse Saint Boy in the showjumping round

Raisner (right) was then seen punching the back of Saint Boy as Schleu was struggling

Bundestrainerin Kim Raisner: "Hau mal richtig drauf. Hau richtig drauf!" Dann schlägt sie selber noch mit der Faust zu (Sekunde 23).@DOSB Das muss Konsequenzen haben.#ARD #Fünfkampf pic.twitter.com/JIBpqEGR6M — Max Möhrike Ⓥ (@der_veganer) August 6, 2021

The world governing body for modern pentathlon, the UIPM, acknowledged those concerns ahead of the men's event on Saturday and then issued a statement revealing Raisner's punishment.

The statement read: 'The UIPM Executive Board (EB) has given a black card to the Germany team coach Kim Raisner, disqualifying her from the remainder of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games.

'The EB reviewed video footage that showed Ms Raisner appearing to strike the horse Saint Boy, ridden by Annika Schleu, with her fist during the riding discipline of the women's modern pentathlon competition.

Saint Boy did not go around the course and Raisner was seen punching the horse with her first

Schleu, who was leading the field, was in tears after going around the course with Saint Boy

'Her actions were deemed to be in violation of the UIPM competition rules, which are applied to all recognised modern pentathlon competitions including the Olympic Games.

'The EB decision was made today at the Tokyo Stadium before the resumption of the men's modern pentathlon competition.'

Raisner is a former modern pentathlete who competed at the 2004 Olympics in Athens.

Schelu's horse appeared spooked before and after entering the arena, and aimlessly made his way around the challenging course while refusing several jumps.

Despite holding a 24-second lead, Schleu fell out of medal contention after the equestrian leg

Coverage seemingly showed an emotional Schleu, 31, in floods of tears before even beginning her performance. While on top of her mount, she looked to get the panicked Saint Boy to co-operate using her whip.

Having then made their way into the arena, Schleu set about attempting to salvage her dreams of a podium finish. However, despite the horse clearing four sets of hurdles to begin with, he then collided with the fifth.

That brought a rapid end to her lead, and Saint Boy then buckled despite Schleu looking to guide him around the course for another go. In the end, she was made to finish with zero points, leaving her rock bottom.

Having narrowly missed out on a medal in Rio 2016, after finishing fourth, Schleu was again left devastated. Her tears were broadcast for all to see as Saint Boy jumped around, remaining alarmed and in no fit state to compete.

Samantha Murray, a silver medallist, believes that the performance was down to 'rider error'

She had held the equivalent of a 24-second advantage after the fencing and swimming legs, but fell out of contention for silverware for the laser round.

Samantha Murray, an Olympic silver medallist and world champion, believes that the nightmare nature of the performance came about largely due to 'rider error'.

'When you try to break it down, you can see that it's largely rider error, the mistakes,' she said. 'I think she was quite put off, because when this horse first went into the arena in the first round, she was eliminated on this horse.

'That probably set a bit of a panic off with this athlete. So when she would have got on this horse, she would have been a bit stressed. That transcends into the horse. Horses can't see the rider, they can only feel you when you're on top.

'You need composure, and you need to be very decisive with what you're going to do when you're riding.

Schleu looked dejected during the rest of the event, and Team GB's Kate French clinched gold

Schleu's failings in the showjumping leg helped Team GB's Kate French claim Olympic gold

'In the moments when she was crying and panicking, I understand why she was like that, but you just wish she'd let the reins loose a bit and rode more with her leg. Really give the horse as much positivity as possible, ride forward, encouragement.

'You saw, when she came to the fences correctly, the horse jumped. When she came on the wrong stride, not quite there, not quite close enough, the horse stopped, because the horse was losing confidence all the way through that.

'These horses need to feel as confident as possible with you, an unknown rider to them.'

The chaos saw Great Britain's Kate French claim gold, in what is Team GB's first triumph for 21 years in the event.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea stars Thiago Silva and Jorginho have stunned fans and team mates by showing off their new blonde locks as they returned to the club for pre-season training.

The pair enjoyed a belated break after Silva played for Brazil in the Copa America narrowly losing to old foes Argentina in the final, whilst Jorginho won the Euros with Italy.

Their new hairstyles were the subject of much ridicule and criticism amongst Chelsea players with Hakim Ziyech labelling them 'terrible'.

Jorginho and Thiago Silva bleach their hair blonde ahead of the new season

It remains to be seen if Chelsea's other stars are inspired to follow suit.

England midfielder Phil Foden also dyed his hair blonde before this summer's Euros as an homage to Paul Gascoigne who infamously did it before Euro 96.

'To be honest, it was my own thing and then I saw people turn it into something else and I jumped on it like everyone else would.' Foden told talkSPORT in June.

England midfielder Phil Foden bleached his hair blonde before this summer's Euros

'I decided to change it up and called the barber and I've liked it ever since.'

Foden later revealed that the entire England squad would've dyed their hair blonde as well had they gone on to win the tournament.

Cheslea will play Villarreal in the Super Cup on August 11 and will host Crystal Palace the following Saturday in their opening Premier League game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Japan's Masatora Kawano showed super-human spirit to finish a gruelling 50km walk race after vomiting on himself and collapsing to the ground.

Kawano was in the medal hunt when he suddenly had a funny turn and appeared to vomit down himself before collapsing in exhaustion and hitting the ground in frustration as his race looked to be over.

However, Kawano somehow managed to haul himself back to his feet to continue racing despite his dream of medalling vanishing before his eyes in an instance.

Masatora Kawano appeared to vomit down himself during the 50km race walk in Tokyo

He collapsed to the floor in exhaustion and pounded it in frustration as his medal hopes faded

The commentator said on the BBC: 'Oh that was a little bit of vomit there I think. That's a real shame, but it looks like Kawano's race is over and you can see the frustration there.'

The Japanese athlete, who was one of the contenders to finish on the podium before the race, admirably ended up finishing the race in sixth position.

Kawano was not the only one to suffer a tough moment in what was a physically-draining race in 31 degrees heat, with over 20 per cent of the field failing to finish.

In a more light-hearted moment, Guatemala's Erick Barrondo was seen soaking his private parts in a bid to stay cool during the race.

Guatemala's Erick Barrondo was seen soaking his private parts in a bid to stay cool in the race

Poland's Dawid Tomala put in a dominant performance to claim the gold, finishing in just under four hours with a time of 3:50:08.

German race walker Jonathan Hilbert was not too far behind him, crossing the line in second position to win the silver medal.

There was a late twist in the battle for the bronze, with a last-gasp charge from Canada's Evan Dunfee seeing him finish just ahead of Spain's Marc Tur at the line.

Tur's compatriot, Jesus Angel Garcia, was way down the field, coming in 35th, but just finishing was still a huge achievement for the 51-year-old, who is competing at his eight Olympics Games.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is never easy to arrive at a new club as an understudy in football but for Kostas Tsimikas it has been a difficult first year at Liverpool.

For Jurgen Klopp and sporting director Michael Edwards, finding cover for Andy Robertson is a tough sell.

How do you promise someone game time when your main player in that position is so reliable and one of the best in the world?

Kostas Tsimikas looks likely to play a big role for Liverpool in the opening weeks of the season

The Greek defender has taken time to adapt to Jurgen Klopp's methods since signing last year

Robertson played in every single one of Liverpool's 38 Premier League games last season. He played in 36 league games in both 2019-20 and 2018-19.

So bringing in an alternative left back was never going to be easy. But Liverpool needed someone to fill in as the demands on Robertson continued to grow.

James Milner has shown his versatility in previous seasons by filling in at left back when needed but Liverpool definitely lost some of their attacking thrust when the right-footed midfielder played there.

So last summer Klopp and Edwards decided it was time to buy another left back. It was thought Tsimikas was one of three options the Reds pursued.

Norwich's Jamal Lewis was one but he ended up signing for Newcastle while Sergio Reguilon was too expensive as back-up. The Spaniard left Real Madrid and signed for Tottenham for around £30million.

Tsimikas only made seven appearances in all competitions after joining from Olympiacos

Tsimikas had been on the radar of Liverpool's scouting department for quite some time and showed he was ready for the step up in class in the Champions League in 2019-20.

Leicester were also interested in the Greek international but the Reds got a £11.75m deal over the line 12 months ago.

But Tsimikas struggled to adapt in his first year on Merseyside and there were a number of issues that prevented him from being able to provide the cover for Robertson that Klopp wanted.

But with Andy Robertson suffering an ankle injury, Tsimikas looks likely start at Norwich on Saturday

He caught coronavirus and also picked up niggling thigh and knee injuries that took time to recover.

As ever with Klopp's signings, players need time to adapt to his tactical style and coaching methods before they are given the green light to play.

Liverpool's defensive injuries last season also meant Klopp was reluctant to chop and change at full back when there was such little inconsistency in the heart of his defence.

That all combined to limit Tsimikas to just seven appearances, including two starts in the Champions League group stage and one in the League Cup.

But Tsimikas was said to be making good progress on the training pitch towards the end of last season and, despite talk of him leaving Anfield this summer, Klopp was keen to keep him around.

Now, with Liverpool's opening league game against Norwich on Saturday, he looks likely to start at left back after a superb pre-season.

Tsimikas has delivered a number of eye-catching displays, the latest coming in the 3-1 win over Osasuna at Anfield on Monday night.

The Greek star has been flying up and down the left wing and provided an outstanding cross for Roberto Firmino to head home on Monday. His rise has come at the perfect time with Robertson set for a spell on the sidelines.

The left back has impressed in pre-season and given some impressive displays in friendlies

Tsimikas is popular around the changing room and forged a bromance with Mohamed Salah

The Scot suffered a nasty-looking ankle injury in Sunday's draw with Athletic Bilbao and tests earlier this week showed ligament damage that is likely to keep him out of action until September.

Tsimikas, self-title the 'Greek Scouser' on social media has endeared himself to fans and has struck him a bromance with Mohamed Salah.

But he now has the opportunity to finally make his mark in the Liverpool defence a year after joining.

With opening games against Norwich, Burnley and Chelsea, he has a chance to prove Robertson should not just walk back into the team again once he's fit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The thought of Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo is a dream for many and Paris Saint-Germain are reportedly considering making that come true.

PSG completed the signing of Messi this week following his shock exit from Barcelona.

It means the Argentine superstar will form a deadly trio with Neymar and Kylian Mbappe - though the latter could leave the club next summer if he decides not to renew his contract.

PSG could look to combine Cristiano Ronaldo with Lionel Messi at Barcelona next year

Messi joined Paris Saint-Germain after his shock exit from Barcelona at the end of his contract

Diario AS are now reporting that PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi is interested in signing Juventus star Ronaldo, should Mbappe decide to leave for Real Madrid.

It's said that Al-Khelaifi is not open to selling Mbappe this summer despite believing that the French striker will not sign a new deal to take his stay at the Parc des Princes past this season.

While leaving Mbappe on a free would be a blow, Ronaldo will also be available for nothing next summer if he doesn't sign a new deal at Juventus.

It would create an exciting prospect of a front three that also includes Neymar and which made up the top three spots for the Ballon D'or award in 2015 and 2017.

Ronaldo's agent Jorge Mendes is said to be 'aware of everything' and that he would have extra motivation for the move.

Should Ronaldo join PSG next summer and sign a two-year deal with the club, it would take him to the age of 39 which is when he is reportedly considering taking a step aside or leaving for less demanding football in the United States or Qatar.

Ronaldo's current contract ends next year and PSG could get him to replace Kylian Mbappe

Mbappe is expected to join Real Madrid as a free agent at the end of his own contract

Messi and Ronaldo dominating the footballing landscape for over a decade as the greatest players on the planet.

The pair traded both club and personal honours with the pair winning 11 Ballon D'or awards between them.

Their competitive rivalry has taken a step back somewhat since Ronaldo left Real Madrid for Juventus back in 2018.

Mbappe meanwhile has shown little desire to sign a new contract in the French capital and is heavily expected to join Ronaldo's former club as a free agent next summer.

Ronaldo and Messi were widely known as the two greatest players on the planet

Speaking at Messi's first press conference at the club, Al-Khelaifi touched on Mbappe's situation.

He said: 'Everyone knows the future of Mbappe. He is a PSG player.

'Kylian is very competitive, he wants to win, he has publicly said that he does not want to leave the team and there are no doubts or excuses of any other kind. Mbappe stays.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@John Barnes has called out Manchester City for signing Jack Grealish ahead of Harry Kane, saying the ex-Aston Villa playmaker 'doesn't improve them'.

Grealish became the most expensive player in British football history when Pep Guardiola's side bought him for £100million earlier this month.

Guardiola has made no secret of his desire to also acquire Kane before the transfer window closes, but is baulking at Tottenham's £150m asking price for their talisman and best player.

Manchester City should've signed Harry Kane (left) ahead of Jack Grealish (right), said John Barnes

City spent £100million on Grealish and are still after Kane but Tottenham want £150m for him

But Barnes claimed City should have prioritised Kane over Grealish because of the wealth of creative attacking talent Guardiola already has at the Etihad, against a lack of firepower in front of goal.

'Harry Kane is much more important to Manchester City than Jack Grealish is,' said Barnes, who was speaking to BonusCodeBets.

'City aren't lacking creativity, they create endless chances with players like Raheem Sterling, Bernardo Silva and Kevin De Bruyne.

Barnes said Guardiola has enough creativity with Raheem Sterling (left), Kevin De Bruyne (centre) and Bernardo Silva (right)

'Bringing Grealish in was great, but it was more important they found a centre forward. They need a guaranteed goal-scorer, Gabriel Jesus is okay, but he's no Sergio Aguero - Harry Kane guarantees goals.'

Barnes said Grealish 'doesn't improve' City

Barnes suggested Grealish's arrival may cause greater selection headaches for Guardiola, who cannot play all of his high-quality creators at once.

'It will be fascinating to see how Grealish fits in this squad. Would Pep have to leave out Phil Foden, Sterling or even Bernardo Silva? City are signing players that match the profile of those they already have.

'Whilst it is good to sign a 26-year-old English player (Grealish) for the future, he doesn't improve them. Harry Kane does.'

Regarding Kane's proposed move to City, which the striker is attempting to force through, Barnes said Tottenham can replace the England captain but have to accept it will be with a lower-quality player.

'If Harry Kane leaves, (Tottenham) won't be thinking to themselves 'oh we didn't think he was actually going to leave. Who can we get now?' Clubs are more prepared than that,' Barnes said.

Barnes said a 'guaranteed goal-scorer' like Kane would improve City more than Grealish will

'It will be a question of who is out there, and who could Tottenham realistically land to replace Harry.

'Obviously, they won't find anyone on his level, there aren't too many. People like Robert Lewandowski aren't going to go to Tottenham Hotspur.

'Once Tottenham get the funds from his potential move, they will have adequate time to find a replacement. In terms of who they sign, Ollie Watkins perhaps?'

Barnes also said Paris Saint-Germain's capture of Lionel Messi will not guarantee success unless he can gel with team-mates Neymar and Kylian Mbappe.

Barnes said Ollie Watkins (left) at Aston Villa was a potential replacement if Spurs sell Kane

'Neymar is a main No 10 that can do it all, but with Messi there, he might not be,' he said.

'The balance is important, it also means Kylian Mbappe may not be as prolific if it all becomes about Messi. It will be interesting to see how it works out for them.

'Having these players won't necessarily make them stronger favourites to the win competition.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Angel Di Maria has said that Cristiano Ronaldo must want to 'kill himself' for not joining Paris Saint-Germain this summer.

PSG have signed the likes of Lionel Messi, Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Achraf Hakimi during the transfer window.

Those players will link up with Neymar and Kylian Mbappe to create a 'unique' team that could dominate Europe and Di Maria believes Ronaldo will be disappointed he is not in the fold.

Di Maria has said that Ronaldo must want to 'kill himself' for not joining PSG this summer

The Argentine is clearly excited that his compatriot Lionel Messi is on his way to Paris

Speaking to Maisfutebol, Di Maria said: 'Cristiano must want to kill himself for not being here.

'The quality and quantity of players that PSG now has is something unique.'

Di Maria also shared his thoughts on his new team-mate, Messi. He said that the Argentine is unlike any other player he has every seen before.

He said: 'He's [Messi] from another world. You throw a rock at him and he manages to subdue it. It seems that you think before the others.

PSG have signed the likes of Lionel Messi (above), Gianluigi Donnarumma and Achraf Hakimi

The Ligue 1 giants have also signed former Real Madrid player Sergio Ramos this summer

'I played with Cristiano Ronaldo, Neymar, Mbappe, Rooney, Van Persie, Benzema, Ibrahimovic, Bale, but I've never seen anything like it. Messi is unique.'

Despite having already signed some of the greatest footballers in the world, PSG are still eager to add to their attacking threat.

For that reason, they are said to be interested in bringing Ronaldo to the Parc de Princes when his contract at Juventus expires next season.

It is believed the Ligue 1 club are closely monitoring the 36-year-old's situation in Italy.

PSG's have now created a team that could dominate Europe for the foreseeable future

However, the decision as to whether they sign Ronaldo will be based on Mbappe's future in France.

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi has registered an interest in signing the Juventus star, but claims there would only be room for the striker if Mbappe decided to leave for Real Madrid.

However, Al-Khelaifi is reportedly not open to selling Mbappe this summer despite believing that the French striker will not sign a new deal to take his stay at the Parc des Princes past this season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Kane is set to make himself available for selection against Manchester City on Sunday, following talks with Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo.

The striker trained with his team-mates for the first time on Friday after providing a negative Covid test which allowed him to end his quarantine following an extended holiday in the Bahamas and USA.

Nuno will decide whether Kane can be included in his match-day squad for his first game in charge after Saturday's session.

Harry Kane is set to make himself available for selection against Manchester City on Sunday

Despite his pre-season only amounting to two days' full training, Sportsmail understands Kane is ready to play a part on Sunday if Nuno wants to select him, with any decision to include Kane made by the Spurs boss.

However, playing him carries significant risk given the fact the 28-year-old has not played in pre-season and the prospect of him picking up an injury could wreck a British record transfer to City - and a possible £150million cash injection for Spurs.

Speaking on Friday, Nuno said: 'We are going to take the decision about Harry tomorrow, and with the other players who joined us later — Bryan Gil and Cristian Romero.

Kane, pictured here on a different break, went on holiday to the Bahamas after Euro 2020

'The decisions are not only based on fitness. It's based on many, many aspects. Football players are not only professionals — they are people that deal with many situations.'

Kane's professionalism was questioned over the past fortnight after skipping the start of his pre-season training schedule in an effort to force a move to City — but he is prepared to feature for Spurs again, even though his intention to leave is clear.

'Harry joined the group today,' Nuno said. 'He trained. We had a talk. Of course it's a private conversation but everything is OK. He is here with us and preparing himself.'

Nuno Espírito Santo will make a final decision on whether Kane is in good enough shape

The Tottenham talisman returned to full training on Friday after providing a negative Covid test

City boss Pep Guardiola was also asked about Kane on Friday but, unlike in his previous press conference, refused to discuss the potential transfer.

'He's a Tottenham player,' Guardiola said. 'I made an exception last time but usually I don't talk about transfers. It's not my business. That's all.'

Meanwhile, Spurs are interested in Villarreal and Spain centre back Pau Torres, who is valued at £55m.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Don't listen to the snobs. Don't let them persuade you there isn't symmetry between the two biggest sagas of this summer.

While the nation toasts record exam results, there remains one question to tackle: Love Island offers useful lessons regarding the possible fate of Lionel Messi's move to Paris Saint-Germain. Discuss.

Before answering, consider this: why would two lower league footballers enter this year's villa, if not because they know nuggets of wisdom can be mined amid the sun cream and stretched bikinis?

Lionel Messi (above) shed tears as part of an emotional farewell to his first ever club, Barcelona

So on to Messi. When the unthinkable was confirmed, the 34-year-old broke down in tears. Messi insisted he never wanted to leave Barcelona.

Then, when his move to PSG edged over the line, the streets around Parc des Princes became a throng of glee.

It was a curious sight: yes, the Ligue 1 giants have signed the finest player of his generation.

But he left Barca against his wishes and signed for PSG by financial default. Hardly a tale dripping with romance, is it?

As they could not afford to keep him, he moved to Paris Saint-Germain by financial default

Would anyone be so boastful if this was a new friend or partner? Who wants to be someone's sloppy seconds? Even their Messi seconds.

The mind drifted to the island villa and another recent love triangle involving Kaz, Tyler and Matthew. A synopsis: Kaz wanted to be with Tyler. That choice was taken out of her hands.

Almost immediately she seemed rather too pleased with Matthew, her new flame. Think Messi landing in Paris: eyes dried, smile wide. Money helps sooth wounds, of course. But brave faces eventually fade.

Matthew was this week dumped from Love Island. Kaz and Tyler are together again. For how long will Messi's new love burn?

The lack of romance feels like a Love Island triangle between Kaz and Tyler (pictured far left)

This transfer represents yet another nadir of a sport beset by hyper-inflation and tilting playing fields. Or so we have been told this week.

But a quick message to those relishing the prospect of watching PSG's galactiques: don't feel bad.

Messi, Neymar, Mbappe – this is precisely why we play fantasy football and why cheat codes exist. It is occasionally OK to indulge guilty pleasures.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mikel Arteta and Arsenal technical director Edu both look to be in a precarious position over the coming weeks as results on the pitch and deals off it come under intense scrutiny — not least from Rwanda president Paul Kagame.

An Arsenal fan key to the club sporting Visit Rwanda on their shirt sleeves, Kagame launched an extraordinary Twitter tirade criticising the club’s leadership in the wake of the Brentford defeat on Friday.

President Kagame, who has been criticised by Amnesty International for the arrest and disappearances of political opponents, tweeted: ‘What! Brentford deserved to win. The fans don’t deserve to get used to this… NO !!!I say this as one of the big fans. The change has taken too long to come!

Mikel Arteta is already under pressure at Arsenal after their opening-day defeat to Brentford

The Gunners' performance was painfully familiar to that of last season's dramatic collapse

‘It’s been a struggle of a decade’s ups and down until this point. Can’t we have a plan that really works?? One part is to look at how we deal in the market.

‘We must not excuse or accept mediocrity. A team has to be built to win, win, win. I am sure we all know on whose shoulders the heaviest burden rests. I hope they know too or even accept it!’

It is unclear whether his criticism was aimed at owners Stan and Josh Kroenke, who have presided over a decade of decline, or the manager, but it is a further embarrassment for the club.

Fans are also outraged and bemused in equal measure at Uruguay midfielder Lucas Torreira being so disengaged with the club that he tweeted a picture of himself enjoying a Madrid fairground with his family as his team-mates were slumping to defeat.

The immediate pressure on Arteta and Edu, with the Arsenal board having backed the pair to turn the club’s declining fortunes around over the summer.

The club's transfer chief Edu could also come under fire as he tries to bring in Martin Odegaard

With the international break in October the traditional point for clubs to sack failing managers, the 2-0 defeat at Brentford already makes Arteta look vulnerable. And the next two weeks will tell whether the confidence placed in Edu by the board to improve the squad this summer was justified.

The pair will hope the potential arrival of Martin Odegaard from Real Madrid will improve matters although they have missed out on Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham, who is off to Roma. But the fixture list may be their worst enemy in establishing momentum.

Romelu Lukaku will doubtless be relishing his debut for Chelsea next weekend at the Emirates after the tentative display of £50m signing Ben White and Pablo Mari in central defence against Brentford.

There then follows a trip to Manchester City with the prospect of Arsenal being bottom of the Premier League going into the first international break.

The September run of games against Norwich (home) and Burnley (away) preceding the north London derby against Spurs at home on September 26th will be crucial for Arteta in maintaining his authority, with Brighton in October completing four games before the second international break.

Brentford bagged a famous scalp on their return to the Premier League after 74 years away

The board united behind Arteta over the summer despite an eighth place finish and no European football for the first time since 1995-96, his impressive FA Cup win in 2020 seemingly decisive in him retaining their confidence.

Arteta has doubled down on his training philosophy this season, with players reporting intense sessions focused on playing the ball out from the back. Some observers are said to feel Arteta’s frequent interventions in training and very technical approach make the sessions hard to follow.

However, he was hired to emulate his mentor Pep Guardiola, so such an approach is unsurprising, even if his best performances have come when Arsenal have surrendered possession and played on the counter attack.

The sale of Joe Willock for £26m will bring some respite for Edu and the club hope to sign ‘keeper Aaron Ramsdale as well as Odegaard this week.

But the need for another keeper and Bernd Leno’s performance, only draws attention to the decision to let Emi Martinez leave last summer, now established as one of the Premier League’s best goalkeepers.

There are still no takers for highly-paid flop Willian, on more than £200,000-a-week, which was another key Arteta decision from last summer. Fortune is also against Arteta as it is unclear when Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette will return, with the club only confirming they are unwell.

The club wanted to get rid of Willian this summer but there were no clubs who came in for him

If they are isolating due to coronavirus, they are unlikely to be back for the Chelsea game. Thomas Partey, last summer’s major signing, is also injured and yet to prove he is worth the £45m fee and wages of more than £250,000 a week.

Arteta reflected: ‘The season is a long one. We’ll review this with cool heads and put it right as soon as possible. I don’t want to hide. There are no excuses. We didn’t do the basic things well enough to beat them.’

New signing White, watched by England coach Gareth Southgate, conceded his new team had problems to address at both ends of the pitch. He said: ‘It’s both boxes, isn’t it? If you don’t score goals and you concede - that’s where it got away from us.

‘It’s obviously a disappointing start. I think we created some chances and could have had some goals - but we didn’t and they did.

Arteta added: ‘We have to react, not find any excuses about players that weren’t here or our injured players, and look at ourselves and raise the level.

‘All the young players that played - Flo Balogun had his debut, Gabriel Martinelli hasn’t played for a long time as he’s been with Brazil - tried their best and it wasn’t enough [to get a result] Chelsea is a completely different game. We will analyse what we did and have time to prepare that game.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham have reportedly been dealt another snub in the transfer market after Villarreal defender Pau Torres turned down their advances.

Spurs are on the lookout for top class defensive recruitments following the recent signing of Cristian Romero from Atalanta, but have fallen short in their pursuit of Torres.

Reports in Spain via Marca claim that a Spurs bid in the region of £55million has been acknowledged by the LaLiga side who are willing to accept, but Torres has decided otherwise.

Spain's highly rated defender Pau Torres has reportedly rejected a move to Tottenham

It is claimed that the player is only willing to leave his side for a team that can offer a greater footballing project and guarantee Champions League football this season.

The news comes as the latest set-back for Spurs, who recently had a bid accepted for Inter Milan's star striker Lautaro Martinez - only for the player to make clear his intentions to remain in Italy.

In recent weeks Tottenham have also posted an interest in Sevilla defender Jules Kounde, only to be informed by the player's representatives that the player is only interested in sides competing in European football's top competition.

Torres joins Kounde in rejecting Spurs, with the Sevilla man also wanting Champions League

Spurs could yet soon see a huge cash injection to their transfer funds, if a British record deal for the sale of Harry Kane to Manchester City is completed.

The north London club still maintain the star striker will not be sold this summer, despite his wishes to move on to a side regularly competing for big trophies.

City are understood to be readying an official bid in the region of £120m for Kane following the two sides facing each other in the Premier League opener on Sunday.

Such a move would break the British transfer record fee, recently set by City when they prised Jack Grealish away from Aston Villa.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raphael Varane has thanked Manchester United supporters for their warm reception at Old Trafford as the Frenchman got to work following his £42million switch from Real Madrid.

The 28-year-old completed his move from Spain to England this week, signing a four-year deal as Ole Gunnar Solskjaer finally landed his long-sought elite defender to partner with Harry Maguire.

And United supporters produced a superb welcome for their new defender at Old Trafford on Saturday, with the Frenchman unveiled holding his No 19 shirt before the fans ahead of United's season opener against Leeds.

Raphael Varane has thanked Manchester United fans for their warm ovation on Saturday

The Frenchman was unveiled at Old Trafford following his £42million arrival from Real Madrid

Bruno Fernandes scored a hat-trick as United got off to a flyer with a 5-1 win over their rivals to round off a fine day as the Red Devils look to close the gap on Manchester City.

Varane has addressed United fans to thank them for their ovation, revealing he is 'very excited to be here' and 'ready to work hard'.

'Hi everyone, I am very excited to be here,' he said via the club's official Twitter account. 'Thanks for the atmosphere at Old Trafford, thank you very much.

'I am very happy to be here and I am ready to work hard.'

United fans are hopeful that Varane is the missing piece to allow United to fight for the title

The 28-year-old is expected to help shore up United's defence that has been prone to error in recent seasons, often to the detriment of Solskjaer's tilts at silverware.

Defensive errors resulted in the club's group stage exit from the Champions League, while they fell short in the Europa League in back-to-back seasons.

United legend Rio Ferdinand believes that Varane's presence will help the team deal with high pressure situations.

Speaking on BT Sport, Ferdinand said: 'He's played in 14 finals and won 14, so he knows exactly what he's doing. It's a big thing for Man United getting into situations when they're under pressure, they can look to this type of leader.'

Varane told supporters that he is 'happy to be here' and 'ready to work hard' at his new club

Ferdinand believes that the experienced centre-back will help United in challenging moments

At the age of 28, Varane is vastly experienced and has won the World Cup with France as well as four Champions Leagues with Real Madrid.

Varane will wear the unfamiliar No 19 shirt for United, with the No 4 shirt currently occupied by Phil Jones, who turned a deaf ear to requests to give up the number.

Varane asked United for No 4 – which he also wears for France – as their negotiations reached the later stages, but Jones flat-out refused, according to MEN.

Varane will wear the No 19 shirt after Phil Jones refused to give up his No 4 for the new man

Jones has held the No 4, formerly worn by Steve Bruce, since arriving from Blackburn in 2011, but the 29-year-old hasn't played for United in more than 18 months.

He will likely inherit Jones' shirt when United eventually managed to shift the fallen star Sir Alex Ferguson once said 'could be our greatest player ever.'

The World Cup winner also wore 19 on his back during his first season with Real Madrid in 2011 as a young talent, having joined from Lens despite interest from United boss Ferguson.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Premier League clubs have been accused of failing in their ‘moral responsibility’ to ensure all players have been fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Several clubs have privately admitted they will not make two jabs mandatory for squads even though fans at nearly all top-flight matches could soon be required to have had both vaccinations.

Others are unwilling to reveal whether players will need to have had two vaccinations in the new season, despite the risks of widespread disruption being underlined this weekend when five Everton players were forced to isolate.

Premier League clubs have been criticised for failing to ensure players are double-jabbed

Covid-19 still threatens to disrupt football with five Everton players in isolation

Public health experts have criticised the clubs for not seeking to set an example that would encourage young people to get vaccinated and help Britain’s attempt to return to a semblance of normality.

‘It’s about leadership, moral responsibility and trust,’ Professor John Ashton, the former director of public health for the North West, said. ‘The clubs have got a duty of care towards their staff and their supporters to make sure they’re safe. They should be doing everything within their power to encourage all of the people at the club to be vaccinated and to maintain a sensible precaution. It’s pretty clear that the clubs aren’t really doing social distancing, even now.’

England’s deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam urged all Premier League players to get vaccinated as soon as possible at a virtual meeting with the 20 team captains on August 2.

Organised in conjunction with the Premier League, the meeting was designed to dispel myths around the Covid vaccine after several players expressed concerns.

‘If the rule is that you can’t come as a spectator unless you’ve been double jabbed, then the same surely has to apply to staff and players,’ said Dr Peter English, the former chair of the BMA’s public health medicine committee.

The Government has drawn up plans that would require anyone attending an event from October that attracts a crowd of 20,000-plus to be fully vaccinated, albeit the situation remains fluid.

This newspaper asked all Premier League clubs whether they would require players also to have been fully vaccinated. Several declined to answer, citing issues around medical confidentiality — grounds English and Ashton said were invalid.

Ashton, the author of Blinded by Corona: How the Pandemic Ruined Britain’s Health and Wealth and What to Do about It, added: ‘This is all about money. It’s all about getting people through the gates.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raphael Varane finally started work as a Manchester United player on Monday, a decade after Sir Alex Ferguson made a desperate attempt to sign the Frenchman at his family home.

Varane, 28, trained at Carrington for the first time since completing a £42million move from Real Madrid and being paraded on the pitch at Old Trafford before Saturday’s win over Leeds.

United’s pursuit of the defender dates back to Ferguson’s tenure, and the Scot has recalled ‘hurtling down on the train from Euston to Lille’ in 2011 to sign Varane, then 18, while former chief executive David Gill discussed terms with his club Lens.

However, Real hijacked the deal thanks to Zinedine Zidane’s influence over his fellow Frenchman.

Manchester United's Raphael Varane has trained with his team-mates for the very first time

The former Real Madrid man chatted to fellow Red Devils summer signing Jadon Sancho (left)

He was straight into action, with Phil Jones (centre) who refused to give Varane his No 4 shirt

Discussing his long-awaited move to Old Trafford, Varane said: ‘There had been a lot of rumours and a lot of people speaking about me and Manchester United since 2011 when Sir Alex Ferguson came to my mother’s house.

‘When it was real, that was when I spoke with my club, and I felt it was a real opportunity to play in the Premier League for Manchester United. I’m very excited to start this new journey and I’m very happy to be here.’

Varane spoke to boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer for assurances over United’s ambitions before committing to a four-year contract.

‘It was very important for me to know exactly what the objectives are,’ he added. ‘I feel a real determination to work very hard and to try to do everything possible to win trophies. That motivates me.’

The Frenchman sealed his £42million switch to Old Trafford from Real Madrid last week

Varane has expressed excitement at the prospect of linking up with his compatriot Paul Pogba

A World Cup winner with France in 2018, Varane is looking forward to teaming up with countryman Paul Pogba at United.

‘Paul motivates players with his energy,’ said Varane. ‘We are different, but very complementary and it’s important to have different types of leaders and characters.

‘He’s ambitious and me too, so we are ready to work hard and do all we can to win trophies.’

Pogba's United future is uncertain, with the Frenchman entering the final year of his contract. Varane added that his countryman is 'very positive' and has 'very good energy' in the dressing room.

'I think Paul is very positive and he has a very good energy; he motivates players in the dressing room and on the pitch with his energy.

Varane (R) has played alongside Pogba (No 6) with France and said he 'motivates' other players

Pogba's United future is uncertain with the Frenchman entering the final year of his contract

But Varane says that Pogba has a 'very positive' attitude and gives off 'good energy' as a player

'We are different but we are very complementary, and it's important in the team to have different types of leaders and characters.'

Although Varane snubbed Sir Alex Ferguson's advances ten years ago, he jumped at the chance of playing Premier League football when the opportunity arose again.

'There had been a lot of rumours and a lot of people speaking about me and Manchester United since 2011, when Sir Alex Ferguson came to my mother's house,' he said.

'When it was real, that was when I spoke with my club, and I felt it was a real opportunity to play in the Premier League for Manchester United.'

Varane is excited to follow in the footsteps of 'legends' Rio Ferdinand (L) and Nemanja Vidic (R)

Varane also shared his pride in following in the footsteps of 'legends' Nemanja Vidic and Rio Ferdinand, delighting in joining the United 'family'.

'Of course, Vidic and Ferdinand were legends,' he added. 'I remember players like Cristiano, Giggs and Beckham also. They are legends and I'm very proud to be part of this family.'

Varane is United's third signing of the summer, after £73m man Jadon Sancho and Tom Heaton, a free signing. United are next in action on Sunday when they travel to Southampton in the Premier League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paul Pogba’s hopes of joining Paris Saint-Germain from Manchester United were almost certainly dashed by Lionel Messi’s arrival in the French capital.

The £89million midfielder looks set to stay at Old Trafford and leave as a free agent for the second time when his contract runs out in June.

The Frenchman’s agent, Mino Raiola, held talks with PSG who were weighing up a £40m bid this month. However, the unexpected opportunity to sign Messi from Barcelona means even PSG’s super-rich Qatari owners would struggle to complete both deals.

Paul Pogba is now very likely to stay at Manchester United for the final year of his contract

The French giants have completed a hugely expensive move for Barcelona icon Lionel Messi on a £1million-a-week contract, the finances of which jeopardise a move for Pogba

Messi will be paid a staggering £35m a year in Paris, while Pogba is seeking an increase on his £290,000 weekly wage at United.

The 28-year-old has rejected the offer of a new contract at Old Trafford and could walk away for nothing next summer — 10 years after he joined Juventus from United for just £800,000 in compensation.

Pogba's contract at United expires next summer, meaning he could sign a pre-contract agreement with a club outside England in January for a free transfer at the end of the season.

United, who re-signed Pogba for a then world record £89m four years later, could sell him in the remaining three weeks of the transfer window or when it re-opens in January.

Sources on Tuesday night indicated that it is unlikely and Pogba will be a key figure in Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s plans this season. The player is also said to be comfortable with another season at Old Trafford.

Mauricio Pochettino is monitoring the situation, with Pogba's deal set to expire next summer

PSG are understood to be monitoring the situation with a view to a potential move next year, particularly if Pogba does not put pen to paper on a new deal at the Premier League side.

But Sportsmail reported on August 8 that signing Messi would probably jeopardise a move for the gifted midfielder, given the gargantuan costs involved in signing the Argentine.

Mauricio Pochettino's side would reportedly need to sell or loan around 10 players to finance a deal for Pogba.

Negotiations are continuing with Pogba's representatives, but the 84-cap international is relaxed about his future, does not want to rush such a big career decision and United know there is currently no urgent time pressure.

The World Cup winner is highly rated by Red Devils manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer in terms of both his talent and his attitude and application, and is thought to be looking forward to the new campaign.

Messi completed his move to PSG on Tuesday, where he put pen to paper on a two-year deal

United have now shelved their interest in Eduardo Camavinga, Saul Niguez and Ruben Neves, who had all been identified as potential replacements for Pogba.

They are also set to abandon their pursuit of Atletico Madrid’s Kieran Trippier and keep Diogo Dalot as competition for Aaron Wan-Bissaka at right back.

Raphael Varane’s £34m move from Real Madrid is likely to be confirmed today after he had a medical on Tuesday. United could miss out on millions because Crystal Palace are open to exchanging players as well as cash in any deal for Wilfried Zaha.

United included a 20 per cent sell-on clause when Zaha returned to Selhurst Park in 2015.

Marcus Rashford had shoulder surgery last Friday and said ‘everything went very well’. The United striker will be out until late October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid are biding their time before a deadline-day swoop on August 31 for Kylian Mbappe, according to a report in Spain, with president Florentino Perez looking to take advantage of Paris Saint-Germain's inflated wage bill after signing Lionel Messi.

Perez has a habit of making audacious signings on deadline day, such as plucking World Cup Golden Boot winner Ronaldo Nazario from Inter Milan in 2002 or snapping up Sergio Ramos in 2005 following a bitter wrangle with Sevilla.

Tottenham are well aware of the Madrid's chief knack for getting late deals done, too, after Real signed Luka Modric in 2012 and Gareth Bale in 2013 on deadline day after weeks of tough negotiations with chairman Daniel Levy.

Real Madrid are preparing a final day swoop for Kylian Mbappe, according to a report in Spain

Real president Florentino Perez is well known for making last-minute signings on deadline day

AS says PSG could be tempted to sell Mbappe after signing Lionel Messi on huge wages

And Spanish paper AS says Real are going to test PSG's resolve with a transfer deadline-day bid for Mbappe, the player Perez has dreamed about signing for years.

Mbappe, who had his wall covered with posters of Cristiano Ronaldo as a teenager, is more than open to a move to Real and has rejected five offers of a new contract with PSG, with less than a year left on his deal.

PSG have not given up hope of him committing his future to them for many years to come so he can form a dream front three with Messi and Neymar, but they also know he is at serious risk of leaving for free next year.

The report adds that Real also believe PSG could do with selling Mbappe to ease their already inflated wage bill, which is about to be further increased by paying Messi a reported £1million a week.

Real have reduced their wage bill by losing Sergio Ramos (left) and Raphael Varane (right)

Ramos joined PSG on a free transfer after Real refused to bow down to his contract demands

Real also have more cash to spend on Mbappe after selling Varane to Man United for £42m

Selling Mbappe for cash could also ease pressure from UEFA for financial fair play reasons and from the French football federation, with both institutions encouraging PSG to reduce their wage bill from 99 per cent of annual revenue to 70 per cent.

Real tried to sign Mbappe in 2017 from Monaco, with Spanish reports saying they were unable to get a deal through due to Gareth Bale's continued presence at the club and his huge salary.

But Real have taken careful steps to reduce their wage bill this summer, refusing to give captain Sergio Ramos a new contract and also agreeing to sell Raphael Varane to Manchester United, set to pocket them £42million.

David Alaba is the only major signing they have made - on a free transfer- and there is now a bit of breathing room for Real to finally get Mbappe and count on one of the top strikers in the game for many years to come.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lorenzo Savadori and Dani Pedrosa were involved in a sickening crash at MotoGP's Michelin Grand Prix of Styria - which led to an inferno on the track.

The Grand Prix over the weekend was immediately red flagged after the collision between the two riders.

Spanish rider Pedrosa stumbled away from the wreckage while his Italian counterpart Savadori, who initially got to his feet, was eventually taken away on a stretcher.

Lorenzo Savadori and Dani Pedrosa's bikes erupt into flames following their crash on Sunday

A track marshal desperately tries to extinguish the fireball at the Michelin Grand Prix of Styria

The crash brought back sickening memories of Romaon Grosjean's horrifying incident in F1 last season at the Bahrain Grand Prix last November.

Thankfully, 28-year-old Savadori was later seen sitting up as he received medical treatment.

Pedrosa - who was making his first MotoGP start since 2018 - fell at Turn 3 at the Red Bul Ring while on the third lap, before Savadori then collided with his KTM.

Fuel immediately leaked before a fire erupted across the track on Sunday afternoon.

The race was immediately red-flagged with Savadori taken away on a stretcher in Austria

The aftermath: Pedrosa's bike after his sickening collision with Savadori on the weekend

Though Savadori was limping, he was passed fit following medical checks but did not return for the restart of the weekend's race.

He was later diagnosed with a broken right ankle that has ruled him out of next weekend's second race in Austria, while Pedrosa was fit to return for the restart on a replacement bike before finishing 10th.

The race was restarted over a one-lap shorter distance of 27 laps, which rookie Jorge Martin of Ducati-Pramac went onto win - for his first MotoGP triumph.

The horror crash comes just two weeks after 14-year-old Hugo Millan tragically died after an accident at the Motorland Aragon circuit in Spain.

Savadori (pictured) sustained a broken right ankle and will miss next weekend's race in Austria

The Spaniard was taking part in a European Talent Cup race when he fell off his bike at Turn 5 with 13 laps to go in a tightly packed battle in midfield.

As Millan started to get to his feet he was instantly hit by another rider, Milan Leon Pawelec, who had nowhere to go and collided with the teenager.

The red flag was instantly brought out and medics rushed out onto the track to give him emergency treatment.

Millan was airlifted to Zaragoza Hospital and despite their best efforts, medics were unable to save him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea's Callum Hudson-Odoi hired out Thorpe Park theme park recently for a private event, which saw NHS staff, key workers and school leavers treated to a day out to thank them for their work during the pandemic.

The 20-year-old Londoner, who will stay to fight for his place at Stamford Bridge this season, organised the event, which saw local teachers and staff from St George's Hospital in Tooting, enjoy the facilities at the theme park away from the crowds.

Hudson-Odoi had recently returned from a trip to Ghana, his father's birthplace, where he organised grassroots football coaching events for young people there.

#TBT to when @Calteck10 hired out #ThorpePark Resort for an awesome private event and invited key workers and NHS staff¿¿



Do you and your colleagues fancy having the Park all to yourself? Book your very own private event on the Island like no other here https://t.co/qewSzQjanJ pic.twitter.com/ddmlZHx7kN — THORPE PARK Resort (@THORPEPARK) August 5, 2021

Callum Hudson-Odoi arranged for a Thorpe Park treat for NHS key workers to thank them

Staff from St George's Hospital in Tooting and local teachers benefited from the gesture

Hudson-Odoi had recently returned from putting on grassroots football events in Ghana

The England winger, who was wanted by Bayern Munich last summer, and who had been linked with a potential loan move after not featuring in the Champions League final, is expected to stay at Chelsea this season.

His relationship with manager Thomas Tuchel is said to be good, despite the furore after the German substituted him at Southampton last season after bringing him on at half time. Tuchel later apologised for that.

Hudson-Odoi is expected to start in the UEFA Super Cup against Villarreal on Wednesday.

The England youth international has a good relationship despite the incident at Southampton

Hudson-Odoi is keen to stay and fight for his place after interest from Bayern Munich

Chelsea will play Unai Emery's Villarreal in the Super Cup at Windsor Park on Wednesday

The game, to be held at Windsor Park in Belfast, will be the Blues' last before their Premier League opener next Saturday at home to Crystal Palace.

Tuchel's men recently faced London rivals Arsenal and Tottenham in the Mind Series to raise money and awareness for mental health services.

They beat the Gunners 2-1 last weekend thanks to goals by Kai Havertz and Tammy Abraham, with the west Londoners going 2-0 up against Spurs courtesy of a Hakim Ziyech brace before second-half strikes from Lucas Moura and Steven Bergwijn meant that the spoils were shared.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Skateboarding sensation Sky Brown today became Britain's youngest Olympic medallist in history - but is considering going for surfing gold as well at Paris 2024.

The 13-year-old hopes to compete at the next Games on a surfboard as well as her trusty skateboard and her brother Ocean, nine, a promising skater himself, is also being tipped to compete for Team GB in three years' time.

In 2016, aged just eight, Sky became the youngest girl ever to compete in the Vans US Open Pro Series before placing third in the pen division of the world championships in Brazil in 2019.

Earlier this year, she was also included in the England under-16 girls team after it was announced that British surfing would be receiving public funding for the first time, with £1.35 million earmarked to support the sport's long term medal potential.

If Sky, who has been lauded as a 'hero' by four-time American surfing world champion Carissa Moore, is to compete in both events then she will have to overcome the logistical challenges caused by the skateboarding competitions being held in Paris with the surfing taking place 10,000 miles away in the South Pacific off Tahiti.

Speaking after his daughter's bronze medal in Tokyo this morning, her father Stu said: 'It'll be up to her by then. She'll be 16, and it's hard enough now. But she's straight back to school and do the things that families do. We'll take her off social media for a little while.'

The teenager showed extraordinary skill to finish third just over a year after fracturing her skull in a training crash that could have killed her, breaking down in tears of joy at the end of the final where she was beaten by two Japanese stars, including 12-year-old rival Kokona Hiraki.

Speaking afterwards Sky said: 'It was a super sick final. All the girls were ripping it, it was insane. I'm so stoked. I can't believe it, it's unbelievable. The medal feels unreal, it's like a dream. I can't wait to show the medal to my family and friends'.

Sky Brown surfs aged 10 as it was revealed she is considering surfing at Paris 2014 as well as continuing with the skateboarding

Sky and Ocean also surf every day at their local beach in San Diego. Ocean is also a talented skater and surfer

Sky Brown, 13, made history by securing bronze medal in the park skateboarding in Tokyo less than a month after her birthday

Sky fell twice in the final before her perfect last run (pictured) pushed her up into third place

Brown celebrates with the Great Britain flag after making history at the Olympic Games

Sky's father Stu lifts his daughter into the air following her medal-winning performance

Just over a year ago Sky 'lucky to be alive' after fracturing her skull in a horror accident in training in California in June last year. Her father Stu said that doctors feared for her life when she was airlifted to hospital

Sky's sporting success came less than a month after she turned 13 (pictured)

Sky is a Nike athlete who is believed to be a multi-millionaire at the tender age of 13

The 13-year-old can't quite believe it after pulling off the perfect final run with the pressure on

Sky Brown of Team Great Britain competes during the Women's Skateboarding Park event - the first time it has been held at the Olympics

Brown showed no signs of nerves whatsoever on her Olympics debut on Wednesday

Brown qualified for the final of the park skateboarding gold with one run to spare

Sky (left today) is the youngest Nike-sponsored athlete on the planet (right) appearing in ads with Serena Williams and Simone Biles

Stu Brown raises his arms aloft next to his daughter. Sky's mother and brother are believed to be back home in California

Sky Brown reacts as she is kissed by her mother Miko (pictured) after coming 3rd place in the finals of the World Park Skateboarding Championship in Sao Paulo in 2019

British skateboarder Sky Brown is already a global star and could choose to SURF at the next Olympics in 2024 fuelled by breakfasts of kimchi and fermented soya beans Sky Brown is an Anglo-Japanese skateboarder, born on July 12, 2008. She was born in Japan to a Japanese mother Miko, but her father Stu is British. After a breakfast of kimchi and fermented soya beans, she does some schoolwork, and attends a school in Orange County two days a week. The rest of her education is online, allowing her to do up to six hours of surfing and skateboarding each day. Her favourite training spots are Prince Park in Oceanside or Poods in nearby Encinitas, both close to her San Diego home. She is the youngest professional skateboarder in the world, and has also won the American TV programme Dancing with the Stars: Juniors. She is also the youngest Nike sponsored athlete in the world and has featured in an ad campaign alongside Serena Williams and Simone Biles. Brown is also a keen surfer, who spends most of her time training in California in the USA. She also spends some of the year in Japan, but the family had to build a skateboard ramp in the garden. Advertisement

Sky was born in Japan but lives in San Diego with her British father Stuart, a skateboarder and marketing executive originally from Cornwall, and Japanese mother Miko, a housewife. As well as being the youngest female professional skateboarder in the world, she is the youngest Nike-sponsored athlete on the planet appearing in ads with Serena Williams and Simone Biles.

Today's amazing bronze came just 14 months after a horror training crash in California where she flew off her skateboard at the top of a high ramp and landed head-first on hard ground, fracturing her skull and breaking her hand and wrist. She was airlifted to hospital unconscious but made a miracle recovery. Her dad said at the time: 'Sky's had the gnarliest fall she's ever had and is lucky to be alive. When she first came to hospital, everyone was fearful for her life'.

The teenager is said to be worth $5million already, with a series of endorsements with other big brands including Tommy Hilfiger, Vans, Hurley, and Billabong. But after today's success her fame and fortune is expected to soar further.

Sky already has 1million followers on Instagram and the YouTube channel she shares with her brother Ocean, nine, who is also a professional skateboarder, has had 20million views. She even won US TV talent show 'Dancing With The Stars: Juniors' in 2018 and such is her love for surfing, she may choose to take part in that event at Paris 2024, when she will be 16.

Today she entered the history books at 13 years and 28 days old, becoming the youngest Briton ever to compete for the nation at an Olympics and then grabbing bronze having left it all on her third and final run, after falling in her first two routines.

She was overwhelmed with relief when nailing her routine third time around, to leap above Japan's Misugu Okamoto into bronze medal position. Virtually the entire field of competitors surrounded Brown and embraced her as she dissolved into tears. When she emerged from the huddle, it was clear that she was delighted.

She has surpassed the summer British record of Margery Hinton, who was 13 years and 43 days when she competed in swimming at the 1928 Games. British figure skater Cecilia Colledge was 15 when she won figure skating silver in 1936.

Sky revealed after the race: 'Sakura [Yosozumi, gold medallist] said, 'you've got it Sky, I know you're going to make it', and that really made me feel better.

'I was a little nervous but I'm happy to be here and honestly, I just wanted to land my trick. I didn't really care what place I got, I wanted to land my trick.

'I really hope I inspire some girls. I feel like people think I'm too young and I can't do it but, if you believe in yourself, you can do anything. I believed in myself and I'm here.'

Just a year has passed since Brown, then 11, fractured her skull and broke bones in her arm after an accident during a practice session.

Father and coach Stu was there watching on at the Ariake Urban Sports Park, with Sky sharing the achievements with the rest of her family back home before taking her place on the podium.

Sky added: 'He [her dad] said it's just a contest, if you fall it doesn't define you. Honestly, that made me feel better. It is just a contest and that's what it is.

'I honestly feel that accident made me stronger. That accident was pretty bad. It was a hard time for my parents and a hard time for a lot of people and coming back and getting the bronze is really cool. I'm really happy. It's really made me stronger.

'I did speak to my mum and my brother and my mum was crying.

'I'm so excited to see my brother [Ocean}. He really gets me pumped up when I'm in a contest he goes 'go Sky', he screams and I really wish he was here.'

Brown competed at the US Open in 2016 at the age of eight, and first elected to compete for Great Britain in 2018.

An earthquake registering 6.0 on the Richter Scale shuddered Tokyo on Wednesday morning, but it was nothing compared to the tremors felt at the Ariake Urban Park where Sky Brown and her 12-year-old rival Kokona Hiraki proceeded to rip up the Olympic record books.

Aged just 13 years and 28 days, Brown won bronze in the women's park competition, after a dramatic podium-or-bust final run of the competition in which she landed a move called the kick-flip indy that had been eluding her all day, and proved enough to make her Great Britain's youngest Olympic medallist.

Incredibly, she was beaten by the even-younger Hiraki, who thus became the youngest Olympic medallist in 85 years, while her team-mate Sakura Yosozuma, who had qualified for the final in fourth place, nailed back-to-back 540s in the opening run of the final, for a score of 60.09 that proved enough for gold.

On the hottest day yet of the baking Tokyo Games, with temperatures tipping 33 celsius amid stifling 90% per cent humidity, Brown exhibited maturity beyond her years, recovering from falls in each of her first two runs of the final to come good when it mattered, a score of 56.47 lifting her into a podium place.

Ranked third with one competitor, the favourite Misugu Okamoto, to go, Brown still faced the prospect of leaving the Games without a medal. But when Okamoto, the reigning world champion and leading qualifier, failed to go clean on her final run, the Briton's ascent into the Olympic history books was confirmed.

Sky made a full recovery, despite breaking her hand and wrist and injuring her skull in this horror crash

Sky even won US TV talent show 'Dancing With The Stars: Juniors' in 2018 (pictured right)

Sky Brown shows her skateboard to Laureus World Sportsman of the Year British F1 driver Lewis Hamilton after the 2020 Laureus World Sports Awards in Berlin

Sky with her brother Ocean, who is also a professional skateboarder but had to stay at home in California

In 2019, Brown finished third at the World Skateboarding Championship, and the following year she effectively secured her Olympic qualification by picking up a bronze medal at the Park World Championships in Sao Paulo, Brazil (pictured). Today she made history in Tokyo

Sky said she missed her little brother Ocean, but said his absence in Tokyo spurred her on

Sky's bronze came 13 months after a training crash that almost killed her Brown flew off her skateboard at the top of a high ramp and landed head-first on hard ground In June last year Sky Brown was 'lucky to be alive' after fracturing her skull in a horror accident in training. Brown flew off her skateboard at the top of a high ramp and landed head-first on hard ground. She was airlifted to hospital and was unresponsive on arrival but is now expected to make a full recovery, despite breaking her hand and wrist and injuring her skull. 'She landed head-first off a ramp on her hand. When she first came to hospital, everyone was fearful for her life. 'Sky remains positive and strong, the whole medical team is shocked to see her positivity.' Brown posted footage of her fall on her Instagram page and YouTube, in a video which also included shots of her being carried to the helicopter and the sound of her heartbeat flatlining in hospital. Speaking from her hospital bed, sporting a black eye and a cast on her left arm, she said: 'I don't usually post my falls or talk about them because I want people to see the fun in what I do. 'But this was my worst fall. I just want everyone to know that it's OK, don't worry, I'm OK. I'm just going to get back up and push even harder.' Advertisement

Brown's dad Stu, who was born in Britain and whose parents live in the New Forest, admitted he may be powerless to prevent his daughter's bid to medal in another Olympic Sport.

At that stage, her medal seemed in grave jeopardy. Still to go on her last routine was Okamoto – the world No 1, who beat her to the world title in Sao Paulo.

But Okamoto fell and was devastated as she lay on the track. Her opponents shouldered her from the track. Brown, the subject of intense attention across the globe before this competition, had taken bronze.

After Okamoto nailed the heats, it seemed like she was the big danger. But Sakura Yosozumi was the one who staked a huge claim, with her first score of 60.09 – which was always going to take some beating.

Brown immediately realised what the Japanese had achieved and ran to embrace her even before the score flashed up. The two are clearly close and spent some of the final together watching others compete. It is a different kind of competitiveness in this sport.

Twice, Brown fell as she attempted to match Yosozumi, But each time she could not complete the course. Her first run still managed to put her into third place but she was out of the medals a she went down for the third and last time

She succeeded, despite the blistering heat here. It is the hottest day of the Tokyo Olympics with temperature at the Ariake Urban Sports Park of 33 celcius, with a 90 per cent humidity.

Her routine included her signature 'frontside 540' which entails one and a half spins. Her ability to repeatedly lean while she span – 'corking it out' as it is known in the sport – also put her well ahead of the field.

Brown is also the youngest Olympic medallist of any nationality since Inge Sorensen of Denmark, who was 12 years 24 days when she won bronze in the 200m breaststroke in 1936.

Brown's achievement is all the more remarkable for the fractured skull and broken bones she suffered during an horrific fall in training last year.

'That accident was pretty bad,' Brown admitted. 'It was a hard time for my parents and a hard time for a lot of people and coming back and getting the bronze is really cool. I'm really happy. It's really made me stronger.'

In 2019, Brown finished third at the World Skateboarding Championship, and the following year she effectively secured her Olympic qualification by picking up a bronze medal at the Park World Championships in Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Brown finished behind Japanese duo Sakura Yosozumi (C) and Kokona Hiraki (L) on Wednesday

Team GB's teenage star hugs France's Madeleine Larcheron during her heat on Wednesday

The Team GB youngster reacts after making history after producing an immense final run

Last month, she had warmed up for the Games by winning gold in the prestigious X Games, although neither of her key Olympic challengers, Okamoto and Hiraki, were present.

Hiraki was first up of the major contenders in qualifying, with her best score over three runs, 52.46, comfortably surpassed by Brown. But Okamoto, the 15-year-old defending world champion, laid down her mark with a leading 58.51.

Ultimately it was Yosozumi who emerged to take gold, with Brown expressing her delight at bronze, and her eagerness to go home to see her younger brother Ocean, and head for the surf, presumably to hone her skills ahead of a potentially audacious bid to qualify for a second sport in Paris in three years' time.

'I really hope so, I'm really going to try surfing,' she added. 'I'm going to go surf a lot after here. I'm excited to see my brother again, and I'm going to go and party with my friends.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United have revealed their 'game-changing' new dark blue third kit ahead of the start of the Premier League season this weekend.

Marcus Rashford, Paul Pogba and Bruno Fernandes are all first-team stars who appear in the club's promotional video publicising the patterned dark blue kit, manufactured by adidas.

Current boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer also features, as does club legend Sir Alex Ferguson, in a video which includes motivational quotes and a historic storyline, with Rashford signing off: 'Of course we are glory hunters... what else would we hunt?'

Marcus Rashford signs off the video unveiling Manchester United's new dark blue third kit

Paul Pogba and Bruno Fernandes also feature in the promotional video for the latest jersey

Club legend Sir Alex Ferguson also appears in the video, instructing the players to 'never rest'

The 69-second clip features snapshots of United's history, with a quick shot of George Best shown, while fans young and old appear in front of the camera.

Most fans on social media liked the kit, while others instead asked about when the confirmation of Raphael Varane's £42million signing from Real Madrid will be confirmed.

One supporter said: 'Can we just like not use the red one for the season? It's not awful but the other two are just straight up gorgeous' while a different Twitter user joked: 'Wearing a blue and yellow kit doesn't guarantee you a trophy, you trying too hard to be Chelsea'.

Regarding Varane's non-announcement, one simply stated: 'ANNOUNCE VARANE!!!' while another said: 'Imagine having more kits than major signings in a transfer window'.

First-team boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer features in the 69-second promotional video for the kit

A quick shot of Manchester United legend George Best is shown: 'We learnt that from the best'

United supporters can pick up the kit at the club store online, with a standard shirt costing £64.95 and an authentic version £99.95.

United open up the new Premier League season - where they will be wearing their usual red home kit - against Leeds on Saturday afternoon.

The Red Devils are looking to go one better than last season and win the title for the first time since 2013.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Champions Bayern Munich had to fight back from behind to grab a 1-1 draw at Borussia Monchengladbach in the opening game of the new Bundesliga season.

Having scored an all-time record 41 goals last season, Robert Lewandowski was quick off the mark again to volley home the equaliser for Bayern just before half-time.

The hosts had gone in front through a 10th-minute strike from Alassane Plea and a fine display from home keeper Yann Sommer sealed his side a point.

Julian Nagelsmann's first league game in charge of Bayern Munich ended in a draw on Friday

Robert Lewandowski got off the mark with his first goal of the 2021-22 campaign in the opener

Valencia's Hugo Guillamon lasted less than three minutes of the new campaign before he was sent off for bad foul on Nemanja Maksimovic of Getafe in their LaLiga clash.

Despite the early dismissal a 10th-minute penalty from Carlos Soler was enough to seal a 1-0 win, while Getafe's Erick Cabaco also saw red late on.

Monaco's sluggish start to the new Ligue 1 season continued as they were beaten 1-0 at Lorient.

Nigerian striker Terem Moffi scored the winner from the penalty spot in the 31st minute, despite Kevin Volland and Strahinja Pavlovic coming close for the visitors.

The result leaves Monaco with just one point from their first two games after their opening draw against Nantes last week.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He only played 65 minutes but it was perhaps Eden Hazard’s best hour in a Real Madrid shirt as Carlo Ancelotti’s side got off to a wining start in La Liga.

They beat Alaves 4-1 and it was the former Chelsea man shining up front alongside a rejuventated Gareth Bale and two-goal Karim Benzema.

There were just three minutes into the second half when Benzema scored his first goal of the season from Hazard’s sublime flick after Lucas Vazquez had crossed from Bale’s long pass – Real Madrid’s new trident all involved in the opening goal.

Eden Hazard played a starring role with an assist as Real Madrid began season with a victory

Karim Benzema scored twice as Real Madrid defeated Alaves 4-1 to open up their campaign

It was classic Ancelotti preferring experience over youth in his team selection. Hazard, Bale and Benzema on from the start and Vinicius Junior, Rodrygo and Marco Asensio all watching from the bench.

Ancelotti also opted not to play young full back Miguel Gutierrez and that meant new signing David Alaba played at full-back and Nacho in the centre of defence.

It was the outstanding Nacho who got the second goal and Hazard was involved again with a clever short corner that involved Fede Valverde and Luka Modric who played the final ball into the box.

The cross was deflected but Nacho read it well and stretched to convert it. Benzema almost got a third from another deft touch from Hazard but he was not to to be denied his brace. Fede Valverde steamed down the right and at the second attempt Benzema shot past Pacheco to make it three.

Benzema fires home his second and Real Madrid's third in a comfortable victory

Gareth Bale also starred following his return to Real after a season on loan at Tottenham

Alaves pulled a goal back when Thibaut Courtois brought down substitute John Gudetti after Eder Militao had failed to steer the ball back to his keeper. Joselu slammed home the penalty to make it 3-1.

Alaves had looked like taking far more from the game in the first half, frustrating for Real Madrid. Far from sitting back and allowing the visitors to come at them they were on the front foot. Joselu headed over and Luis Rioja flashed a shot wide.

Hazard had Real Madrid’s first effort and Bale had two shots that went wide but it was predictable from Ancelotti’s team and Alaves were soon back on the attack with Joselu’s shot blocked by Nacho.

Benzema sent a shot wide and a curling cross from Alaba was almost turned in by Hazard but he could not get his shot away after bringing the ball down on his chest.

Bale is set to feature more in the plans of Carlo Ancelotti (left) this season after his loan spell

Nacho doubled Real Madrid's lead 11 minutes into the second half of the encounter

Manu Garcia was lively for Alaves playing just behind Joselu but he was booked for a rash challenge on Benzema.

The half ended with Edgar and Rioja causing more problems for Real Madrid. First Edgar broke and crossed for Rioja to lob over with shouts for a handball against Lucas. He then skipped away from Lucas but pulled his shot wide.

After the underwhelming first 45 Ancelotti’s half time team talk worked the trick and his veteran front three put Alaves to the sword. Vinicius and Rodrygo came on late-on for Hazard and Bale and one mazy run from the former ended with him crossing inside the six-yard box but there was no one to finish.

Madrid were not to be denied their big win. Alaba crossed and Vinicius converted to make it 4-1. It was all smiles from the Brazilians and from Ancelotti's veterans. He had given the old guard the nod in his team selection, and they had nodded back.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sheffield United are keen on signing Manchester United wonderkid Amad Diallo on loan, according to reports.

The 19-year-old completed a £37million move from Italian side Atalanta in January but has only turned out eight times for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side since then.

Reports claim the Red Devils are prepared to let Diallo go in the summer transfer window after Jadon Sancho's £73million arrival from Borussia Dortmund pushed him further down the pecking order.

Sheffield United are keen on signing Manchester United's Amad Diallo on loan, say reports

Slavisa Jokanovic is keen to boost his attack as the Championship season gets in full flow

And according to talkSPORT, Slavisa Jokanovic's Blades are keen to take the winger on a temporary deal to boost their Championship promotion bid this season.

Diallo showed flashes of quality in his opening six months at Old Trafford, scoring against AC Milan in their Europa League last-16 tie and assisting Mason Greenwood in a Premier League clash at home to Leicester in May.

But Sancho's arrival means first-team game time will be limited at Old Trafford this season, with the England international adding to the already-competitive battle for forward places in Solskjaer's squad.

Diallo showed brief glimpses of quality at United and scored against AC Milan in Europe

Daniel James and Mason Greenwood started the Red Devils' 5-1 victory over Leeds to start the Premier League season, while Anthony Martial, Edinson Cavani and Sancho did not start their Old Trafford opener on Saturday.

Paul Pogba has also been used in a wider role in recent months which is a blow for Diallo's starting chances, though Marcus Rashford is facing around three months on the sidelines after surgery on his shoulder.

Meanwhile, Sheffield United are hoping to achieve an immediate return to the Premier League after their relegation last season, but Jokanovic's side are struggling for goals at the beginning of this Championship season.

Sheffield United have yet to find the net in the Championship so far but have scored in the cup

The Blades began their second tier campaign with a 1-0 home loss to Birmingham City, before registering a goalless draw away at promotion rivals Swansea on Saturday.

The Blades did off the mark for the season in their slender EFL Cup first round win over Carlisle, with former Liverpool youngster Rhian Brewster finding the net in that match.

The Yorkshire club have been busy in the transfer market in recent days, having struck an agreement to sign Liverpool defender Ben Davies on loan, who has yet to feature for the Reds since his move from Preston in January.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal midfielder Granit Xhaka has signed a new contract with the club that is set to run until the summer of 2025.

As reported by Football.London, Xhaka will be remaining with Arsenal after a move to Roma failed to come to fruition.

Xhaka had reportedly agreed personal terms with Roma, but the Italian club were unable to meet Arsenal's demands with regards to a transfer fee.

Arsenal midfielder Granit Xhaka has signed a contract extension with the club until 2025

The 28-year-old has since re-established himself in the Arsenal team and, in the absence of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette, was given the captain's armband for the defeat to Brentford.

Xhaka had two years remaining on his previous contract, which was signed in 2018.

Signed from Borussia Monchengladbach in 2016, Xhaka's time at Arsenal has been characterised by inconsistency, although he has featured prominently under various managers, making 221 appearances in total.

Xhaka had seemed set to join Roma but has re-established himself in Mikel Arteta's plans

The Switzerland international had two years remaining on his previous contract with the club

At Euro 2020 Xhaka earned much praise for his performances for Switzerland, who reached the quarter-finals of the competition.

Despite the arrival of Albert Sambi Lokonga, Xhaka will hope to feature regularly alongside Thomas Partey at the base of Arsenal's midfield once the Ghana international is back fit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Roy Keane might love his boxing but he can't get behind Anthony Joshua or Tyson Fury, accusing the pair of 'too much talk' around the super-fight fans want.

The Gypsy King and AJ were in advanced negotiations over an all-British clash to unify the heavyweight division, but the plans were scrapped when Fury was ordered into a trilogy fight with Deontay Wilder.

Keane, a Manchester United icon, had a fearsome reputation as one of football's hard men and adores boxing, though he doesn't have much time for the heavyweights anymore.

Roy Keane has criticised Tyson Fury and Anthony Joshua for not getting their fight finalised

Keane answered the questioned of which fighter he prepared when speaking with Gary Neville

'I don't like any of them,' Keane told Gary Neville after his former team-mate asked which of the two fighters he preferred on his show, The Overlap.

'The heavyweight stuff is irritating me, too much talk.

'None of them. They both irritate me, I'm not picking any of them.'

While Keane doesn't think much of Joshua, the IBF, WBA and WBO champion said back in December 2020 that he reckons Keane would make it as a boxer.

The former midfielder's missed punch on Alan Shearer back in 2001 isn't great evidence to support the Watford-born fighter, but Joshua still picked Keane when asked which football would do well in the ring.

Like all the other boxing fans, Keane wants Fury and Joshua to stop talking and get fighting

Keane was a football tough-guy but his punches weren't great, missing Alan Shearer in 2001

'Manchester United need someone like him, to get in there and say it how it is, doesn't take any nonsense,' Joshua said.

'In boxing, that's the type of person you need to have. Eric Cantona, come in, shirt up, he had the aura of a champion.'

It was Keane's 50th birthday on Tuesday and to celebrate, Neville compiled 50 quick-fire questions for the Irishman.

The former midfielder was asked how was better, his old rival Patrick Viera, or himself: 'I thought I was better than Patrick, yeah. Is that what you're saying, who's better? Yeah, me.'

Neville briefly paused to look up at his long-time colleague, who said: 'What are you pausing for?'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Simone Biles has said she is 'delighted' to be home in the US after her tumultuous appearance at the Tokyo Olympics - as she enjoyed an emotional surprise reunion with her parents.

The 24-year-old flew into Houston on Thursday and was welcomed at the airport by crowds of supporters and relatives, including her parents, Ronald and Nellie, and her sister, Rachel.

Biles shared images of herself embracing her mother and father at the airport on Instagram, revealing that their appearance in the terminal came as a welcome surprise.

'Houston, I'm home,' she wrote, before thanking United Airlines, for which she serves as a spokesperson for 'making sure I didn't have to wait one more minute to see my family'.

Simone Biles had an emotional embrace with her father as she landed back in the US

Biles, pictured cuddling her mother Nellie, insisted she is delighted to be home after Olympics

Carrying a bouquet of flowers, Biles spoke very briefly with local media, with Houston TV station KHOU-11 reporting that she spoke of a simple dietary request, saying: 'We want to have some steaks.'

The legendary gymnast's best friend Rachel told the station: 'Very, very emotional. Good to have her back.'

Ron, 71, and his wife Nellie, 66, are actually Biles' grandparents, however they adopted the athlete and her sister Adria after they were taken away from their birth mother, Shanon, who suffered from drug and alcohol addiction and spent time in jail, leading to her children being placed in foster care when Biles was just three years old.

She was adopted by Nellie and Ron three years later and refers to them both as her 'parents'.

After leaving the airport Biles headed to her nearby home town of Spring in a convertible, cheered on by numerous fans who lined the road holding placards of support.

Her homecoming followed her dramatic appearance at the Games, which was mired by withdrawals, psychological counselling and family tragedy.

Biles had arrived with the expectation of equaling or even surpassing the historic four gold medals she won in Rio in 2016, however her quest for further Olympic glory was blighted by mental health struggles.

After a relatively underwhelming qualification process, the gymnast admitted that she was experiencing a mental block known as 'the twisties' - a phenomenon which temporarily affects an athlete's spatial awareness and can result in serious injury.

The US gymnastics star endured a difficult Olympics, but did win a medal in the beam final

She withdrew from multiple events due to her mental health, but did win the silver on beam

Daily medical evaluations and two sessions with Team USA sports psychologist led to Biles being withdrawn from her finals until she was eventually cleared for the balance beam, theoretically the least risky of the apparatus and one which can be performed with the minimum impact on spatial elements.

She took a bronze medal in the beam, to go with her silver from the team competition.

Biles also revealed her paternal aunt had died suddenly during the first week of the Games, with her coach, Cecile Landi, revealing during a press conference that the family tragedy had made an already-tough week 'hell'.

Landi also said that Biles was planning to undergo therapy upon her arrival back in the US, revealing the gymnast had been 'openly talking about it' in Tokyo.

As Biles and the other Team USA gymnasts touched down in America, it was revealed that she'd had to spend several days in Tokyo training in 'secret' in a facility located an hour outside of the city so that she could try and work through her mental health issues away from prying eyes.

On Wednesday, the gymnast posted a touching tribute to the university that afforded her use of its training center, saying that she would be 'forever thankful' to the college and its staff.

'I’ll forever be thankful for Juntendo for allowing me to come train separately to try to get my skills back,' she wrote, before adding of her experience in Tokyo: 'The Japanese are some of, if not the sweetest people I’ve ever met.'

According to the Wall Street Journal, Juntendo professor Kazuhiro Aoki received a call from Biles' trainers on Wednesday morning asking whether she would be able to use the university's gym facility, which is located an hour outside of Tokyo.

On Wednesday, it was revealed that Biles had spent several days secretly training in a facility located one hour outside of Tokyo, where she attempted to overcome her mental health issues

Tribute: The 24-year-old gymnast praised Juntendo University on Twitter, thanking the college for allowing her to train in its gym, one hour outside of Tokyo, away from private eyes

The gym had already been used by Team USA upon their arrival in Japan, before they moved into the official Olympic facilities.

'This is a complicated matter,' Aoki was told over the phone. 'But this is for Biles.'

He revealed to the publication that the gymnast began training in his gym just two hours after the call was made, explaining that staff locked all of the doors so that Biles could be sure nobody would see her struggling through her routines.

'She practiced for two hours that day,' the WSJ reported. 'Then she came back for three more days. Each time, Aoki said, she was accompanied by her coaches and a medical provider.'

According to the professor, who was able to catch a glimpse of the gymnast at work, Biles looked 'like a totally different person' to the gymnast he saw earlier in July, and he remarked that she 'often got frozen' while practicing her skills.

The call from Biles' coaches came just 12 hours after the gymnast shocked the world by flubbing her team final vault, her first event in the competition, during which she balked in mid-air and ended up almost crashing down to the ground.

Shortly after the shock error, Biles stunned spectators and teammates alike when she pulled out of the competition altogether, leaving the other three US gymnasts to carry on the final a man-down.

Struggle: A professor from the university said he received a call from Biles' coaches about using his facility less than 24 hours after she pulled out of the team final following a vault error

Surprise: Biles stunned spectators when she fumbled on her vault - which is usually one of her strongest events - and she later revealed it was the result of the twisties

The gymnast - who won five medals in Rio in 2016 - sparked furious controversy with her decision, with some praising her for spotlighting the importance of mental health, while others accused her of 'quitting' and 'abandoning' her team.

At the time, her future at the Olympics was very much up in the air, with USA Gymnastics revealing that she would be regularly evaluated by its psychologists and doctors to determine her fitness to compete in the other event finals she had qualified for: the all-around, floor exercise, uneven bars, vault, and beam.

One by one, she pulled out of the events - starting with the all-around, which her teammate Sunisa Lee went on to win in her absence.

One day after the final took place, Biles hit back at her critics, sharing a video of herself training her uneven bars routine, while revealing the impact that the 'twisties' had on her skills.

It is now believed that the video was shot inside the Juntendo University training facility where Biles started training while attempting to fight through her mental health issues.

In the Instagram video, Simone could be seen crashing to the ground while trying to perform her uneven bars dismount, which requires her to twist her body around in the air.

Speaking about the struggle with the issue in the caption of her videos, Biles hit out at those who criticized her decision to withdraw from both the finals, insisting that she did not 'quit', while noting that mental health is just as serious as physical health.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's the iconic photo, a football team captain surrounded by team-mates as he holds aloft the cup they have just won high above his head, clasped in two hands and being shaken wildly.

That is, unless you happen to win the Ramon de Carranza trophy as Cadiz just did.

Social media lit up at the Spanish side's penalty shoot-out victory over LaLiga champions Atletico Madrid in one of the country's most illustrious pre-season tournaments, but not because of Cadiz's performance.

Cadiz players lift the giant Ramon de Carranza cup after beating Atletico Madrid on penalties

LaLiga champions Atletico took the lead, but Cadiz levelled and then won the shoot-out 4-2

Instead the size of the trophy stole the show, for it must be one of the largest in any sport across the world. The Ramon de Carranza trophy is so huge that it took at least two Cadiz players to lift it in celebration.

The match itself saw Yannick Carrasco put Atletico ahead after 41 minutes, only for Cadiz's Alberto Perea to equalise in the final few minutes. Cadiz then beat Atletico 4-2 on penalties.

However, some on social media cheekily suggested winning was perhaps the worse option given the mass of silverware the victors are faced with.

'Imagine being the captain of a team that's just won a trophy then realising what you've got to lift...' said one wry Twitter user.

The trophy is almost all tall as some of the Cadiz players, and has been contested since 1955

'I still can't get over how goofy this trophy looks every year hahaha,' wrote another. Well done to Cadiz!'

One fan couldn't resist using the moment to get an early dig in at a Premier League club, claiming the cup 'is bigger than Tottenham's trophy cabinet'.

The tournament itself has been running since 1955 and was created by Cadiz's city council to honour former mayor Ramon de Carranza. Cadiz's stadium is also named after the same man.

Cadiz fans can only hope no players are injured carrying the Ramon de Carranza cup back to their trophy room ahead of the new LaLiga season, which begins on 13 August.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A British boxer stunned an Olympic audience on Wednesday night when he refused point-blank to wear his medal on the podium.

Ben Whittaker kept his head down throughout the ceremony and when his name was announced he collected his silver and stuffed it into his pocket as his fellow medallists looked on.

Whittaker, 24, of West Bromwich, looked crestfallen and barely raised his head to look at the Union Flag as it was unveiled next to the flags of the other medallists from Cuba, Azerbaijan and the Russian Olympic Committee.

There were four medallists on the podium instead of three as the bronze medal was shared with Imam Khataev of the Russian Olympic Committee and Loren Berto Alfonso Dominguez of Azerbaijan. The boxing event doesn't have a bronze medal match due to short recovery times.

Team GB boxer Ben Whittaker (far left) took off his silver medal after losing his light-heavyweight gold-medal fight. There were four medallists on the podium instead of three as the bronze medal is shared - Imam Khataev of the Russian Olympic Committee (second right) and Loren Berto Alfonso Dominguez of Azerbaijan (right).

The 24-year-old took off his medal and stuck it in his pocket as fellow medallists looked on

He produced his medal from his pocket and reluctantly held it for the photographers as the other three boxers hugged and smiled for the cameras, with medals around their necks.

Asked by MailOnline why he hadn’t worn his medal, Whittaker said: ‘Yeah, so, I didn’t win a gold.

‘I lost a gold, so to me it’s a failure so I am not going to celebrate silver at the moment. I am sure over the years I will look back and see what an achievement it is.’

He added: ‘You don’t win silver…you lose gold. So that is why I was so emotional. Nobody trains for silver or bronze.

Whittaker was in tears after losing the final to Cuba's Arlen Lopez via a split decision

‘Everybody up here trained for the gold medal. I woke up this morning truly believing this was my time. I had the whole of the West Midlands behind me and Great Britain

‘Congratulations to Arien. It was his time. He is a great boxer. I just have to go back to the gym, change a few things, work harder and hopefully next time it will be my turn.’

Due to Covid safety rules, medal winners no longer have their awards placed around their necks by officials and dignitaries and instead the awards are presented to them to be self-placed.

Whittaker kept his hands in his pockets throughout the medal celebration for the light heavyweight medals and had earlier left the ring after his defeat to Arien Lopez of Cuba wiping away tears.

Whittaker (left) called himself a 'failure' for picking up silver, saying 'nobody trains for silver

When he appeared with the other medallists later, he was asked to wear the medal, but took it off immediately on leaving the Ryogoku Kokugikan arena and returned it to his pocket.

Piers Morgan, who criticised the praise directed towards Simone Biles and Ben Stokes after the pair withdrew from the Olympics and England cricket duties respectively due to mental health reasons, hailed Whittaker for his statement.

The former Good Morning Britain presenter tweeted: 'Love this - finally, an athlete at these Olympics prepared to tell the truth about competing in elite sport. Good for you @Ben Whittaker.'

Another fan posted: 'I like that interview from Ben Whittaker , honest and disappointed with a silver medal because in his mind he hasn't won the silver he's lost the gold and that is the mentality he needs to move forward.'

Whittaker received the support of Piers Morgan who praised his mentality after the fight

However, Whittaker has also been criticised for 'disgraceful' behaviour by several fans and commentators.

One observer in Tokyo said: ‘I have been to Olympics over the last 25 years and witnessed many, many medal ceremonies but I have never seen anything like this.

‘It wasn’t fair to the other boxers and the Olympics. He needs to learn to accept this loss and come back stronger next time.’

Fans on social media also slammed Whittaker for snubbing his silver medal at the ceremony, with the 24-year-old branded 'disrespectful' and a 'really bad loser'.

Fans reacted furiously to Whittaker's decision to snub his silver medal on the Tokyo podium

One fan tweeted: 'Silver medal is a great achievement! Bit disappointed to him not hanging the medal around his neck. I think that’s disrespectful to other athletes who would dream of achieving a Silver.'

Another posted: 'Really bad loser - getting an Olympic silver medal is something to be very proud of. Children who would be watching could emulate this bad sportsmanship.'

Meanwhile, one fan said: 'Unfortunately disgraced himself at the medal ceremony. Hang that medal around your neck and be proud like the rest of#teamgb you've done great to get silver.'

One angry fan tweeted: 'Disgusting behaviour at the medal ceremony. He doesn’t deserve to be part of the team. Spoiled, petulant, disgraceful.'

Long after the fight, Whittaker apologised to any offence he may have caused for discarding the medal.

He added: 'At the time I should have took it on the chin and put the beautiful silver medal around my neck and just smiled.

'I wasn’t trying to be disrespectful to him (Lopez the gold medalist). It’s his moment and I don’t want to try and take the shine away from him.'

The 24-year-old (left) claimed he 'woke up this morning truly believing this was my time'

He was born in Wolverhampton and said he got into boxing through his father’s love for the sport.

In an interview released by the Olympics 2020, he said: ‘I was in and out of trouble at school, very hyperactive and my mother couldn't handle me.

‘So my dad took me down to the gym to burn off energy and gain some discipline. I haven't looked back since.

‘Boxing is my life and I thank boxing for the opportunities it has given me. School was never for me, I needed to be active. Sitting in a classroom was a big no.’

Whittaker revealed in October of last year that he would not be happy with a silver medal

He had told an interviewer in April about his ambitions which was ‘to win a gold medal at the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo, and to become world champion.’

In October, Whittaker posted a tweet saying: 'If your happy with a bronze or a silver medal you ain’t fit for the TOP!'

Several British sports stars have been accused of 'petulance' by refusing to wear their runners-up medals in recent years, including England's Euro 2020 squad who lost the tournament final to Italy via a penalty shootout last month.

England's Euro 2020 stars, including goalscorer Luke Shaw (right), took their silver medals off after losing the final to Italy last month

Three Lions captain Harry Kane took his off straight away in the medal ceremony at Wembley

England manager Gareth Southgate kept his medal on in the aftermath of the ceremony

Only seven of the Three Lions' squad - Jordan Pickford, Harry Maguire, Tyrone Mings, Aaron Ramsdale, Sam Johnstone, Raheem Sterling and Jordan Henderson- chose to keep their silver medals around their neck, while England manager Gareth Southgate also did not take his off.

But most of squad appeared to remove their medals just moments after receiving them, to mixed reaction from their fans - with some slamming the 'disrespectful' and 'unsporting' behaviour while others insisted it is 'standard practice' to remove runners-up medals at sporting contests.

Actor and failed London mayoral candidate Laurence Fox slammed the England stars, calling them 'kneeling babies' and 'sore losers'.

He tweeted: 'You don't take your medal off in camera shot like it's someone else's fault that you took too many steps for your penalty. You lost. Pay your respects to those who beat you by waiting ten yards before you pull your medal off. Be gracious. Sore losers.'

England fans on social media were split on England's players taking their silver medals off

One Twitter user posted: 'I really don't get why England players took off the medals so quickly and dismissively. Bad vibe x sport. They played well throughout the tournament. Period.'

Another viewer said: 'Taking the medals off is EXACTLY why the rest of the UK don't support England.'

But die-hard Three Lions fans defended the players, with one supporter tweeting: 'Hardly childish... it's the mentality of the the fact they still lost, why wear a medal for second place'.

Another said: 'I personally cheered those England players removing their silver medals.'

England's rugby stars removed their medals after losing the World Cup final to South Africa

Prop Kyle Sinckler took his runners-up medal off from around his neck after receiving i

In 2019, England's rugby stars also refused to wear their runners-up medals after losing the Rugby World Cup final 32-12 to South Africa.

Maro Itoje did not put his on while Kyle Sinckler quickly tore his off during the post-game ceremony and captain Owen Farrell took his off before South Africa lifted their trophy.

Fans watching the final branded England as 'sore losers' and 'unsportsmanlike' for taking their medals off so quickly.

One said at the time: 'England having a temper tantrum refusing to wear their medals. Pathetic.'

England captain Owen Farrell looked at his medal but did not put it back on after the match

England's rugby players were branded as 'sore losers' for not wearing their medals

But former England rugby captain James Haskell defended Eddie Jones' side for taking off their medals as 'what matters is 1st place, the gold medal'.

He told Sportsmail after the final: 'I think for obvious reasons none of England's players will be framing their runners-up medals on the wall when they get home this week. I have seen comments already criticising players for taking them off straight away after the presentation.

'Anyone who suggests this is guilty of a misunderstanding and has never played sport at the highest level. They have never worked super hard to achieve something and then fallen at the final hurdle.

James Haskell defended the likes of Maro Itoje who did not even put their silver medals on

'Nobody cares about coming second. In 2019 we make everyone feel better about themselves and say, have this medal for 10th place or it's about taking part. These are things we tell ourselves, but what matters is 1st place, the gold medal.

'The players who get silver will be p****d off, they will be upset, and they will be despondent. It's how we are all built and it's frankly how it should be at an elite level. No one got anywhere being happy with defeat.

'Friends and family will be telling them to be proud of reaching a World Cup final but, for a few weeks at least, the players will not want to listen. No professional athlete wants to come second.'

Stream every unmissable moment of Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 live on discovery+, The Streaming Home of the Olympics
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olympic athletes are sharing moments of triumph – and despair – with their families in real time through live video links within arenas, in an attempt to overcome the Covid ban on supporters in Tokyo.

And new tech is enhancing the experience of TV viewers, which even allows spectators to track the heart rate of nervous competitors as they prepare for critical moments of competition.

The system to link up sports men and women with their loved ones is known as Athlete Moment. It is one of a number of technological innovations at the Games.

The Olympic Broadcasting Service has set up two-way video links so competitors can see the celebrations, or commiserations, of their family and friends back home when they have completed their events.

Team GB gold medallist, Tom Daley, is among those who could go to the monitor and see his joyous family after he had delivered the dives of his life.

Tom Daley and Matty Lee could connect immediately with their family via poolside monitors

The Team GB pair produced a stunning performance to win synchronised 10m platform event

The 27-year-old won his first Olympic gold alongside Matty Lee in the men's synchronised 10m platform event.

As the divers went to the screen, Tom's fans could be heard shouting: 'Show us your medal?'

And the Olympic heroes waved their bling enthusiastically in front of the screens for the people back home.

The technology is available in five of the Olympic venues.

The divers could go to a monitor in the arena and share the moment with their loved ones

Five Olympic arenas have the 'Athlete Moment' monitors for competitors to talk to loved ones

After producing the swim of his life to win a silver medal behind Team GB's Adam Peaty in the men's 100m breaststroke final, Arno Kamminga of the Netherlands was able to instantly celebrate with his friends, who were waiting for him on a video link.

'They were on the screen and that feels so special,' Arno said afterwards. 'I knew they were with me but to see them right after my race and right after I got my medal, it's amazing.

'They're my special ones – my family, friends and even my old coach, where it all started. To swim good is really nice, but to share it with your family and friends and your loved ones, that makes it even better.'

Hungary's Omar Salim just missed out on a medal in his taekwondo event, but his nearest and dearest were on the screen to cheer him up right after the bronze medal bout.

Arno Kamminga of the Netherlands was able to instantly celebrate with his friends, who were waiting for him on a video link

'There were a lot of people there!' explained Omar. 'We had my mother, my uncle Joseph who has also competed for Hungary in the past, and then a lot of my friends and team-mates who I grew up in taekwondo with. They were all there watching me from different places, and it was so nice to have that support.'

During the pandemic there have been a number of experiments with fan interaction, including in the Premier League where supporters were given the chance to appear on a live video wall streamed into stadiums.

The developments at the Olympics may pave the way for more fan participation at live events in the future

'What we're working on is incredibly important, and I think it's here to stay,' said Yiannis Exarchos, CEO of Olympic Broadcast Services, which provides the broadcast feed for rights holders around the world.

The Olympics has also developed online fan interaction with videos and virtual cheers

'After the announcement that there would be no international fans allowed into Japan, we felt it was our duty to make sure their voices were heard at the Games, and as such we fast-tracked a few ideas that we had for future games.

'It was our task to decide how we can use technology to support athletes, as these are Games of human connection. Despite the difficult conditions and procedures. We need to highlight that the world is here, and the world is watching and engaging and supporting the efforts of the athletes.'

In addition to Athlete Moments, the Olympic Broadcasting Service, has created a Fan Zone which allows viewers to upload videos of themselves and a virtual cheer to show their appreciation for the athletes.

There have been more than 80 million cheers from the 205 countries participating at the Olympics, so far.

In archery, special cameras and technology can record biometric data from athletes

The innovations are not just to support the athletes. The coverage includes new features that will no doubt shape sports coverage in the years ahead.

In the sprint races, viewers will be able to track the peak speed of the athletes and analyse the different phases of each race.

There are also new insights into what the athletes are going through while they compete, with biometric data providing information about their stress levels.

In archery, four cameras placed 20 metres from the athletes focus on their face and analyse the slight changes of skin colour generated by the contraction of blood vessels from the captured video.

Audiences have been able to watch the heartbeat variations and adrenaline rush experienced by the archer's body, as they shoot their arrow, through an on-screen graphic using technology from Intel. The data is rendered into a 'confidence level' for each shot they have to make.

Viewers can watch the action and track heart rates and 'confidence levels' of nervous athletes

'The Olympics have always been a platform for innovation in live sports coverage,' Sotiris Salamouris, chief technology officer, told Sportsmail.

'Many important technological changes were either firstly introduced during the Olympics or became widespread once adopted during the Games. The examples are many and impressive: from live satellite contribution, to formats of increased picture quality, to specialized cameras of different types.

'Once new technologies and production methods have been adopted by the Olympics, there is confidence by the industry for their continuous use from this point onwards and thus become the new 'standard' for live sports story telling. This has happened again and again in the past.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raphael Varane completed the second part of his medical at Manchester United on Wednesday and an announcement of his £42million move to the club is imminent, according to reports.

Last month, United announced that they had struck a deal with Real Madrid for the transfer of the World Cup winner, who had been at the Santiago Bernabeu for the last decade.

Varane's transfer to Old Trafford has taken some time to complete due to quarantine rules and the Frenchman is in a race against time to feature in United's opening game of the Premier League season against Leeds on Saturday.

Raphael Varane's Manchester United medical was completed on Wednesday, say reports

The Frenchman was ushered into United's training ground in a black Mercedes on Tuesday

And according to Italian journalist Fabrizio Romano, Varane is now signing his United contract after completing the final part of his medical checks on Wednesday.

He had the first part of his medical on Tuesday after arriving at United's training ground in the back of a black Mercedes van.

United manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer had been desperate to add to his defensive ranks this summer, and identified Varane, 28, as a top target to play alongside captain Harry Maguire for the coming campaign.

Varane's availability had become apparent after the Frenchman entered the final phase of his Real Madrid contract and came into a stand-off with the Spanish giants regarding fresh terms.

Varane joins in a £42million deal from Real Madrid, where he spent a decade of his career

He will now be Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's (above) second high-profile signing after Jadon Sancho

United need to successfully register the player by Friday evening, so can will be clear to play against Leeds United at Old Trafford on Saturday.

Reports claim that Varane wants to start training immediately on Wednesday with his new team-mates in a bid to stake his claim for a starting role against Leeds, though manager Solskjaer has already suggested the newcomer will have to make do with a place on the substitutes bench.

Earlier this week Varane updated fans via his social media channels, showing himself training alone in the garden of his new Manchester residence while quarantining.

The ex-Real Madrid man updated fans earlier in the week on his solo training in Manchester

Varane joins Jadon Sancho in becoming United's second marquee arrival of the summer.

The Red Devils are bidding to improve upon last season's second placed finish, and a defeat in the final of the Europa League.

The club will also competing in the Champions League again, after going out at the group stages last season, which sent them down the Europa League path.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England's deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam has reportedly urged all Premier League players to 'get vaccinated' as soon as possible after warning them that they 'can't outrun' the virus.

A virtual meeting on August 2 was held by the Premier League with all 20 teams' captains in a bid to dispel any myths around the Covid jab and get vaccinated before the start of the new campaign.

According to The Telegraph, Van-Tam and the Premier League medical officer Mark Gillett looked to reassure the players over the vaccine in the hope the information would reach their team-mates.

The report goes on to claim that Manchester United skipper Harry Maguire was 'extremely supportive' of the idea to get double-jabbed and will encourage his team-mates at Old Trafford to follow suit.

Many players left the country this summer for holiday breaks or tournament football when all adults under the age of 30 were invited to take up the vaccine, with some yet to do so.

It comes after confirmation that players in England's top division would not be forced to get vaccinated, despite clubs fully encouraging their players to do so.

Jonathan Van-Tam has reportedly urged all Premier League players to 'get vaccinated'

It comes after the Premier League confirmed players will not be forced to accept the vaccine

Premier League chief executive told The Telegraph about the message that was being sent to the players in the virtual meeting.

Masters said: 'We [Premier League] cannot mandate vaccination and we are not [doing that]. We are trying to explain to the captains who then explained to the squad players - and this message will be coming through from club doctors and club executives - that if you are not vaccinated it might make life more difficult for you. You won't be able to do things that vaccinated people can.

'Professor Van Tam explained the potential downsides or risks of vaccination are far outweighed by the potential risks and downsides of getting Covid. He said that one thing is very sure: you will either get vaccinated or get Covid. You can't outrun it. Eventually you will get it. From his perspective he was trying to do a little bit of myth-busting around some of the issues or views out there.'

The Premier League's pandemic protocols will remain in place for players at training grounds and in dressing rooms as there are fears the season could unravel because of the disruption caused by positive Covid-19 cases.

Van-Tam held a virtual meeting with the 20 Premier League captains earlier this month, including Liverpool's Jordan Henderson (right) and Manchester United's Harry Maguire (left)

There is a concern Covid outbreaks could still impact the return of football this season

It needs only two or more positive tests at a work building, such as a training ground, for Public Health England to intervene and potentially close a training ground.

Several players have expressed concerns about the vaccine.

Everton midfielder Fabian Delph published a quote on Instagram from the Healing Chamber, a holistic medical practitioner based in Charlotte, North Carolina.

'It's now a 'conspiracy theory' to believe that the immune system is capable of doing the job it was designed to do,' the post read. The former Liverpool defender, Dejan Lovren, has said that nobody should be forced to be vaccinated.

'Everyone should choose, when I read people who are not vaccinated will not be able to find a job, I wonder if it is compatible with human rights,' Lovren said. 'I do not think that vaccines are dangerous but no one can make me take it.'

Lovren, who is now with Zenit St Petersburg, was eventually vaccinated ahead of representing Croatia at Euro 2020.

Leon Legge, who plays for Port Vale, shared anti-vaccine sentiments on social media with nearly 10,000 followers.

In one post, he wrote: 'People don't realise that the vaccine hasn't enough evidence or data to be even be legally called a vaccine.'

Fabian Delph published a quote on Instagram which was about the Covid-19 vaccine

Bristol City said they would educate staff on vaccinations after striker Nahki Wells shared anti-vaccine information on social media before deleting it hours later. He posted a series of conspiracy theory memes, including one purporting to be advice on 'how to legally decline a vaccine'.

Premier League clubs started their vaccinations programmes over the summer, with many players now double vaccinated.

Covid officers will continue to patrol training grounds to ensure players do not socialise for longer than 15 minutes.

It was a lack of vigilance that allowed Ben Chilwell and Mason Mount to chat to Chelsea team-mate Billy Gilmour after the England-Scotland Euro 2020 game for more than 20 minutes, which meant Chilwell and Mount had to isolate after Gilmour caught coronavirus.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mikel Arteta says he is determined to prove Arsenal’s many doubters wrong and wants it all captured on camera as Amazon Prime prepare to document the club’s season.

When the BBC asked their 20 TV and radio pundits to predict who will finish in the top four of the Premier League, Arsenal did not feature once. That includes the selections of Sportsmail columnists Chris Sutton, Martin Keown and Micah Richards.

Arteta, usually a private person who likes to keep issues in-house, will have nowhere to hide after the club decided to sign up for the Amazon series. He revealed that he was given no say in the matter.

Mikel Arteta is determined to prove the doubters wrong with Arsenal written off this season

Arsenal travel to top-flight newcomers Brentford on Friday night as they look to start the season strongly.

When told bookmakers had them at 50-1 to win the title and the odds suggested they would finish outside the top four, Arteta, who was a player the last time Arsenal finished fourth or higher in 2015-16, said: ‘I don’t know where they get that from.

‘Hopefully we can prove them wrong. Last year it was six points (off fourth place). We need to be there. We can find excuses, other teams doing whatever. We have to find a way — our way — to do it with the tools we have.’

No pundit has backed Arsenal to seal a top four finish and Arteta wants to prove them wrong

The Gunners have opened their doors to an Amazon documentary crew for this season

Regarding the Amazon series, he continued: ‘I experienced that a few years ago when I was (assistant manager) at Man City. We’re going to help as much as possible for everybody to see what this club means, how things are done, be as transparent as we can. Hopefully this is a perfect year to show that. We need to make it happen. It’s down to us.

‘I think I’ve been very transparent since I’ve been here and tried to respond to every single question. But if you ask me things about the dressing room, I’m sorry, that door is completely closed. While they (Amazon) are here we will try to be us.’

Last season saw supporters protest against the club’s owners, culminating in ugly scenes outside the Emirates Stadium in April after the Super League debacle.

Arteta is hopeful that returning Arsenal fans can help push the side throughout the season

This summer the club were linked with Leicester’s James Maddison, Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham and Manchester City’s Bernardo Silva. None of them arrived. Centre back Ben White at £50million is their biggest signing, from Brighton.

Arteta insists Arsenal will be active in the market before the window closes at the end of this month as he feels the fans need to be excited. ‘Since I’ve been here, we haven’t had the fans and this for me is a key factor,’ he added.

‘We have to embrace and engage with them. The team have to give enough arguments to the fans to support us. With them we are going to be much stronger.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leicester City have officially unveiled their sprawling vision for a planned redevelopment of the King Power Stadium.

On Thursday afternoon, the club revealed the first images for the venue and hope to expand it to a 40,000 capacity, as well as build a hotel and indoor arena.

Releasing their proposal on their website and social media, Leicester have asked for feedback as part of a public consultation, and are keen for the views of supporters.

Leicester City have officially unveiled their proposed development to the King Power Stadium

Public consultations for the expansion of King Power Stadium’s capacity to 40,000 and significant developments to the surrounding areas are now open. — Leicester City (@LCFC) August 12, 2021

The pictures were pitched on social media and accompanied by a in-depth video narrated by club legend, and avid fan, Gary Lineker, who outlines the project.

If it is approved, 8,000 new seats will be added as part of an upgrade to the East Stand, which will also be topped by a bubble-like roof.

The ambitious Leicester, who are riding high on the wave of their FA Cup triumph, would see their home capacity increase from 32,261 to around 40,000.

The sprawling proposals from the club have pitched a stadium expansion and new attractions

If the plans are approved, the East Stand upgrade will take the capacity up to around 40,000

In the document released by the club, the major extension is the centrepiece of the development, with the club looking to revitalise the stadium and its surroundings.

As well as the hotel and 6,000-capacity arena, a residential tower, office space and a new public area featuring a fanzone would also be built.

Leicester are believed to be planning to submit their application in the autumn, in the hope of then being given the green light by next spring.

They have also said that the earliest possible date for work on the stadium to be completed is the summer of 2024, however.

Leicester plan to submit their application in the autumn and hope for approval by next spring

The King Power's (pictured in May) expansion would underline the club's progress off the field

'To continue competing in the Premier League requires a disciplined, sustainable and innovative business model that delivers an outstanding experience to LCFC fans all over the world,' a club statement read.

'Following the completion of our world class training centre, we are now turning our focus to the regeneration and development of the King Power Stadium site.'

They will apply for full planning permission to the expansion of the ground as part of the next steps, as well as consent for the further development in the area.

The club believe that the plans will 'further underline Leicestershire's reputation as a home of world class sport' and also 'create a 365-day destination' for supporters.

Reacting to the proposals, Sir Peter Soulsby, the Mayor of Leicester, said: 'These are ambitious plans that reflect the club's ongoing commitment to the city and constant desire to build on its incredible achievements.'

Leicester have been quick to continue their progress off the field, having moved into a new and state of the art training complex worth £100million in December.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Brentford that begin an exciting new adventure in the Premier League this Friday night could scarcely be further removed from the club Hermann Hreidarsson played for in the late nineties.

When the big Icelandic defender arrived at Griffin Park for a club record £750,000 fee in September 1998, following businessman Ron Noades down the leagues from Crystal Palace, they'd just been relegated to the fourth tier.

Now the Bees are set to grace the top flight for the first time in 74 years and host Arsenal first up in their stunning £70million Community Stadium, opened just last year.

Hermann Hreidarsson is backing Brentford in their first season in the Premier League having played for the club when they were in the fourth tier back in 1998-99

The giant Icelandic defender played for Brentford in 1998 and 1999 having followed chairman-manager Ron Noades down to the depths of the Football League from Crystal Palace

Capacity crowds are also returning at the perfect moment for Bees fans who have seen plenty of ups and downs over the years.

Hreidarsson, 24 at the time, had played regularly for Palace in a short-lived stint in the Premier League after moving to England from his homeland.

Little did he know it at the time but that would be the first of five relegations from the division, an unwanted record he shares with former Wales striker Nathan Blake.

But instead of playing in what was then Division One, Hreidarsson moved even further down after Noades became chairman and subsequently also manager of Brentford.

But why decide to make such a drop?

'Ron was just a really passionate football man and I had a great relationship with him,' Hreidarsson tells Sportsmail. 'It was a no-brainer just to test it out.

'It was probably the best move I ever made because I really learned there were so many talented football players in the lower leagues.

Hreidarsson worked with Ron Noades (centre) at Palace and followed him to Brentford

Now Brentford are set for the Premier League after winning last season's play-off final

'I thought I could do it with my right foot down there but I got battered in the first few games and thought, "What is going on?"

'It was a great learning curve, this was the nitty gritty and you have you have to enjoy doing the dirty work, the s****y bits and enjoy fighting, which I incidentally did.

'It turned on the real hunger to want to get back to Old Trafford, back to Liverpool or Highbury. But you have to work for it or it doesn't happen. It toughened me up.

'You had to really roll up your sleeves and be at it for 90 minutes week-in, week-out or you just get crushed.'

With their 6ft 3in ice man patrolling the defence, however, it was Brentford doing most of the crushing as they won promotion as champions.

Brentford's stunning £70million Community Stadium is fit to host Premier League football

The Bees are finally able to welcome supporters back in big numbers as they face Arsenal

Brentford's first six in the Premier League Friday Arsenal (H) August 21 Crystal Palace (A) August 28 Aston Villa (A) September 11 Brighton (H) September 18 Wolves (A) September 25 Liverpool (H) Advertisement

Ghanian forward Lloyd Owusu banged in 22 league goals as the Bees went 16 games unbeaten from mid-February onwards to seal the title with a final day win over second-placed Cambridge United.

'Ron had a great coaching staff there. Ray Lewington, one of my favourite coaches from my time in England was an absolute football genius,' Hreidarsson recalls.

'We had a really good team and went on a great winning streak. I think I am unbeaten in the my last 33 games with Brentford! [including a portion of the following season]

'Everything was a great experience; lovely Griffin Park, what an atmosphere and it grew as the season progressed and we picked up real form and were flying. The fans were buzzing and I loved it.'

Just 10 games into the 1999-2000 season and Hreidarsson was on his way back to the Premier League with Wimbledon. The transfer fee of £2.5m ensured a handsome profit for Brentford.

The Crazy Gang culture was still very much alive at the Dons and Hreidarsson wasn't immune from the pranks and practical jokes.

'The new player initiation when they burned my clothes. There was a bonfire out there with my clothes on it,' he recalls with a smile.

'I thought I'd got away with the shoes but they were in the toilet. My gear was c*** anyway. I did love it at Wimbledon though, there were some great characters.'

Brentford manager Thomas Frank is thrown into the air by his players after promotion in May

They suffered relegation that season and Hreidarsson went on to go down with Ipswich Town in 2002, Charlton Athletic in 2007 and Portsmouth in 2010.

Having come up through the Championship play-offs in May, Brentford will inevitably be many people's favourites to go straight back down but Hreidarsson is optimistic about their chances.

'They are a proper 21st century football club, they are innovative and ahead of the game and I'm sure a lot of clubs look at them with envy for as a great example of how things can be run without spending millions and millions,' he said.

'[Owner] Matthew Benham and [director of football] Rasmus Ankersen are geniuses behind the scenes. To be able to do that and go to the top level with that formula is inspiring.

Star striker Ivan Toney, who scored 31 Championship goals last season, will be a key figure

'That consistency has been at the club for years now, you could see they were going places and getting stronger and stronger.

'They fully deserved to go to the Premier League and what a timing with the new stadium. They are riding a great wave.

'The manager Thomas Frank and the football he plays is so good to watch. It's brave with the high pressing and high intensity.

'They have got the players, great assets in many areas with pace, power and ability. I think Brentford will have a great season and I'm really excited.'

Hermann Hreidarsson previewed the 2021 Premier League season with CoinJar, Brentford FC's new Official Cryptocurrency Partner - the ultimate platform to buy, sell and spend Bitcoin and cryptocurrency. Sign up in an instant and access digital currency wherever you go.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pep Guardiola has emphasised the importance of Gabriel Jesus to his Manchester City side as Harry Kane speculation continues to dominate the Premier League build-up.

City have been heavily linked with a move for Tottenham and England captain Kane throughout the summer and manager Guardiola last week confirmed the club's interest.

The champions are seeking a replacement striker for the prolific Sergio Aguero, who left the Etihad Stadium at the end of last season.

Pep Guardiola has described Gabriel Jesus as being 'incredibly important' for Manchester City

Yet after more than four years of mostly playing second fiddle to Aguero, it could also be the chance for Brazil international Jesus to step forward.

'Gabriel is an incredibly important player for us,' said City manager Guardiola, whose side interestingly begin their title defence at Spurs on Sunday.

'Always his mind was in the right place and he can play as a striker or wider, in more lateral positions.

'He is an exceptional player, there is no doubt about that. He has had an incredible key role in these many years of success we've had, every season.'

With Kane still in the Spurs camp, for now at least, Jesus has the chance to stake his claim for a regular starting spot this weekend.

City have been heavily linked with a move for Tottenham's Harry Kane throughout the summer

The 24-year-old was unavailable for the Community Shield last week - having taken a later summer break following the Copa America - but is now in contention.

His principal role of centre forward, however, is not always one Guardiola chooses to deploy. In the knockout games in last season's run to the Champions League final, for instance, the Spaniard opted to play with a 'false nine' and the system mostly worked well.

Yet he insists a striker will always have a part to play.

Guardiola said: 'We played with recognised strikers with Sergio Aguero and Gabriel (last season).

Guardiola says a striker will always have a part to play despite him often using a 'false nine'

'Unfortunately Sergio was injured for more than a year and he played few, few games but, always when Sergio was fit, he was an important part of the team.

'He was there, a proper striker - and Gabriel is a proper striker. Sometimes we play with a different approach but the intention is the same, to try to control the game and score goals as much as possible with or without a striker.

'It is what has happened since I arrived and we will continue this way.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Soldier's Minute (Ripon, nap, 3.45) has been knocking on the door in big sprint handicaps and his time could have arrived in the William Hill Great St Wilfrid Handicap.

The six-year-old, trained by Keith Dalgleish and ridden by Callum Rodriguez, finished a close fourth in last season’s Ayr Gold Cup and second in a sprint handicap at York’s Ebor meeting, demonstrating that these cavalry-charge sprints suit him.

This season has not been straightforward for Soldier’s Minute and he has only run twice. But he performed as well as could have been expected on his comeback in a conditions race at Hamilton, where he had to concede weight to rivals rated higher.

Callum Rodriguez rode Soldier's Minute to fourth place at last season’s Ayr Gold Cup

Crucially, Soldier’s Minute has dropped a few pounds in the handicap, which can turn near misses into hits.

Soldier’s Minute is drawn next to a strongly-fancied contender in Soul Seeker and only a few stalls from another leading player Mr Wagyu, who decisively won the Stewards’ Sprint Handicap at Glorious Goodwood, the race for sprinters who miss the cut for the more prestigious Stewards’ Cup.

The favourite is Tim Easterby-trained Staxton and it is hard to believe that he will not play some part in the finish. Staxton finished fifth in the 2019 Great St Wilfrid and won it last year. He has run six times at Ripon, winning three times.

Hukum (Newbury, 2.20) should have more joy trying to repeat his 2020 win in the Geoffrey Freer Stakes. The Owen Burrows-trained four-year-old has been in fair form and looks a cut above his opponents.

Hukum (left) is in good form ahead will aim to win the Geoffrey Freer Stakes again on Saturday

Charlie Appleby-trained Al Suhail has been cut to favourite for Newbury’s feature Hungerford Stakes but he may have to give best to William Haggas-trained Sacred (Newbury, 3.30).

Frankie Dettori will try to repeat his 2020 big-race double on the equivalent weekend at Deauville. A year ago Dettori won Saturday's Prix Guillaume D’Ornano on Mishrill before landing Sunday’s Group One Prix Jacques Le Marois on Palace Pier. John and Thady Gosden-trained Palace Pier is back again in the Marois facing a line-up which is headed by Jim Bolger’s 2,000 Guineas and St James’s Palace Stakes winner Poetic Flare. On Saturday afternoon Dettori rides the Gosden-trained Derab in the Guillaume D’Ornano.

Mastercraftsman, the top two-year-old in Europe in 2008 who landed the Irish 2,000 Guineas and St James’s Palace Stakes as a three-year-old has died Arc-winning jockey Pierre-Charles Boudot, 28, who is facing allegations of rape, has been suspended from riding for a further six months by France Galop. The three-time champion jockey was indicted in May and had his licence suspended for three months after he was accused of rape by a work-rider following a party in February.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona manager Ronald Koeman has admitted he would 'prefer' to have Lionel Messi but praised his team's effort after their 4-2 victory against Real Sociedad.

The Catalan club opened their LaLiga campaign off with three points thanks to goals from Gerard Pique, a brace from Martin Braithwaite and a stoppage time goal from Sergi Roberto.

It is the first time since the 2003-2004 season where Messi won't play a league game for the club and he will be a big miss in their challenge for the title and the Champions League.

Ronald Koeman hailed the 'collective' effort of his team after their opening day victory

Barcelona approach a LaLiga season without Lionel Messi for the first time since 2003-2004

Speaking to the media following the victory, Koeman said: 'I think our game can be more collective than before, but I'd prefer to have Messi in my team. But if we don't have the player, it has to be the collective.'

Barcelona were unable to sign Lionel Messi to a new contract due to LaLiga regulations about player salaries.

The Argentine superstar has joined French giants Paris Saint-Germain where he will form a deadly trio with ex-Barcelona teammate Neymar and Kylian Mbappe.

Martin Braithwaite netted a brace as Barcelona picked up a 4-2 win over Real Sociedad

One of Barcelona's additions this summer, Memphis Depay, impressed Koeman who was also previously his manager for the Dutch national team.

Asked about his performance against Real Sociedad, the Barcelona manager said: 'He played a great game and he gave a great assist. He's always doing things,' he said Depay before turning his attention to Braithwate who scored twice.

'He's an example of a professional. He always works for the team and has improved his game. He has speed and is difficult to stop. I'm delighted to have a player like him.'

Memphis Depay will have a big role to play this season in the absence of Messi

He also offered praise to Pique, who took a pay cut to allow Memphis and Garcia to be registered for this match.

'He was the leader last year but this season he is better physically. His attitude has been exemplary, like that of the other veterans.'

More sacrifices will need to be made to register Sergio Aguero or further reinforce the team during the summer transfer window.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David de Gea was forced to take a taxi home from Manchester United's team bonding dinner out after finding his Aston Martin clamped.

The goalkeeper joined team-mates at the swanky establishment as they toasted the upcoming season but will have been dismayed by his £150,000 Aston Martin Vantage being rendered immobile afterwards for not having any tax.

Images show the Spaniard's luxury sports car with a front wheel locked up and yellow notice stuck to one of the windows in a city centre parking spot.

David de Gea's Aston Martin was clamped as he did not have any tax on the vehicle

The Spaniard was forced to take a taxi home after the team bonding night out

Paul Pogba (left) and new signing Jadon Sancho (right) were among the stars to hit the town

De Gea was not the only United star to be confronted with a car-related frustration in the wake of United's three-and-a-half hour meal.

England full-back Luke Shaw was among the players to leave the restaurant at around 10:30pm and found he had been given a parking ticket.

The 26-year-old's Range Rover was seen with the yellow ticket on the windscreen on Tuesday night.

Solskjaer's squad will have been celebrating the end of their pre-season campaign and looking ahead to the start of the Premier League.

The likes of Paul Pogba and new £73million signing Jadon Sancho were pictured upon arrival to the Ivy.

Luke Shaw returned to his Range Rover to find a parking ticket on the windscreen

Shaw (front) and Brandon Williams (red jacket) spent three-and-a-half hours at the Ivy

The Frenchman was kitted out in a denim jacket and black cap while the England winger wore an understated white t-shirt.

Some, including the 21-year-old, wore a face covering while others opted against it.

No doubt Solskjaer and Co were looking ahead to what might be in store for them this season as they bid for a 14th Premier League crown and 21st league title.

United will play their season opener in front of supporters at Old Trafford in Saturday's 12:30pm kick off.

They take on Marcelo Bielsa's swashbuckling Leeds side having strengthened in the transfer market with the recruitment of Sancho from Borussia Dortmund and Raphael Varane will soon be arriving.

The Real Madrid centre-back is set to join on a £42m deal having completed his medical at Carrington on Wednesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel believes Romelu Lukaku is on the same level as Erling Haaland, Robert Lewandowski and Harry Kane ahead of his move to Chelsea.

The European champions are about to seal a club record £98million deal to re-sign the prolific Belgian, who Chelsea returned to after their pursuit of Borussia Dortmund’s Haaland proved unsuccessful.

‘Romelu is one of the guys like Haaland, Lewandowski and Kane, a real No 9 who loves to score and has a presence in the box,’ Tuchel said. ‘He has the kind of profile we are looking for.’

Thomas Tuchel has lavished praise on Inter star Romelu Lukaku ahead of his Chelsea arrival

Timo Werner echoed Tuchel’s praise of his incoming strike partner, saying: ‘Lukaku is one of the best three strikers in the world, no question.

I don’t think we need to say much about him. He would benefit any team.’

Lukaku passed the main part of his medical in Milan on Monday before flying to Nice, with meetings planned for him and his agent Federico Pastorello in Monaco on Tuesday.

The Blues have agreed a £98m deal with Inter to land the Belgian marksman this summer

Tuchel hailed Lukaku as one of the top strikers along with Erling Haaland (left) and Harry Kane

They were then due to fly into London to finalise his switch on Tuesday, but those plans were delayed by Inter’s bid to secure Edin Dzeko from Roma as a replacement for Lukaku.

Jose Mourinho’s Roma, in turn, are attempting to land a successor to Dzeko and have made a £34m approach to Chelsea for Tammy Abraham, made up of an initial loan.

The Blues would prefer a permanent deal for Abraham, who is also admired by Arsenal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal have launched a striking 'mystery blue' third kit with a lightning bold pattern throughout the shirt for the 2021-22 season.

The new jersey is based on London culture from the 1990s and is in line 'with the club's DNA', according to kit manufacturers adidas.

Gunners stars including Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Bukayo Saka, Emile Smith Rowe and Alexandre Lacazette - along with Arsenal's women's team - modelled the kit, which will be worn for the first time in the north Londoner's opening Premier League game with Brentford on Friday.

Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (left) and Emile Smith Rowe (right) model Arsenal's new third kit

Arsenal have launched their new 'mystery blue' third strip for the forthcoming season

Nicolas Pepe and Thomas Partey were among the other Gunners stars to show off the flashy new strip during the launch.

The kit contains the words 'Arsenal for Everyone' inside the shirt collar, paying tribute to the Gunners' scheme promoting diversity right throughout the club.

Arsenal recently came out to defend England winger Saka after he received significant racist abuse on social media following his crucial penalty miss in the Three Lions' Euro 2020 final shootout loss to Italy.

England winger Bukayo Saka was another Arsenal star to show off their new shirt

The kit has a lightning bolt pattern through the kit in adidas' third season with the club

The Gunners already revealed their adidas home and away kits for the forthcoming campaign, with the home kit displaying their traditional red and white colours and the away jersey being a yellow.

Arsenal have been in a partnership with adidas since the start of the 2019-20 season, with the north Londoners signing a £65m-per-year deal after five seasons with Puma.

Mikel Arteta's side kick off their Premier League season on Friday night at newly-promoted Brentford as they look to bounce back from back-to-back eighth-placed finishes in England's top-flight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Imran Tahir claimed the first hat-trick of The Hundred as the Birmingham Phoenix went joint top of the table with Trent Rockets after a 93-run win over Welsh Fire.

Leg-spinner Tahir finished with five for 25 after dismissing Ahmad Qais, Matt Milnes and David Payne with the last three deliveries as Fire were bowled out for 91.

Opener Will Smeed - at 19 the youngest player in the men's competition - had finished unbeaten on 65 from 38 balls after Moeen Ali smashed 59 off just 28 as Phoenix posted 184 for five, the highest team total in The Hundred so far.

Birmingham Phoenix's Imran Tahir has claimed the first hat-trick of The Hundred competition

The leg-spinner helped Phoenix dismantle Welsh Fire in their 93-win victory on Monday night

David Payne took three for 38 from his 20 balls but Ali hit five sixes and Smeed four, Liam Livingstone weighing in with two more in his 31 from 19 balls.

After Fire had won the toss, Phoenix's powerplay of 35 for one looked a shade modest, but Ali's assault changed that.

A disdainful six into The Hollies off Luke Fletcher preceded one straight down the ground off Ahmad, then an extraordinary set of six-wide-wide-six-six-four-wide-one as he took Graeme White apart.

Tahir finished with five for 25 after dismissing Ahmad Qais, Matt Milnes and David Payne

He went past fifty from 23 balls and there was disappointment in the crowd as he departed as Jimmy Neesham mixed things up, dropping the ball straight into the hands of Ian Cockbain at long-on.

Livingstone was caught at deep cover by Glenn Phillips, who had put him down off Ahmad in the previous over on 19.

Smeed's fifty came from 29 balls with his third six.

Fletcher's final set went for only two singles and Payne dismissed Chris Benjamin and Benny Howell but Matt Milnes undid the fightback by conceding 17 at the death, Sneed finishing with a six off a full toss.

Needing 1.85 runs per ball, Fire lost Tom Banton without scoring, pinned by Adam Milne's yorker. They pushed on to be 41 for one from 25 after Ben Duckett slog-swept Tahir and Cockbain took a couple of boundaries off Pat Brown but then Duckett made a hash of a ramp as Benny Howell took the pace off and was bowled.

The win at Edgbaston sends Birmingham Phoenix joint-top of the table with Trent Rockets

Phillips launched Tahir for a huge blow over deep midwicket but skipper Ali's decision to keep the wrist spinner on for a full 10 paid off handsomely as Phillips skewed him straight to cover - Ali taking the catch - and new man Leus Du Plooy also miscued, Tahir himself peddling back to get under it, leaving Fire 55 for four from 40.

Fire had no choice but to swing the bat but very little came off, Cockbain, Neesham and White holing out before Tahir returned to have Ahmad caught at mid-off before trapping Milnes in front and bowling Payne, the exuberant spinner celebrating with virtually a lap of honour.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Atletico Madrid's warm-up match with Feynoord crumbled into chaos on Sunday, with Yannick Carrasco sent-off amid a brawl which Diego Simeone had to break-up.

The Spanish champions are gearing up to begin their LaLiga defence next weekend, and were down 1-0 in the first-half against the Rotterdam club.

On 39 minutes Carrasco's battle with full-back Tyrell Malacia boiled over, with the 27-year-old kicking out at his opponent after they challenged for the ball.

Diego Simeone was raging as he yelled at Yannick Carrasco for causing a brawl on Sunday

The Argentinian boss was forced over after Carrasco lost his cool with full-back Tyrell Malacia

⚠️ ¡OJO!



🔥 CARRASCO se ha encarado con un rival después de una entrada y ha terminado expulsado



🥶 El Cholo ha saltado al terreno de juego para llevarse a su jugador al vestuario



pic.twitter.com/GJ3AOHDVZS — Post United (@postutd) August 8, 2021

As Malacia rolled around in faux agony the Belgian was seeing red, taunting and slapping the floored Dutchman – who instantly sprung to his feet to retaliate.

Team-mates piled in and a struggle ensued, with Orkun Kokcu moving away from the scrum with blood smeared across his neck and face.

Jan Oblak pulled the winger away but before his rage could continue, Simeone stepped-in.

The Argentine hard-man came trotting across the field and grabbed Carrasco like a parent furious at their toddler, launching a tirade at his player as the referee raised a red card.

Carrasco first started taunting Malacia on the floor before confronting Orkun Kocku after

The midfielder pulled away from the ruckus with blood smeared on his face and his cheek

Atleti went on to lose the angsty friendly 2-1 despite Angel Correa's late equaliser, as Naoufal Bannis snatched a winner deep into injury-time.

The result and Carrasco's behaviour will have frustrated Simeone so close to the season, and the manager have to re-focus his players for the season opener away to Celta Vigo.

Atleti won the LaLiga title on the final day last season, finishing two points ahead of Real Madrid. The last time they clinched back-to-back titles was in 1951.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Great Britain’s 13-year reign as Olympic champions in the men’s team pursuit ended in chaos, confusion and controversy after two extraordinary clashes with Denmark — on and off the bikes.

The day started with Team GB trying to kick their semi-final rivals out of the competition for wearing illegal kit in Monday’s qualifying. It finished with Denmark’s Frederik Madsen riding into the back of Britain’s Charlie Tanfield, causing a crash which initially left the race result in doubt.

Cycling’s governing body, the UCI, eventually ruled that Denmark should advance to today’s final against Italy, meaning Team GB will be without a medal in this event for the first time in six Games. But the decision left a bitter taste in the mouth of British bosses, who felt the Danes should have been disqualified on two counts.

Denmark's Frederik Madsen (top) bizarrely ploughed into Team GB's Charlie Tanfield (bottom)

Madsen (top), who wasn't looking where he was going, crashed into the back of Tanfield

Madsen confronts Tanfield before the Dane can be heard screaming 'f*** them' shortly after

Extraordinary scenes in the men's team pursuit on the track.



The front rider in the Danish team smashes straight into Charlie Tanfield - who was a last minute addition to the #TeamGB quartet after Ed Clancy withdrew earlier today.



Follow➡ https://t.co/pj60RkMuGr #bbcolympics pic.twitter.com/vDKn3iu5Nq — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 3, 2021

WARNING – STRONG LANGUAGE IN CLIP BELOW

In the race itself, Team GB were well off the pace against the current world champions, with Tanfield — a late replacement for Ed Clancy, who dramatically announced his retirement in the morning — falling behind his team-mates.

As the bell sounded for the last lap, Denmark were about to catch the straggling 24-year-old, which would have secured their passage through to the final. However, instead of overtaking Tanfield on the outside, Madsen inexplicably rode right into him, causing them both to hit the deck.

A loud “FUCK THEM” broadcast on BBC One at 8.50 in the morning 😬 pic.twitter.com/aE5Ib4ayDv — Scott Bryan (@scottygb) August 3, 2021

A furious Madsen shouts 'f*** them' towards Team GB following his crash with Tanfield

The Dane got to his feet and angrily shouted at his opponent despite being the one at fault, while the injured Tanfield bravely got back on his bike to finish the race, knowing that three riders are needed to complete the full 4km distance to register a result.

In the immediate aftermath, neither team knew which one would go through until the UCI finally ruled in favour of the Danes, deeming them to have caught Team GB, who were furious about the decision.

‘It’s our understanding that what the Danes did was basically cause a crash,’ said Britain’s head coach Iain Dyer. ‘I raised a precedent from an event a month ago, but the commissaire didn’t see it that way. There’s not a mechanism to appeal.’

Tanfield (pictured) was a last-minute addition to the Team GB quartet after replacing Ed Clancy

Three-time gold medallist Clancy pulled out of the race after aggravating his back

Team GB had earlier been involved in a second protest regarding the illegal medical tape that Danish riders had worn on their shins during qualifying on Monday, as well as aerodynamic undervests, which had not been registered in time.

The UCI ruled that the Danes had indeed breached regulations and should not wear either piece of kit again. However, they only issued them with a warning rather than disqualifying them.

‘Do I think they should be disqualified? I don’t think there is any alternative,’ said Britain’s performance director Stephen Park. ‘The rules are clear. It says you cannot apply something to the skin and they have. It says if you break that rule, your option is for being eliminated or disqualified.

Denmark broke the Olympic record while wearing shin tape and undervests (pictured above) to give them an aerodynamic advantage in qualifying on Monday for the men's team pursuit

GB appealed about Denmark’s kit overnight and the UCI agreed it breached regulations

‘There is no doubt in anyone else’s mind it’s deliberate.’

There was further intrigue about the undervests worn by Denmark, which rules state must be available to buy publicly at the start of the Olympic year. ‘None of the other teams believe it was for sale on January 1,’ added Park.

Team GB claim that the website selling the undervest was updated in the last 24 hours to make it appear that it was for sale earlier than it was.

‘There was some debate over whether or not they did or didn’t need to be registered,’ added Park.

Gold medal winner Chris Boardman questioned the validity of Denmark's kit on Monday

Yet some users online did not agree with Boardman, pointing towards GB's superior finances

‘The relevance of that was whether it was for aerodynamic gain or not and whether it was available for sale.

‘Unfortunately to the first point, the item in question, which is a HUUB garment, is actually advertised as an aerodynamic undervest, so there can be little doubt as to whether or not it is there for aerodynamic purposes or not.

‘There is also a question because none of the teams believe it was for sale on January 1, particularly as a number of teams have researched into the source code of the website and found that it was actually published in May.

The Danish team were given a warning yet were not disqualified by cycling's governing body

‘The information relating to the kit being available on January 1 was only added in the last 24 hours.’

While earlier, there was drama as Britain’s three-time Olympic champion Clancy withdrew from the event after aggravating a back injury and announced his international retirement.

‘I’m absolutely gutted that my Olympic career has ended this way,’ said the 36-year-old, who was Team GB’s only ever-present for the team pursuit wins in Beijing, London and Rio.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twice in an hour, British hearts were pounding. But after all the fretting, Giles Scott was a gold medallist for a second time and celebrating his indomitable victory in the sun-warmed waters of Sagami Bay.

This big, long hulk of a man had crowned one of the most astonishing afternoons in our Olympic sailing story by winning the Finn class in breathtaking style after an awful start, proving himself again a rightful heir to the legend that is Sir Ben Ainslie.

Scott’s gold was the second of two won by the team in 57 unforgettable minutes in sweltering heat 40 miles south of Tokyo, the other coming in the men’s Skiff 49er through the brilliance of Dylan Fletcher and Stuart Bithell. Theirs was as touch and go as Scott’s. A silver medal in the Nacra 17 catamarans followed, and the lily was well gilded.

Team GB won their twelfth gold medal of the Tokyo Olympics in the men's 49er FX sailing

Giles Scott celebrates after reigning supreme in the Finn class, making it 13 golds for GB

Both golds hung in the balance right up to the line. Scott’s was not meant to. He could barely have been a firmer favourite in a one-horse race: not only the defending champion but he led his nearest challenger, Hungarian Zsombor Berecz, by a yawning 11 points going into the final, double-scoring medal race.

But Scott got off to the worst possible start. Fearing he may have crossed the line prematurely he went round again, voluntarily putting himself to the back of the fleet rather than run the risk of disqualification.

Dylan Fletcher and Stuart Bithell edged out New Zealand in dramatic fashion at Enoshima

‘I don’t know whether I was over the line but I didn’t want to take any chances,’ he said.

And guess who was up front as the race hotted up? Only Berecz. Oh no. But Scott possesses a deep fighting spirit. He is also a fine sailor, strong of build and a super tactician. He later admitted he found himself in the toughest race of his life.

With some 200 yards remaining Scott lay in seventh place. That wouldn’t do with Berecz leading or occasionally slipping into second.

It was all playing out in front of Scott’s eyes and he only needed a basic grip of maths to know the figures weren’t adding up for him. He sniffed out the wind, such as it blew in these light conditions.

Ultimately, with inches of the race remaining, his bow powered into the required fourth place, and for the sixth time in as many Olympics the Finn title was in British hands. The run stretches back to Iain Percy in 2000, through Ainslie from 2004 to 2012, to Scott from 2016.

Fletcher and Bithell had to beat New Zealand and hope at least one boat finished between them and their rivals. They just sneaked over the line in front of Germany to do so

Fletcher and Bithell wave a Union Jack flag as they celebrate their huge victory on Tuesday

Scott banged the side of his boat in relief. Berecz then hugged him so hard he fell into the water, where victor and vanquished staged an impromptu celebration.

This is to be Scott’s last Olympics, with the Finn being dropped from the programme after 18 Games dating back to Helsinki in 1952. But, anyway, he is 34 and it is to the America’s Cup that he will now turn his attention full-time after playing a crucial role at Ainslie’s elbow earlier this year.

Before victory in the Finn came an equally thrilling finale to the 49er. The equation for those boys was: beat New Zealand with a boat between them. This was not easy because the Kiwis, Peter Burling and Blair Tuke, had serious pedigree as defending champions and America’s Cup winners.

The pair were rivals before deciding to pair up for the Tokyo Olympic Games this summer

Britain were right up there throughout the race. They led for a while but on the final run were second, with Germany in front and New Zealand directly behind them. Not enough.

As the line approached the Brits squeezed ahead, winning by a finger. It was one of the most remarkable denouements to an Olympic sailing race anyone could remember.

Fletcher, though, had dreamt he would win. ‘Yes, it was last week,’ he said. ‘I didn’t tell anyone beforehand. It’s amazing to feel that dream come true. It wasn’t quite that close in my dream.’ As Bithell added: ‘Dreams come true, kids.’

Scott celebrates with Hungary's Zsombor Berecz (right) and Spain's Joan Cardona Mendez (left) who gained silver and bronze respectively

Scott just about fended off the challenge of his chief rival Berecz on Tuesday in Tokyo

Vivian and Leslie Bithell roar with delight and wave the Union Jack as they watch their son Stuart win Olympic at his home club, Hollingworth Lake Sailing Club, near Rochdale

Cue jubilation among the team on boats and on land. Also for Fletcher’s bride-to-be, Charlotte Dobson, who had just finished seventh — and out of the medals — in the women’s 49ers.

‘I am sure the gold medal will be on our dining room table for the foreseeable future,’ said Dobson. ‘I am really proud of him. It is a really precious moment to be Olympians together. Our races epitomise the yin and yang of sport. But there is no talk about sailing at home. We have a big iron curtain drawn on that.’

One man who chose not to watch the 49ers cavort in delight was Scott, who was preparing for his own shot at glory. ‘I saw the race but I made a point of not looking at them celebrate. I’m so happy for them but it’s not what you need to see five minutes before you start your race.’

The medal rush was not over yet, courtesy of happy couple John Gimson and Anna Burnet in the mixed Nacra 17 catamarans. The pair, who are together on and off the water, finished fifth in the medal race which secured the silver medal.

Mrs Bithell was in tears as she watched her son make Olympic history in Tokyo

Family, friends and Hollingworth Lake Sailing Club members cheer on Bithell in his medal race

Stream every unmissable moment of Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 live on discovery+, The Streaming Home of the Olympics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Team GB have guaranteed their best boxing medal haul for 101 years, as Galal Yafai defeated Yosvany Veitia 4-1 to reach the flyweight semi-finals.

Yafai, featuring in his second Olympic Games, is hoping to add to the Commonwealth gold he won in 2018 in the same division, and he's gone one step closer after a hard-fought points victory.

It means Team GB have now won six medals in boxing in this Olympics - bettering the five they won in London 2012 - only beaten by their haul in the 1920 Games.

Galal Yafai (left) won the first and third rounds to beat Yosvany Veitia in a points decision

The 28-year-old from Birmingham came out of the blocks strong - his incessant punching in the first round proving too much for Yosvany Veitia to handle, handing Yafai a 4-1 split at the end of it.

But Veitia responded strongly in the second round as Yafai attempted to calm things down - the third seed Cuban earning a 3-2 split.

Yafai stumbled over the line against Zambia's Patrick Cinyemba in the Round of 16 and had to dig deep again - his bustling all-action style getting him there with a crucial split in the final round.

Elation and relief for Yafai - he's set up a semi-final bout against Kazakhstan's Saken Bibossinov.

𝐇𝐈𝐒𝐓𝐎𝐑𝐘 𝐌𝐀𝐊𝐄𝐑𝐒 🇬🇧🥊



With 6⃣ medals secured at #Tokyo2020, a new record haul for British boxing is set and marks the country's best #Olympics performance since 1⃣9⃣2⃣0⃣.



What. A. Team. 🔥#TeamGB | #TeamGBBoxing | #MakeAmazingHappen pic.twitter.com/yO1ZO6bhs3 — GB Boxing (@gbboxing) August 3, 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rio Ferdinand has told the story of how Sir Alex Ferguson would be speaking to his bookie during Manchester United training sessions about which horse he was going to back.

Ferguson is one of the greatest managers in the history of the game and won 38 trophies during his 26 years at the helm at Old Trafford.

The legendary manager rarely took control of training sessions, leaving it to his coaches including Carlos Queiroz and Rene Meulensteen.

Rio Ferdinand revealed Sir Alex Ferguson would 'speak to his bookies' during training sessions

Ferdinand played under Sir Alex during one of the club's best periods in their history

And Ferdinand said on his 'Rio Ferdinand Presents Five' podcast: 'Fergie never took sessions.

'He obviously did the talking and setting up of the sessions with the coaches before we went out and trained and then he'd just stand on the sidelines and observe the individuals, team, situations, the mood, the pace and intensity of training.'

When asked if Fergie would be saying anything during his observations, Ferdinand added: 'He's speaking to his bookie about which horse he's backing. That's the person he has most conversation with.

'Every now and again before the session he'd gather us in, maybe ahead of a big game at the weekend or after a result and say, "listen guys that game is out of your system now, I want a hard session". So he wouldn't be talking too much about the detail.'

In his podcast, Ferdinand also revealed what it was like to work with coaches Mike Phelan, Queiroz and Meulensteen.

When asked about Phelan he responded: 'He was there more for the manager.

'Understanding and checking, maintaining of standards and making sure the manager was abreast of everything in terms of little details going on, the subtle things.

Ferdinand said Mike Phelan was Ferguson's 'eyes and ears' during his time at Old Trafford

Carlos Queiroz played a balancing act for Ferguson in his two spells at Manchester United

'He wasn't someone who took a lot of sessions either. He was the eyes and ears of the manager which I didn't understand at the beginning but by the end I did with age and maturity.'

Queiroz had two spells at United from 2002-2003 and 2004-2008, with a year in charge of Real Madrid in-between.

Ferdinand said: 'Carlos was probably the balancing act for the manager who was a bit of a maverick and smell a situation and just go with it.

'Carlos was a bit more pragmatic and would say, "let's think about this, this situation is going to happen in a game, lets bide our time so we're solid and we're strong".

'He was brilliant, the best manager for transition. We did a lot of sessions that were repetitive and based about how we win the ball and going into the heart of the other team and killing them with movement and rotations.

'If you look at the team when he was coach, we were resolute, we could fight anybody, run against anybody and play against anybody.'

Ferdinand says Rene Meulensteen was the best 'one-to-one' coach he ever worked with

Meulensteen spent six years at Old Trafford from 2007-2013, replacing Queiroz as assistant manager in 2008.

When asked about the Dutchman, Ferdinand said: 'Rene was the best one-to-one coach I ever worked with.

'With him we were just doing a lot of game experience training so you're visualising the game, the ball comes to you and someone's on the move somewhere and you've got to find them. Stuff like that he was brilliant for me.

'He was so different to Carlos but still really good. His sessions were always thought provoking.

'Maybe the balance from attack to defence wasn't as fine tuned as Carlos but we were successful when he was there.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kepa Arrizabalaga was the unlikely hero as Chelsea ended their recent UEFA Super Cup hoodoo to lift the showpiece trophy in Belfast following a nail-biting contest against Villarreal.

The Blues have been burnt on three occasions in this competition, and their fate at Windsor Park was to be decided on the lottery of a penalty shootout, with neither side able to be separated after 120 minutes.

Up stepped Arrizabalaga - a late substitute from Thomas Tuchel for Edouard Mendy on the 119th minute - who saved two spot kicks to send the travelling Chelsea supporters into bedlam as they got their hands on yet another piece of silverware.

Chelsea ended their UEFA Super Cup hoodoo with a dramatic victory over Villarreal in Belfast

There was plenty to pore over as Thomas Tuchel's side won their first silverware this season

Although Tuchel, in an ideal world, would have rather played just the 90 minutes with Saturday's Premier League opener in mind, there was plenty for fans to pore over ahead of their curtain-raiser this weekend.

Sportsmail takes a look at five things we learned from Chelsea's showing in Northern Ireland on Wednesday evening.

Chalobah does NOT need to go out on loan

Tuchel was forthcoming in admitting his surprise at the attitude of his returning players in pre-season, with a raft of outsiders coming back to Cobham after spending time out on loan.

Two players that caught the German's eye included Trevoh Chalobah and Ruben Loftus-Cheek. We are all familiar with the latter's talent, having seen him operate in top flight football, but Chalobah is something of an unknown, having plied his trade with Lorient last term.

Young defender Trevoh Chalobah showed he belongs in the squad and does not need a loan

Tuchel handed the youngster his Chelsea debut in Belfast, with the defender slotting into the right of a back three - typically occupied by club captain Cesar Azpilicueta.

And the 22-year-old barely put a foot wrong in an accomplished performance over 120 minutes, displaying superb sprint speed to help protect his side from counter attacks, while showing a confidence on the ball required in defenders in the modern game.

On this showing, any expectations that Chalobah will spend another season out on loan should be muted. He could be a real asset for Tuchel during this slog of a campaign.

Werner misfires with Lukaku looming

In any other window, let alone week, Chelsea's impending mega-money arrival would dominate headlines. However, a certain Argentine's move to Paris has seen Romelu Lukaku's return to West London go under the radar, slightly.

The Belgian marksman, 28, is expected to make his £98million move from Inter to Chelsea in the coming hours, with Tuchel finally set to land his long-desired elite goalscorer to lead the line this season.

Timo Werner struggled to make an impact at just the wrong time for Chelsea on Wednesday

With Romelu Lukaku (L) on the cusp of a £98m move, Werner (R) failed to make an impact

Tuchel has dipped in the market as a result of uninspiring performances from Timo Werner. The £53m has, on the whole, failed to deliver since making his £53m move from RB Leipzig last season, with the German looking devoid of confidence throughout a nightmare debut campaign.

And the 25-year-old did little to show that he would be making life difficult for Tuchel in selecting his leading man, putting in another subdued performance in a Chelsea shirt.

Werner made his standard darting runs down the channels, but he saw very little of the ball and did little to help his side when they were put under pressure by Villarreal in the second half. Lukaku would certainly have provided that out ball.

It came as no surprise, then, when Tuchel replaced the striker with Mason Mount. Werner will need to step it up if he is going to want to challenge Lukaku this term.

Ziyech hampered at just the wrong time

Of Tuchel's plentiful attacking talents, Hakim Ziyech has certainly enjoyed the strongest pre-season for Chelsea.

The Moroccan - hampered by injuries and a lack of minutes in his first season - has been a shining light for the Blues over their pre-season schedule and continued that trend with a strong 40 minutes that included a finely-taken strike to open the scoring.

It was agony for Hakim Ziyech whose progress was stunted in the first half at Windsor Park

The Moroccan was withdrawn after a bizarre shoulder injury from an innocuous aerial dual

However, disaster struck for the former Ajax man when he went down with what appeared to be a shoulder injury from an innocuous coming together with Pau Torres, Ziyech clearly in distress as he was taken off the pitch.

He was later seen with his arm in a sling in concerning viewing for Chelsea fans. The likes of Marcus Rashford and Adama Traore have long been blighted by shoulder issues, and the injury can really knock the confidence of a player, particularly attackers.

Ziyech failed to hit the ground running last season with injuries forcing him out of the opening fixtures under Frank Lampard, and he looks to have suffered the same fate once again in an agonising development for the Chelsea star.

Ziyech has enjoyed a strong pre-season and scored in Belfast, but could be out for a spell

Chelsea still off the pace with Palace opener fast approaching

The result is all that matters, of course, but Tuchel will know that a fully fit Chelsea side would have made easier work of their Spanish opponents in Belfast.

In truth, the drop off in intensity from the first to second half was alarming. Villarreal, with the benefit of two additional pre-season fixtures, appeared to have plenty more in the legs than the Blues, with some stars only returning to training just nine days ago.

Chelsea's alarming dip in fitness levels as the game wore on will be of concern to Tuchel

Misplaced passes, loose first touches and poor reading of play all came to bear in the second half at Windsor Park, with those elements coming together to lead to Gerard Moreno's deserved equaliser for the Spaniards.

Chelsea still looked more likely to find the winner in extra time, with Mason Mount in particular growing into the game, but varying levels of fitness among Tuchel's squad will be a concern with only a few days to go before Chelsea host Crystal Palace on the opening day.

Ruthless Tuchel unafraid of bold moves with Kepa gamble

Tuchel's propensity to make the bold decisions is not something that Chelsea fans will be unfamiliar with. He did, after all, elect to substitute Callum Hudson-Odoi off having initially introduced the youngster during one of his first games in charge of the club.

That episode was viewed as the no-nonsense German laying down the law to his squad, a clear message that the former PSG coach is unafraid of ruffling feathers if it results in improved performances for his side.

Tuchel's propensity to make bold decisions was on display again with a brave call in Belfast

The German opted to substitute Kepa Arrizabalaga on for Edouard Mendy for the shootout

But Tuchel's decision to withdraw Edouard Mendy for Kepa Arrizabalaga lacked the spontaneity of his Hudson-Odoi call last season. No, this was a calculated, considered and ruthless decision that had been in the making long before the 119th minute in Belfast.

'We talked about it with the goalkeepers when we had the first knockout game against Barnsley,' Tuchel revealed after his side's triumph. 'Kepa has the best save percentage with penalties, the analysts showed me the data and since then I decided.'

And Tuchel's gamble paid in full, with Kepa the hero to deny Villarreal twice to win the Super Cup for Chelsea.

The gamble paid in full as Arrizabalaga made two saves to win the Super Cup for the Blues

Tuchel's clear messages to his squad means he is able to soften the blow with these calls

The German has demonstrated, on both of these occasions, that seemingly unpopular calls can be taken with clear, sensible communication with the players spurned to ensure that no rifts emerge in camp.

That Mendy was one of the first players to rejoice with Kepa demonstrates how Tuchel has installed a team-before-individual mindset among his European champions.

Tuchel will, no doubt, continue to make bold decisions moving forward. His players will have no hesitation in backing their manager's daring selections either - he has plenty of credit in the bank, after all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel's extra-time goalkeeping substitution proved an inspired one as Kepa Arrizabalaga saved two penalties to help Chelsea beat Villarreal and add the UEFA Super Cup to their Champions League triumph.

Kepa was Chelsea’s hero after being brought on in the final minute of the added half hour just for the spot-kicks.

Kepa saved Villarreal’s second attempt with his first meaningful touch and then Villarreal captain Raul Albiol’s decisive kick to clinch a 6-5 shootout victory in Belfast.

Kepa Arrizabalaga came off the bench to save two penalties in Chelsea's Super Cup victory

Chelsea players celebrate with the Spaniard after their shootout victory over Villarreal

In February 2019 Kepa sparked controversy when he infamously refused to come off when then manager Maurizio Sarri wanted to replace him for a Carabao Cup final shootout.

But Edouard Mendy had no such issues and Chelsea prevailed to lift the Super Cup for the second time in the club’s history.

‘This was not spontaneous,’ Tuchel said of Kepa’s introduction. ‘We talked about it with the goalkeepers before my first cup game against Barnsley.

‘We had some statistics that we prepared and they showed that Willy Caballero is the best in penalty defending and they analysed like a thousand penalties from Willy.

‘Second best was Kepa and third best was Edou.

‘The analysis and goalkeepers coaches introduced me to the data, we spoke to all three goalkeepers very open and told them this can happen in knockout games.

‘If we have a change left that we take this change not for personal reasons but to help the team, to improve the chances as we have this proof off statistic.

Thomas Tuchel revealed he has known his shootout order since his first cup game at the club

‘It’s fantastic Edou accepts it. He puts his ego to one side when we take this decision and he is aware why we do this, this is the key. He knows it’s not a sudden idea of the manager.

‘There is proof that Kepa is better in this discipline and these guys are team players. I’m happy for Kepa and Edou to have a goalkeeper like this who is not too proud to step out of the field and happy to take this for the team.’

Kepa said: ‘It’s not a normal situation but I was ready because I knew that this can happen and I tried to be ready mentally and physically.’

Mendy said: ‘Of course I’m happy because we won and we work for this success. I knew since last year that if Kepa comes on the pitch he will help the team. He did today so I’m really happy with Kepa.

Tuchel said that Edouard Mendy accepted being replaced by Kepa for the shootout

'It is a team work and team effort and when you play for Chelsea you play for success and you play for titles. We did this today, together and we are happy.’

Chelsea led through Hakim Ziyech, who came off with a shoulder injury before half time.

Tuchel said: 'If you take a player out during the first half it is serious. Unfortunately he was a very good player for us.’

Villarreal talisman Gerard Moreno equalised to force extra time and the two sides could not be separated until Kepa’s dramatic sudden death intervention.

Chelsea begin their Premier League campaign against Crystal Palace on Saturday and Tuchel added: ‘Mentally this is a good one [victory] but physically [extra time] is the worst that can happen. But victory and a trophy helps to regenerate but we have to be careful now.’

Chelsea hope to have Romelu Lukaku in their ranks by the time they face Palace. He landed in England last night as he edged a step closer to finalising his £98m club record move to re-join Chelsea.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku is on his way back to Chelsea as one of the high-profile transfers of the summer as the Blues undergo more overhaul in their forward areas.

The west Londoners shelled out nearly £150million on Timo Werner and Kai Havertz just 12 months ago but Thomas Tuchel's striker options are about to get even stronger - but could it be just too strong?

Lukaku - set to arrive at Chelsea for £98million - will make him by far the most expensive centre-forward of the summer window so far, and will give Tuchel seven options for his three most advanced roles in his 3-4-2-1 formation.

Chelsea are set to seal a £98million return for former striker Romelu Lukaku this summer

Sportsmail looks at how Lukaku's arrival at Chelsea will impact their other striker options

Current whispers suggest Havertz and Werner will stay and fight for their places, as will Hakim Ziyech and Christian Pulisic. England internationals Mason Mount and Callum Hudson-Odoi can play in other areas but tend to take up those attacking roles as well.

Tammy Abraham and Michy Batshuayi are set to be moved on from west London this summer, but there is still heavy competition at the top end of Chelsea's pitch. So how does Tuchel keep all seven happy?

Seven cannot go into three, so with Lukaku now preparing for the Premier League season with Chelsea, how does the former Inter Milan striker's arrival impact the forward options at Stamford Bridge?

PRESSURE OFF WERNER

Last season, German international Werner struggled with the pressure of being Chelsea's main man up front following his £53m move from RB Leipzig.

The 25-year-old found the net just six times in the Premier League last term - and just once in the final 14 matches of the season - with the majority those final games seeing the German adopt the central striker role that Lukaku is now taking over.

Timo Werner struggled for Chelsea last season as their £53m main centre-forward up front

Chelsea's new striker will not struggle will the pressures of being the Blues' all-time record signing, nor the main source of goals over the course of a Premier League season.

His Stamford Bridge transfer makes him the most expensive player in football history in terms of total transfer fees accumulated, meaning he is used to the big fee attached to his name.

The Belgian is likely to push Werner out wide to the left-hand side, which was arguably his best position for the Blues last season. Werner's blistering pace is a useful asset in Chelsea's counter-attacking game, while his off-the-ball running can drag defenders away from other dangerous players, such as Lukaku.

Chelsea's Champions League final-winning goal last season showed exactly why Werner is useful in a wide role.

Werner's best moments when he was creating space for others, such as Kai Havertz

The German international caused a giant hole in the Manchester City defence between John Stones and Oleksandr Zinchenko by running away from goal, which allowed Mason Mount to play Havertz in for a one-on-one. The rest was history.

And while all the attention will surround Lukaku, his price tag and his quest to rule the line under his previous spells in England, Werner can quietly go about his business and look to build on his six goals and 12 Premier League assists from last year.

NEW ROLE FOR HAVERTZ

Havertz, meanwhile, should be more worried about Lukaku's return to west London.

The 22-year-old German set himself up nicely for next season by netting the Champions League final winner in Porto and was hoping to put a season where he struggled with a new country, coronavirus and a £89m transfer fee behind him.

Havertz will hope to remind head coach Thomas Tuchel that he is still a viable No 9 option

Now he is likely to become Chelsea's second-choice centre-forward option for the coming season, a position where he has grown in confidence over the years.

At Bayer Leverkusen, his form as the main man up front was phenomenal, particularly after the coronavirus hiatus that temporarily stopped the 2019-20 season.

Havertz scored five goals in his first four games back for Leverkusen after the period of rest and that sort of form justified his move to Chelsea in the summer of 2020. Yet at Chelsea last season, his best performances came through the middle, rather than from the right-hand side in Tuchel's famed 3-4-2-1 formation.

With Lukaku now in the squad, Havertz is likely to be utilised from that wide role inbetween the Belgian forward up front and Chelsea's right wing-back.

The German international's best moments last season came when used through the middle

German Havertz (middle) showed he can play a deeper and wider role by scoring at Euro 2020

It may not be his strongest position, but it is a role where the German has been growing in confidence recently.

He played that exact role during Germany's Euro 2020 campaign, with Joachim Low almost copying Tuchel's system at Chelsea. Havertz ended the tournament with goals against Portugal and Hungary in the group stage and was a major threat in the last-16 defeat to England, and was unlucky not to get on the scoresheet.

Should be produce those kind of performances, then Lukaku's arrival may not be terrible competition after all. But as we learned last season, Havertz does rely on confidence for good displays - so must get his chance.

ZIYECH AND PULISIC ARE BACK-UPS NOW

Havertz and Werner adopting those wider roles for Chelsea alongside Lukaku spells trouble for Hakim Ziyech and Christian Pulisic, who would be cemented as back-up players even more so than they are now.

Christian Pulisic (right) and Hakim Ziyech (far left) could now be serious back-up options

Twelve months ago, the Blues pair were incredibly exciting prospects at Stamford Bridge. Pulisic had just netted in the FA Cup final against Arsenal before being handed Eden Hazard's old No 10 shirt, while Ziyech was the £38m marquee signing before Werner and Havertz came along.

But both players have struggled with injuries since then and neither of their Stamford Bridge careers seem to have taken serious flight yet.

Ziyech is starting to show some pre-season form in west London this season that hints he could be given more than the 23 league appearances he was handed last season.

Ziyech is showing some signs of good pre-season form in a glint of hope for the Moroccan

Yet Lukaku's arrival would push him further down the pecking order if Tuchel sticks with the in-form Havertz.

The Moroccan also has Callum Hudson-Odoi for competition on the right-hand side, while Pulisic could have Mason Mount for company on the left, though the duo are benefited by the Englishmen's abilities to turn out at right wing-back and central midfield respectively, alongside Reece James and Cesar Azpilicueta.

It is not the end at Stamford Bridge for Ziyech and Pulisic, as Tuchel will no doubt tinker with his squad on a weekly basis and game time will come. The same can't be said for the likes of Tammy Abraham and Michy Batshuayi, who are set to join Olivier Giroud out of the Chelsea exit door.

But it's time for the pair to start thinking whether Ziyech and Pulisic have run out of time to become the marquee signings everyone thought they would be.

Pulisic may be wondering whether he can still justify the £58m fee Chelsea paid for him

CREATIVITY FOR OTHER ATTACKING PLAYERS

Let's not forget of course that Lukaku will actually help Chelsea improve as a squad, and thereby increasing the confidence of players like Havertz and Werner, who don't necessarily have to view him as a striker rival.

One area where the Belgian will address is their creativity from open play, which was a concern last season.

Chelsea's highest league goalscorers from open play were Mason Mount and Timo Werner with five each, while Jorginho ended as their best top-flight goal-getter overall last term by scoring seven penalties.

Blues boss Tuchel will have been concerned by his side's creativity from open play last season

Lukaku, meanwhile, found the net 15 times from open play in Serie A last season, with 18 out of his 24 goals in Inter Milan's Scudetto-winning season came from inside the penalty area.

Ultimately, the 28-year-old will help to break teams down - with those problems coming to light in Tuchel's reign with goalless draws against Wolves, Manchester United, Leeds and Brighton, along with a disappointing home defeat to Arsenal.

Lukaku will also help Chelsea's creativity by contributing to the fluidity of the front three, or two-and-one in the 3-4-2-1 if you're being specific.

Lukaku's clinical goal record from inside the box will help Chelsea break teams down next term

The Belgian likes to take up wide areas and take on full-backs, particularly on the right-hand side, which could see some useful rotations with Havertz, who we've already noted enjoys coming into the middle of the pitch.

Whether the team gels this easily in the opening weeks of the season is anyone's guess, but what cannot be understated is Chelsea's incredible strength in depth up front.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mario Balotelli has been cleared of a rape allegation after a 16-year-old girl accused the footballer of the offence in Nice, with the Italian counter-accusing her of an extortion plot.

The incident allegedly occurred in July 2017, when the former Manchester City star was playing for French side Nice.

The 31-year-old said that the pair had met when she was on holiday and they had consensual sex, after which she contacted him asking for €100,000 (£84,930).

Mario Balotelli has been cleared of a rape allegation from 2017 by a then-16-year-old accuser

Balotelli reported the attempted extortion attempt to the police, three weeks before his accuser and her lawyer contacted authorities.

However, Italian police in Balotelli's home town of Brescia have closed the case, deeming that any accusation levelled at the footballer was 'unfounded'.

'Balotelli is satisfied, as this was an unacceptable and insulting accusation,' the Italian's lawyer said.

Balotelli says he had consensual sex with the accuser before she asked him for €100,000

'It's a pity for the girl, who proved herself to be an instrument in the hands of an adult without scruples.'

A judge ruled that witness evidence and telephone conversation recordings with Balotelli proved a 'machination' to extort money.

The 31-year-old now plays for Turkish side Adana Demirspor, having moved from Monza this summer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olly Stone considered retirement before opting for what he hopes will be a career-defining back operation last month.

England fast bowler Stone, 27, was resigned to missing the upcoming Ashes after suffering a fourth stress fracture since 2016 and third in as many years in June.

Indeed, the recurring nature of the injury led him to doubt his future but after digesting the news he would not be able to bowl flat out again for 26 weeks – whether he chose surgery or embarked on rest – he had a metal screw inserted in his lower back, designed to strengthen the spine, at the Wellington Hospital, just a stone's throw from Lord's.

Olly Stone 'questioned whether it was all worth it' when he was told he required an operation

The bowler's recovery following a stress fracture will stop him from bowling flat out for months

'When I got the news, I thought 'here we go again,' and questioned whether it was all worth it, whether I wanted to carry on,' Stone told Sportsmail.

'But it was a stupid question, of course it is. It's something I love doing and I will be back.'

Stone's history - he also missed a year after rupturing his anterior cruciate ligament - has led him to be cautious about his recuperation.

'I would love to play in the Ashes but I have said to the ECB and Warwickshire that I don't want to rush my recovery,' he added.

Stone took seven wickets in two Test appearances for England against India and New Zealand

'I have set a target of next April. If I make good progress, we can always reassess. If I am back sooner, then great, but I didn't want to set unrealistic goals.'

Of his decision to undergo the knife, he added: 'There was an obvious weakness there. My body just couldn't handle the demands placed upon it and I didn't want to get to the same stage in a year's time and do it all again – so I decided to try the surgical route.'

Stone was identified as one of three out-and-out pacemen England were looking to utilise in Australian conditions next winter – and was impressive in taking seven wickets across two Test appearances versus India and New Zealand in the first half of 2021 – but will now remain sidelined along with another of the trio in Jofra Archer, who is set to return to Barbados to recover after being diagnosed with another stress fracture of the elbow.

Stone's rehabilitation will take in cycling and swimming from next Monday but will not intensify until a follow-up with the surgeon in early September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal fans are not alone in their disappointment at the north London team's woeful start to the Premier League after the president of Rwanda, the East African nation that is one of the club's sponsors, took to Twitter to blast their performance.

Paul Kagame took to social media to go off on an extraodinary rant at Mikel Arteta's side, who suffered a shocking defeat by new-promoted Brentford on the opening day of the season.

'The game itself aside Arsenal and the fans don't deserve to kind of get used to this....NO !!! (sic)' President Kagame wrote. 'It's been a struggle of about decade(s) -ups&downs-more downs until this point.'

Rwanda president Paul Kagame has blasted Arsenal after Friday's 2-0 defeat by Brentford

The Gunners suffered a shock defeat by Brentford in their season-opener on Friday evening

Kagame has claimed that Arsenal fans 'don't deserve this' performance in a Twitter rant

Rwanda are Arsenal's sleeve sponsor, with the 'Visit Rwanda' logo printed on the left sleeve of all the Gunners' shirts.

Disappointed after Friday's 2-0 defeat, Kagame called for changes at the club.

'We just must NOT excuse or Accept mediocrity. A team has to be built with purpose to win win win. So that when we lose....it was not to be expected! I am sure we all know on whose shoulders the heaviest burden rests. I hope they know too or even accept it!!!'

Kagame, who has enjoyed support from Western donors for restoring Rwanda to stability after a 1994 genocide, is also accused by rights groups of being an autocrat and quashing political opposition to extend his 21-year presidency.

Arsenal's day started badly when Aubameyang and Lacazette went down with illness, and with Thomas Partey and Gabriel also absent, it was a far more callow Gunners side than boss Mikel Arteta had probably envisaged starting the season with.

Brentford, who have just been promoted to the top-flight, thoroughly deserved the victory

Brentford did not have to wait long to open their Premier League account. When Calum Chambers hacked the ball off the byline, it came back via Ethan Pinnock to Canos, who cut inside the defender and buried a low shot inside Bernd Leno's near post.

They doubled their lead with 15 minutes remaining, but it was a dreadful goal for Arsenal to concede.

They criminally allowed a long throw from Mads Bech Sorensen to bounce in the six-yard box and Norgaard arrived at the far post to head into an empty net.



Arsenal, who have not qualified for any European football this season, next face London rivals and Champions League holders Chelsea at home on August 22.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Darren Ferguson insisted he could smell victory when he spoke to his Peterborough United players at half-time. For Wayne Rooney, though, there was only the whiff of disappointment as his Derby County slipped to costly defeat after conceding twice in added time.

Prior to their late collapse, Rooney's side had looked capable of holding on as they attempted to protect the 77th minute lead given to them by Jack Stretton. The signalling of eleven minutes stoppage time - the result largely of an injury to Derby forward Colin Kazim-Richards - gave Ferguson's side fresh hope and after levelling through Harrison Burrows, they secured victory seconds before the final whistle through Siriki Dembele.

The outcome was crushing for Rooney and his players, particularly as both late goals came after defensive errors. In addition, the loss of Kazim-Richards weakens his squad in a area where his options are already limited, adding to the manager's early season concerns.

Peterborough pulled off a stoppage-time fightback to see off Derby 2-1 and claim three points

The late goals awarded Peterborough their first Sky Bet Championship win of the season

Derby boss Wayne Rooney will be left heartbroken after suffering two late goals

'Lapses in concentration have cost us and it is results that matter in the end,' said the Derby manager. 'We let a runner go for the first goal and then a mistake for the second and that happens. But the one thing i you can't question the player's attitude and their hard work.

'We did quite well as a team and caused them problems. But we should be creating more chances for the possession we had. But I never felt in any danger at all. We deserved to win and we are going to go away with no points.'

Stretton, 19, appeared as a replacement for Kazim-Richards who went to ground early in the second half and could face a lengthy absence after being stretchered from the field.

It was Derby's 19-year-old Jack Stretton (above) who opened the scoring in the 77th minute

The game remained an evenly contested battle for the majority on Saturday

The youngster impressed and finished well for his first senior goal after Peterborough had failed to clear. 77th minute corner. But with Derby operating under a transfer embargo that limits them to a 23-man squad, more will now be expected from a player who has yet to start a league game.

'It's a great finish by Jack and I'm pleased for him getting his goal,' said Rooney. 'But I think the bigger issue is Colin getting his injury and we are left with no recognised senior striker.

'Jack is going to have a lot of pressure on his hands unless something changes. I'm not asking for any favours. That's where we are. That's where we have been allowed to get to and that's where we are stuck.'

There were some tough challenges made - including that on Derby Colin Kazim-Richards

Ferguson's side deserved credit for the way they stuck to their task. They gathered momentum in the final stages of the game before Joe Ward's cross set up Burrows'a equaliser in the 91st minute before the wing-back's ball in led to Dembele's winner.

Victory delivered Peterborough's first points following last season's promotion and Ferguson said:

'I knew with the stoppage time that was going to play a big part because if you are winning the 11 extra minutes gets them going, if you're losing the extra 11 minutes gets us going,' said Darren Ferguson, the Peterborough manager. 'We have a great record of coming back in games and it's important to keep our home form going because it's going to be vital.

'Sometimes you can smell a result and at half time I told the team you've got to win this game. It was a game we needed to get something out. You don't get time to hang around in this league. It's relentless.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jamie Redknapp says Liverpool should do everything they can to sign Leicester midfielder Youri Tielemans.

Liverpool got their season off to a flyer with a convincing 3-0 victory over Norwich after goals by Diogo Jota, Roberto Firmino and Mo Salah.

Former Liverpool player Redknapp believes they can challenge for the title but believes that the loss of Georginio Wijnaldum was a 'major blow'.

Jamie Redknapp said Liverpool can win the title this season after their 3-0 win over Norwich

He has urged his former club though to do all they can to sign Leicester's Youri Tielemans

The Dutch midfielder left Liverpool at the end of his contract and joined French giants Paris Saint-Germain.

After Liverpool's victory, Redknapp said: 'Liverpool have to get a midfield player in. That's a major blow, losing Wijnaldum, and I don't think they've got the capability of actually replacing him right now.

'Who you get is incredibly difficult: I always look at Liverpool as buying the best players. I would go for [Youri] Tielemans – I would do everything in my power to get him into the club.

'He's a Liverpool type of player. Leicester fans will probably be throwing cups of tea at the TV now, saying 'well, why would he want to leave when he's at a big club?' And he is at a big club with a great manager.

'Leicester are obviously in the ascendancy, I love what they're doing there. They're not a selling club anymore but that's the sort of player who you need to get, who will come into the club and make you better, because right now, that's where they're short.'

Redknapp though said that the Reds will feel they can the title by having Virgil van Dijk back in the team.

Redknapp believes that Georginio Wijnaldum is a 'massive blow' for Jurgen Klopp's side

Wijnaldum left the club at the end of his contract and went on to sign for Paris Saint-Germain

The defender played all 90 minutes on his Premier League return, having not played since the injury he sustained in the Merseyside Derby last October.

He said: 'This is a season that Liverpool should be really looking forward to: they've got the crowd back, they've got their talisman back in Virgil van Dijk and they'll believe that they can win the title.

'I think City are just marginally ahead. But because of their [Liverpool's] history and pedigree in winning the title a couple of years ago, there's no reason why they can't do it again.

'It was shown, last year, what injuries can do to a team. If the wrong player gets injured, it can make all the difference. They'll be right in amongst it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Lionel Messi has been announced as a Paris Saint-Germain player at the Parc des Princes after signing a two-year deal worth a staggering £35million a season.

The 34-year-old landed at Le Bourget airport on Tuesday afternoon and was greeted by hordes of PSG fans who had been camped out since early morning to welcome the player they, and the rest of Europe, had believed would see out his career at Barcelona.

Waving to his new supporters and wearing a Paris T-shirt, the Argentine looked ecstatic just two days after the tears over his Barcelona farewell.

Lionel Messi holds the Paris Saint-Germain shirt after completing his move to the French side from former club Barcelona

Moments before the announcement, PSG teased a trailer showing him in the centre circle in a video preview clip on Twitter

Messi had been spotted earlier in the day wearing the PSG kit and will have the No 30 shirt he first wore while at Barcelona

His capture completes an incredible summer for PSG in which they have signed the captains of Barcelona and Real Madrid on free transfers.

They have assembled one of the most expensive forward lines ever with Messi agreeing a deal worth only slightly less than Neymar’s estimated £37m yearly contract.

Kylian Mbappe completes PSG’s all-star front three, although he is now in the last year of his deal, having turned down three attempts by the French club to renew it, and is holding out for a free transfer to Real Madrid next summer.

Messi said last night: ‘I am excited to begin a new chapter of my career at Paris Saint-Germain. Everything about the club matches my football ambitions. I am determined to help build something special for the club and the fans.’

Messi prepares to put pen to paper on his Paris Saint-Germain contract sat alongside club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi

Wearing the training apparel of his new club, Messi goes through a standard medical as he gives a cheerful thumbs up

The Argentine is put through his paces during his medical ahead of completing his move to the Parc des Princes

Messi mania has already gripped PSG supporters, with the club shop selling out of the forward's replica top just minutes after his confirmation was announced on Tuesday evening.

It remains to be seen what Messi’s arrival does for Mbappe’s willingness to stay and PSG’s ability to keep him without making a mockery of UEFA’s Financial Fair Play rules.

Messi has not trained since winning the Copa America with Argentina last month, so he may have to wait until the game at Reims on August 29 for his debut. He will wear the No 30 shirt he wore on his Barcelona debut 16 seasons ago.

Lionel Messi waves to the gathered fans after arriving in Paris on Tuesday wearing a t-shirt that said 'Ici c'est Paris' - which translates to 'Here is Paris' and is widely used on PSG merchandise and branding

Messi passed his medical at the American Hospital in Paris and waved at the crowds wearing a PSG face mask, before signing a two-year deal with an option for an extra season.

Barcelona have spent the four years since PSG paid Neymar’s £198m buyout clause trying to buy him back, and two summers ago they flew to Paris in a failed attempt to re-sign him.

Messi became a free agent this summer after his original contract with Barcelona expired, but he was expected to re-sign with the club following positive initial talks between all parties.

Lionel Messi was all smiles on a private jet alongside wife Antonella as they boarded a flight to Paris to sign a deal with PSG

Messi, pictured at the airport on Tuesday, has agreed a two-year contract to move to France as leaves LaLiga

Messi shared a hug prior to going through airport security as he said his final goodbyes before jetting off to sign his PSG deal

Yet due to LaLiga's financial regulations, the 34-year-old superstar was unable to sign and now moves to the Parc des Princes to play under fellow Rosario native Mauricio Pochettino.

Messi was pictured alongside four PSG players - Neymar, Angel Di Maria, Marco Verratti and Leandro Paredes - at a dinner in Ibiza 24 hours before Barcelona confirmed he was leaving.

The 34-year-old played it down as a 'coincidence' in his departing press conference but he will now join forces with the quartet in Paris.

'Coincidence? Completely. I met them in Ibiza, we met them one day, got together and we're friends,' Messi explained. 'I was going to meet Paredes and Di Maria. Ney called me and said "do you want to see me?"

'We uploaded the photo in that moment because we were having a good time and there was a joke at the time, they kept telling me "come to Paris, come to Paris".

A new 💎 in Paris !



PSGxMESSI ❤️💙 pic.twitter.com/2JpYSRtpCy — Paris Saint-Germain (@PSG_inside) August 10, 2021

Lionel Messi leaves Barcelona after 21 years of his football career after agreeing a two-year deal with Paris Saint-Germain

Messi will work under coach and compatriot and former Tottenham boss Mauricio Pochettino (left) at the Parc des Princes

Neymar played with Messi at Barcelona and had remained in contact with his Copa America nemesis after leaving for Paris

MESSI'S HONOURS AT BARCELONA LaLiga - 10 Copa del Rey - 7 Champions League - 4 Supercopa de Espana - 7 UEFA Super Cup - 3 FIFA Club World Cup - 3 Advertisement

Messi was left in tears last Sunday at his farewell press conference as he revealed he was leaving against his wishes.

Having agreed to a 50 per cent pay cut, Messi was adamant he did all he could to allow Barcelona the chance to strike a deal.

Spanish employment law rules out options such as playing for free.

'There's nothing more to tell,' Messi said.

'Anything else, I can't say. What's clear is that I did everything possible; the club, Laporta, they couldn't do it because of LaLiga.

'I've heard a lot of things said about me, that I didn't want to continue, but on my behalf, we did everything we could because I wanted to stay.'

Messi joined Barcelona as a 15-year-old and went on to make his senior debut in 2004 at just 16 years old, featuring 778 times for the club in total across his 21-year-career.

During that time Messi became Barcelona's record scorer with 672 goals including 120 Champions League goals and a record 474 LaLiga goals.

He also managed 10 LaLiga titles, four Champions Leagues and seven Copa del Reys.

Messi's individual contribution also saw him claim the European Golden Shoe award for the continent's top scorer on six occasions.

The 34-year-old was in Ibiza with the club's big names including Neymar, Angel Di Maria, Marco Verratti and Leandro Paredes

Messi's father, Jorge, (right) was central to the negotiations on behalf of his son's PSG switch after 21 years in Spain

Messi's with his six Ballons d'Or - he also won four Champions Leagues during a trophy laden career at the Nou Camp

Messi looked devastated as he spoke to the media and his team-mates at the Nou Camp prior to his departure

President Joan Laporta had reportedly made Messi a priority this summer and was focused on signing the Argentine until 2026.

The forward was prepared to take a 50 per cent pay deduction from his previous deal - which was worth more than £425million over four years - to adhere to LaLiga's financial fair play rules.

This would have seen Messi's earnings slashed by £250,000-a-week on the proposed new five-year contract. However, the 34-year-old was said to be happy to take the hit if it meant he was able to re-register as a Barcelona player with LaLiga.

But it proved unworkable and Laporta refused to blame Messi for his departure, with the Barcelona supremo insisting the Argentinean made it easier for the club to extend his deal - but the club were not able to extend his contract and keep the club within LaLiga's salary rules.

An emotional Laporta told his press conference last Friday: 'The base of everything is the previous administration's disastrous management which we inherited.

'Some decisions might even have been criminal. I'm not talking about signings. Some are hard to understand. They must have been under pressure but it led to this situation now.'

The Spanish top-flight club announced a debt of €1billion in February of this year, a few months after Josep Bartomeu resigned from his role as president.

Barcelona shared a bombshell statement on Thursday evening saying the 34-year-old would not be staying at the club due to financial restrictions placed upon them by LaLiga

He went on to make his senior debut in 2004 at just 16 years old and featured 778 times, emerging as a key player

Messi became Barca's record scorer with 672 goals including 120 Champions League goals and a record 474 LaLiga goals

Messi's father Jorge travelled to Barcelona to meet with the club's officials to close the deal and sign the new contract but was left stunned when, at a dinner, he was told a new deal was not possible.

The divorce with Barcelona has been an emotional one, so much so that a lawyer working on behalf of the Spanish club's loyal section of supporters filed a complaint to the European Court of Appeals, stating the Parisians should be stopped in their pursuit of Messi based on financial data.

Juan Branco confirmed the complaint on Twitter on Sunday night by tweeting a statement that read: 'In the name of the 'socios' of Barcelona, my firm has prepared a complaint with the European Commission and demands for provisional suspension before civil and administrative courts in France to prevent Paris-Saint Germain from signing Lionel Messi.

'PSG's ratios in terms of "Financial Fair Play" are worse than those of FC Barcelona.

'In 2019-2020, PSG's salary-to-income ratio was 99%, while Barcelona's was 54%. Meanwhile, the difference has increased.

'It is inconceivable that the "Financial Fair Play" serves to aggravate the drifts of football-business, the instrumentalization of football by sovereign powers, and the distortion of competitions.'

Manager Ronald Koeman says it is 'still hard to understand' that Messi has left Barcelona, with the baffled Dutchman taking to Twitter to wish the Argentine well following his shock departure.

In a document posted by Juan Branco, he confirmed 'socios' were looking to stop the move but to no avail

Messi (in mask bottom left) joined Barca's famous La Masia academy from Argentine side Newell's Old Boys in 2000

Messi had been left 'shocked' and 'dejected' by Barcelona's inability to renew his contract due to financial constraints

'Still hard to understand that you will not play for @FCBarcelona anymore,' the former Everton and Southampton manager wrote on Twitter.

'Thanks for everything you have done for our club Leo. I really enjoyed the full season we worked together. I am impressed with your work ethic and desire to win.

'It makes you the best player in the world. For now, I wish you and your family the best! #ForcaBarca'.

In their statement, Barcelona cited 'financial and structural obstacles' as their inability to secure his signature for the next five years.

A statement on their official website read: 'Despite FC Barcelona and Lionel Messi having reached an agreement and the clear intention of both parties to sign a new contract today, this cannot happen because of financial and structural obstacles [Spanish LaLiga regulations].

'FC Barcelona wholeheartedly expresses its gratitude to the player for his contribution to the aggrandisement of the club and wishes him all the very best for the future in his personal and professional life.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United forward Edinson Cavani is set to miss the start of the Premier League this weekend after being granted extended leave, according to reports.

The 34-year-old signed a one-year contract extension at the back end of last season following an impressive debut campaign at Old Trafford, where he scored 17 goals in all competitions.

Yet as part of that new deal, an extended break this summer following his involvement for Uruguay at the Copa America was discussed and has been granted, according to The Athletic, with the striker yet to return to England.

Manchester United forward Edinson Cavani is set to miss the start of the Premier League

An extended break for Cavani after he featured for Uruguay at the Copa America was granted

The report details that United believe 'a happy man is a happy player' with Cavani using the time off to see his family in his native Uruguay - something he has been unable to do since the Covid-19 pandemic began.

He was in the Uruguay squad which reached the quarter-finals of the Copa America in Brazil, succumbing to a penalty shoot-out defeat by Colombia on July 3.

United kick off their Premier League campaign at home to Leeds this Saturday, but Cavani is near-certain to miss that season-opener.

With Uruguay on the Government's red list, the 34-year-old is also likely to have to quarantine upon his return to the country, putting his involvement in United's second game away at Southampton in doubt too.

The 34-year-old impressed in his debut season at Manchester United, scoring 17 goals

As a result of Cavani's absence, United are reportedly set to unleash new signing Jadon Sancho from the start against Leeds.

According to the Sun, Sancho is tipped to start for United despite only starting to train with the club at Carrington earlier this week.

The 21-year-old signed from Borussia Dortmund in July in a £73million deal on a five-year contract, a year after United pulled out of a move when the German side demanded £110m for him.

England star Sancho impressed at this summer's European Championship competition but saw his spot-kick saved by Gianluigi Donnarumma in the final as Gareth Southgate's side lost to Italy on penalties.

Jadon Sancho is reportedly set to start for Manchester United against Leeds on Saturday

The new £73m signing from Borussia Dortmund only started training with the club on Monday

After the tournament, Sancho and his international team-mates were given an extended break - during which he visited the Turks and Caicos Islands with Red Devils team-mate Marcus Rashford - but returned to training on Monday.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer also has the likes of Anthony Martial and Mason Greenwood to call upon up front, with Marcus Rashford beginning his recovery period following shoulder surgery.

Cavani has been posting workout videos in a home gym on his social media in recent days, implying that a return to England is not far away.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Odsonne Edouard is ready to run down his Celtic contract and leave the club in a free transfer if a move fails to materialise this month.

The France Under 21 international has entered the final year of his contract and wants to go.

While English Premier League Brighton are keen, however, hopes of a quick deal have diminished.

Odsonne Edouard is ready to wind down his Celtic contract and leave on a free next summer

Southampton have also been linked, but have now had a £20million offer accepted for Blackburn Rovers striker Adam Armstrong.

Italian club Roma are long-term Edouard admirers, but have now agreed a £34million fee to sign Tammy Abraham from Chelsea.

Celtic have been linked with £7million OH Leuven striker Thomas Henry. However any move for another striker is contingent on Edouard leaving.

The French forward wants to quit Parkhead amid interest from Brighton and Southampton

Celtic have been linked with a new striker but any move would depend on Edouard's exit

With three weeks of the window remaining, there is still time for clubs seeking a goalscorer to emerge.

Should no acceptable offers come in before the end of August, however, the 23-year-old would be free to sign a pre-contract with interested clubs in January.

And Sportsmail understands the £9m signing from PSG is quite prepared to wind down the clock and wait to see who comes in – a move could potentially see Celtic fail to make a penny from his departure.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raphael Varane has arrived at Manchester United's Carrington training base ahead of completing his medical and signing off the formalities before officially becoming Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's latest signing.

Last month United announced that they had struck a deal with Real Madrid for the transfer of the World Cup winner, despite the Frenchman being widely expected to remain in the Spanish capital.

Solskjaer had been desperate to add to his defensive ranks this summer, and identified Varane, 28, as a top target to play alongside captain Harry Maguire for the coming campaign.

Raphael Varane was ushered into Man United's training ground in the back of a black Mercedes

The Frenchman has finished his quarantine period and will now seal his £42m transfer

Varane's availability had become apparent after the Frenchman entered the final phase of his Real Madrid contract and came into a stand-off with the Spanish giants regarding fresh terms.

Following the completion of a medical United will rubberstamp the deal for £42million, with Varane becoming one of the top earners at Old Trafford.

And, should United successfully register the player by Friday evening, he will be clear to play against Leeds United in the club's Premier League opener on Saturday.

The ex-Real Madrid man updated fans earlier in the week on his solo training in Manchester

Reports claim that Varane wants to start training immediately on Wednesday with his new team-mates in a bid to stake his claim for a starting role against Leeds, though manager Solskjaer has already suggested the newcomer will have to make do with a place on the substitutes bench.

Earlier this week Varane updated fans via his social media channels, showing himself training alone in the garden of his new Manchester residence while quarantining.

Varane joins Jadon Sancho in becoming United's second marquee arrival of the summer.

The Red Devils are bidding to improve upon last season's second placed finish, and a defeat in the final of the Europa League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Talent clearly runs in the Bellingham household after Jude's younger brother Jobe was named in Birmingham City's matchday squad for their Carabao Cup clash with Colchester on Tuesday.

Jobe, who is still only 15 years old, was left on the bench for Birmingham's first-round win over their League Two opponents at St Andrew's but was left beaming with pride after being handed a spot in Lee Bowyer's first-team squad.

Should he have got the nod to make his senior debut for the Sky Blues, Jobe would have broken his own brother's record as the youngest player to have played for the club.

Jobe Bellingham, younger brother of Jude, was named in Birmingham's Carabao Cup squad

The 15-year-old (left) is the younger brother of Borussia Dortmund star, Jude Bellingham (right)

Before leaving for Borussia Dortmund in a £25million deal last summer, which saw Birmingham retire the teenager's No 22 shirt, Jude became the club's youngest first-team player, at just 16 years and 38 days old.

And with Jobe not turning 16 until next month, he still has plenty of time to follow in his brother's footsteps and break the record himself.

While he didn't make it on to the pitch, Jobe will have been happy to see his team-mates secure a 1-0 victory to advance to the second round of the League Cup.

Marcel Oakley's 76th-minute debut goal clinched victory for the Sky Bet Championship side after Colchester created the best chances and later hit the bar through Cameron Coxe.

Teenager Jobe didn't get onto the pitch but still has time to break his sibling's club record

Older brother Jude left Birmingham to join Borussia Dortmund in a £25m deal last summer

Bowyer changed all 11 players from Saturday's 1-0 win at Sheffield United and the Blues boss was relieved his second string passed a stiff test.

'What we practise every day and bring into the game we didn't do in the first half and that disappointed me,' said Bowyer.

'I want players to show me I was wrong in not picking them on Saturday and they didn't do that.'

Bowyer believes right back Oakley, who made his debut at 18, took his chance, however.

'We had to use Marcel in pre-season because we haven't got cover for Maxime Colin,' he added.

'Marcel is only 18 but he has a big heart. I don't give debuts away cheaply but he deserved it based on his pre-season. I knew I could trust him.'

Birmingham City beat League Two's Colchester United in their Carabao Cup first-round clash

Colchester head coach Hayden Mullins - an ex-West Ham United team-mate of Bowyer's - felt hard done to by the result after on-loan Fulham forward Sylvester Jasper threatened three times.

'I'm disappointed with the result, which is a surprise for a League Two club coming to a Championship outfit' said Mullins.

'We dominated most of the game which is really good. I wanted us to be positive and aggressive with the press and in our attacking play and not show them too much respect and we kept pushing right to the end and hit the bar.

'There were a lot of positives - the way we pressed and the energy we showed, I don't think many teams in our division would have lived with us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's usually the skateboarders that are left bloodied and bruised, but at the Olympics on Thursday, it was the turn of the cameraman to dust himself off.

Australia's Kieran Woolley opened up his park skateboarding campaign in Tokyo, which is making its debut at the Olympics, in style with a faultless first run.

However, right at the end of his opening run in the qualification heats which initially put him first, Woolley inadvertently smashed into the nearby cameraman after performing a last-gasp rail grind.

Kieran Woolley smashed into a cameraman at the end of his opening run on Thursday in Tokyo

The cameraman immediately gave the thumbs up as Woolley checked in on him after his run

The 17-year-old lost balance before completely wiping out the unlucky victim, who fell straight to the floor while still holding his camera.

Woolley immediately put his hands to his head before apologising to the cameraman, who gave the thumbs up, while still holding his camera, to let him know that no damage had been done.

Olympic fans were quick to make light of the situation, taking to social media to express their amusement.

One fan wrote on Twitter: 'Kieran Woolley taking out the cameraman while also getting the highest score is class.'

Another TV viewer made a skateboarding-related pun, writing: 'Australia's Kieran Woolley ending his run with the rare and difficult back side cameraman-bonk.'

The Australian found the funny side of things after wiping out the nearby cameraman

Woolley shone during the first qualification heat, and will take his place in Thursday's final

'Kieran Woolley destroying the camera man is what I've been waiting for in these Olympics,' another joked.

And finally, another fan said: 'Kieran Woolley just took out the camera man after a rail grind. Then goes top of the leaderboard on his 1st run.'

Woolley was one of the stars of the opening qualification heat, and progressed through to Thursday's final with absolute ease.

After qualifying for the final, the Australian said: 'It is going to go insane, it will go off for sure.

'We have all the heavy-hitters coming up in the next heat. It's going to be super fun.'

Unfortunately for Woolley, he missed out on a medal in the final - with his compatriot Keegan Palmer claiming gold ahead of Brazil's Pedro Barros in silver and Cory Juneay of USA, who took bronze.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Laura Kenny and Great Britain's women's team pursuit squad had to settle for silver in the Tokyo Olympics as Germany won gold in a new world record time.

Kenny had won gold in every Olympic event she had entered prior to this race and began the Games with the potential to reach seven golds and perhaps become Britain's most decorated Olympian.

But though the two teams had been closely matched in qualifying and in the first round, Germany utterly dominated the final, stopping the clock in four minutes 4.249 seconds, winning by more than six seconds.

Britain's women's team pursuit squad had to settle for silver on Tuesday as Germany took gold

The Germans won with a time of 4:04:249 as GB surrendered the title they won in Rio

Both teams had broken the world record in the first round early on Tuesday, Britain setting a time of 4:06.748 before Germany responded with 4:06.166.

Britain's celebrations for that record had been cut short when Katie Archibald crashed into Neah Evans after the finish, and it was unclear if either rider was affected in the final as the team set a much slower time.

Evans had replaced Elinor Barker in the line-up after qualifying.

Kenny told the BBC: 'We knew (Germany) were going to go fast, but maybe not quite that fast.'

British rider Katie Archibald rode into the back of team-mate Neah Evans following their semi-final victory over USA – but both riders got quickly back up ahead of the final

Germany utterly dominated the final, winning by more than six seconds at the Izu Velodrome

Asked about the prospect of adding two more medals to her tally, she added: 'Yeah, I'll just keep turning up and see what happens!'

Team-mate Evans added: 'It's really special. Obviously we were defending champions and there are huge expectations because we do have such a good reputation, but there are so many strong nations.

'We came out fighting but it wasn't to be this time.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rafael Nadal marked his return to action this week with an unusual reprimand for Novak Djokovic over his erratic behaviour at the Olympics.

Preparing to play the Citi Open in Washington DC, the Spaniard criticised his rival for setting a poor example to children.

Djokovic’s notorious temper boiled over in his bronze medal play-off defeat by Pablo Carreno Busta, when he angrily hurled his racket into the empty stands before smashing another against a net post. The world No 1 left Tokyo without a medal.

Rafa Nadal (right) has rebuked Novak Djokovic (left) after the Serbian threw his racket in anger

Djokovic hurled his racket into the empty stands during his defeat to Pablo Carreno Busta

He also smashed a racket and hurled it into the net during an epic meltdown on court

‘It’s strange someone who has had so much success should react that way from time to time, but at the end of the day he’s very competitive and reacts like that,’ said Nadal.

‘It’s not the best image. It’s important to avoid these situations, especially if you’re a reference for many children.

‘Luckily there weren’t any fans in the stands and it didn’t lead to anything, but these are things that happen once in a while and you have to try to avoid them.’

Djokovic has a habit of losing his temper in matches and Nadal said: 'It's not the best image'

Nadal is playing at the Citi Open to prepare for the US Open after missing the last two months

Carreno Busta was Djokovic’s opponent at the US Open last year when the Serb was defaulted in the fourth round for swiping away a ball that hit a line judge in the neck.

There is little love lost between Nadal and Djokovic, who ended the Spaniard’s run of French Open titles with a semi-final victory in June before going on to win Wimbledon. Nadal is no great fan of Djokovic’s burgeoning players’ union, the Professional Tennis Players Association.

Nadal, who did not play at Wimbledon or the Olympics, revealed he did not pick up a racket for nearly three weeks after Roland Garros due to a foot problem. However, he is now giving himself a lengthy run-in to Flushing Meadows.

Stream every unmissable moment of Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 live on discovery+, The Streaming Home of the Olympics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi is now Ligue 1's biggest star after joining Paris Saint-Germain but his lifelong friend Cesc Fabregas has warned the Argentine that French football is no easy street.

The former Arsenal and Chelsea midfielder, 34, is currently plying his trade at Monaco, who nearly finished ahead of PSG last season, only for Mauricio Pochettino's side to lose out to surprise champions Lille on the final day.

Fabregas came through the same Barcelona youth team as Messi and even holidays regularly with the former Catalans captain, but has warned him that Ligue 1 is much harder than it looks.

Cesc Fabregas (left) has warned his friend Lionel Messi (right) that Ligue 1 is not so easy

Messi was unveiled as a PSG player on Wednesday after his free transfer from Barcelona

The midfielder knows that too well - he scored the winner for Monaco in a shock victory against PSG which ended up being one of Thomas Tuchel's final matches in charge of the Parisian giants.

The Spaniard said: 'Certainly when PSG don't win the league, everyone sees it as a disaster because they spend a lot of money. Everyone sees it as a one-team league, but in the last five years Monaco and Lille have put a break in it.

'It's not as easy as people think. It's very intense, very aggressive, very fast and strong players. They (the teams) defend very well.

Asked if Monaco can cause another shock against PSG this season, Fabregas claimed: 'We will try. Who said Lille would win the title last year? They tried and did a good campaign, stuck together and worked hard.

Ex-Barcelona man Fabregas is currently plying his trade at Ligue 1 title challengers Monaco

'On paper, yes - they (PSG) are the best team. But that doesn't guarantee anything.

'We (Monaco) are tough, we're a young group full of energy and we are very proud of what we are doing - we keep going as a team and manage to compete with them at least until the end.

'Having a fantastic team helps, but it doesn't guarantee anything to win the title.

He added: 'The league is a good league, it's a league that's improving. It's already physical, aggressive players in a good way, they defend very well.

'In attacking, they used to be not very talented but they're improving. New foreign, modern coaches are coming in and it's a league that's going up with the generation of coaches and players.

The 34-year-old claims five or six Ligue 1 teams will compete at the top, including his Monaco

'I think we will see a very interesting Ligue 1 this year. Lille are competitive, Marseille have signed well. Lyon have a good team with a good coach, we are a good team as well. Five or six teams will be competing at the top, it will be a good year.'

Messi's arrival shook the French football world this morning. After a press conference which hosted most of Europe's elite media, the former Barcelona star was embraced by streets of PSG fans, over the the moon with the entrance of the world's greatest player.

Yet Messi's move to Paris has still divided opinion. Some believe it adds a great deal of value to a divisoin previously branded as a 'farmers league', while others say it extends the advantage the Qatari-owned giants have over the rest of France.

Fabregas admits the signing of Lionel Messi is a 'different dimension' for the French top-flight

Fabregas, who admits he expected Messi 'to stay at Barcelona forever' disputes that last claim, as the player he has known since he was 13 years of age is a completely different draw to other signings the French league has seen.

'Everyone has their own opinions (on French football), having Leo in this league is something really special,' said Fabregas. 'In the last few years PSG have tried to get big names... (but) Leo for me is the greatest, there is no-one like him. He's on top and the most special one. For France and Ligue 1 it's another dimension.

'Sometimes I tell him, he doesn't even know how big he is. He goes to places, he thinks it's normal being embraced like that, being the best, being surrounded by fans. What we see from the outside, I've never seen it from anyone else.

Fabregas (left) thought Messi (right) would stay at Barcelona for the rest of his career

'There are sometimes more followers of Lionel than the club (he plays for). More people will be following Leo and the trio with Mbappe and Neymar which will be fantastic to watch.'

For anyone doubting that Messi's arrival in Ligue 1 is a negative move for French football, look at the way Fabregas describes the current mood in his Monaco camp about the Argentine's arrival - even though their first fixture against Messi's PSG comes in mid-December.

The Spaniard revealed: 'All the boys are excited, knowing they are playing against Lionel Messi. Some of them were dreaming of it. For them it's a really good thing. They don't stop asking questions.

'Everyone wants his shirt, (for when we play them mid-December). I say we are 25 and he will only have two! It's nice to see the excitement, the will of wanting to compete against the very best, to do well and show their talents.

The midfielder reveals his Monaco team-mates are looking forward to taking on Messi

'The team is filled of young talents at Monaco. It will be a big test for them and will be motivated. When the best player comes, they want to show what they can do.

'Sometimes it brings more motivation to do well and make something special happen. It will definitely be a tough challenge, though we were close last year. Up until the last two games of the season we were in the mix.

'We have to keep going not thinking too much about PSG. It's a long, big season.'

And the friendly mind games have already begun between Monaco and PSG, with the former claiming PSG need to deliver Champions League this season, given the quality they have in their squad.

Fabregas claims the pressure is on Mauricio Pochettino (above) to deliver multiple trophies

'They must have pressure to make a super team like that,' admits Fabregas. 'It's obvious they want to win the Champions League. They have been following it and trying to touch it for some time.

'There's no-one better than Lionel Messi, no defender better than Sergio Ramos, Gini Wijnaldum is one of the best midfielders at the moment. Hakimi is the best right-back or one of the best. It feels like that they're doing little extra final push to see where it takes them.

'But football is very competitive, the line is so thin between winning and losing. It's why there's so many 0-0, 1-1, extra-time, penalties. Everything is going to penalties because everyone knows each other really well.'

Whether it's PSG, Monaco or somebody else who lifts the title in May, we're in for a Ligue 1 season like no other.

BT Sport is the exclusive home of Ligue 1 football in the UK and Ireland, with around 200 top-flight clashes available to watch this season. For more info, visit btsport.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Neville claims both Jurgen Klopp and Pep Guardiola would never sign Romelu Lukaku due to his off-the-ball work as the Belgian closes in on a £98million move to Chelsea.

The Inter Milan forward is completing the final details ahead of his Stamford Bridge move after touching down in London on Wednesday, in a move which will see him return to Chelsea seven years after quitting the club.

Lukaku also enjoyed Premier League spells at West Brom, Everton and Manchester United, the last of which Neville claims did not suit the Red Devils.

Gary Neville says Jurgen Klopp (right) would not sign Romelu Lukaku (left) due to his workrate

Neville believes certain players are suited to certain systems, and Lukaku does not fit Liverpool

Neville said in The Overlap podcast: 'Jurgen Klopp wouldn't sign Lukaku in a million years. Neither would probably Pep Guardiola but Chelsea are the club that have had that type of striker.

'A Costa, a Drogba, a single point striker, that physical presence that wants to carry that line. They've had that in their armoury for 20 years. It suits Chelsea Football Club. He wouldn't press from the front so he'd never suit Jurgen Klopp.

'He would never suit Old Trafford. The fans up there need a personality up front. Cavani suits Old Trafford. I know he's probably past his best years but he works a lot harder than Lukaku off the ball.

Neville also claimed Pep Guardiola (right) would not consider moving for Lukaku like Klopp

Neville says that United's Edinson Cavani works harder than Lukaku without the ball

'I'm not saying he's better - Lukaku will score 25 goals for Chelsea but he doesn't suit United. He wouldn't suit Liverpool.'

Lukaku spent two years at Old Trafford after moving from Everton in an initial £75m transfer and scored a respectable 42 goals in 96 appearances, but failed to guide the United to a trophy.

The Belgian international forward was often criticised by the United faithful for his poor first touch and lack of athleticism - which Neville himself brought up at the time of his United exit in 2019 - with the ex-United defender claiming the move did not work.

'I think certain players suit certain clubs,' Neville added. 'It was never going to work out there (at United). It just wasn't right. Maybe the time's not right, maybe the manager's not right, maybe the feeling's not right.

Lukaku was an unpopular player at Manchester United despite scoring 42 goals in 96 games

'Some players you look at them in the shirt and you just go "no". Inter Milan, it works.'

Lukaku moved to Inter in 2019 and managed to guide them to the Serie A title as their main striker last season.

The 28-year-old scored 30 goals in 44 appearances in all competitions last season for Inter but Jamie Carragher believes the striker still has something to prove this term at Chelsea.

Carragher claimed: 'There's something about Lukaku though, even though his goal record is amazing each season, when we talk about a (Robert) Lewandowski or a Harry Kane or other strikers, there's never a question about them.

Jamie Carragher says Lukaku still has something to prove at Chelsea ahead of his £98m move

'But with Lukaku there seems to be that slight "but" to me. Just something that he still has to prove.

'It's not like he's got a lot of honours in his career or been that man who's taken someone to something like he did last season with Inter Milan. He was at Man United, a huge signing, but he never got across the line.'

Neville responded to that claim by saying: 'I've got no doubts about Lukaku. I have no buts. I've got buts for him at United, at certain clubs under certain systems and what you expect.

Lukaku scored 30 goals last season as Inter Milan won their first Serie A title in 11 years

'What does United expect from a striker? What does Chelsea expect from one? They are different expectations.'

Roy Keane, meanwhile, agreed with Neville's statement that Lukaku's stint at United came at the wrong time for the player, but believes the Belgian, who has 64 goals in 90 games for his country, is 'guaranteed' to score plenty at Chelsea this season.

The ex-United captain claimed: 'The timing for a player is huge, the club and Man United were maybe at the wrong time. Because there was no doubt he was a brilliant player. His stats will tell you that, even going back to his time at Everton.

Roy Keane (middle) agreed with Neville that Lukaku was not a good fit for Manchester United

'Sometimes, a brilliant player will come to your club and it's just not the right fit. The chemistry's not right, maybe it's the coach or manager. He might have a few injuries.

'Lukaku went off to Inter Milan, don't tell me you were surprised that he scored so many goals? Obviously he worked on his diet but he matured himself, going to another country.

'So when you think of him coming back, he's guaranteed goals. Chelsea, the way they're playing, the sharpness, the quality they will have on the ball, it guarantees you 20 goals.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At least Jimmy Anderson was fit after all to give England two rare moments of inspiration on a chastening first day of the second Test.

That was the only silver lining to the clouds that gathered over Lord’s on Thursday morning and then the metaphorical ones that engulfed England as the sun broke through.

Clearly Anderson, as Sportsmail revealed on Thursday, was having none of the negative talk at Lord’s on Wednesday that saw him virtually ruled out of this pivotal match.

James Anderson offered another reminder of his enduring class with two crucial wickets

Indian opener Rohit Sharma is bowled by Anderson as England finally broke through

That was not before Sharma produced an outstanding display to as he was bowled for 83

He passed a fitness test on the thigh problem that threatened to sideline him and then saw Joe Root win the toss and bowl in conditions made for the old master.

But not even Anderson could stop India, mainly in the form of the brilliant KL Rahul, providing a master-class in how to bat in archetypal English conditions.

England’s record wicket-taker was superb after lunch to bowl the classy Rohit Sharma with a beauty and then quickly send back the out of touch Cheteshwar Pujara.

But that was as good as it got for England until Ollie Robinson finally struck with the second new ball on the brink of 7pm to have Virat Kohli well snaffled by Root at first slip.

A glimmer of hope, perhaps, but with Rahul initially standing firm and then flourishing to reach his sixth Test century, the advantage is very much with India on 276 for three. England have much to do to get back in this Test and the series.

It seemed Root had given England that advantage by winning his seventh toss in succession against Kohli and putting his faith in a still considerably weakened attack.

But perhaps his decision to bowl without Jofra Archer, Chris Woakes, Ben Stokes, Olly Stone and now Stuart Broad was made more through a lack of faith in his own top order.

And the chaos that has enveloped England’s Test team was emphasised by Root and Chris Silverwood making another three changes to the team that drew at Trent Bridge.

Haseeb Hameed, back for his fourth Test almost five years after his third, Moeen Ali and Mark Wood were all in and Broad, Zak Crawley and Dan Lawrence missed out.

That added to the raft of changes England have made after virtually each game since everything seemed well with their world when they won the first Test against India last winter.

England certainly needed more this time from an attack that, with the exception of Anderson, lacked the cutting edge and nous to make the most of the chance handed them.

Yet that should take nothing away from India’s openers, who came through a considerable examination of their application on a damp and gloomy first morning.

39-year-old Anderson was at the centre of things as he so often is as England fought back

Anderson hugs Jonny Bairstow after he took the slip catch to remove Cheteshwar Pujara

Firstly there was a sublime display from a batsman in Rohit who has rarely thrived against the moving red ball outside of India.

Then, when Anderson had nipped a world-class innings in the bud, a supporting member of India’s star-studded Test cast in Rahul began to take over the stage.

It was Rohit who dominated an opening stand of 126, making 50 out of the first 71 runs and then 75 out of the first 100.

Notably he pulled Wood, held back by Root until after lunch, for six and then gloriously repeated the shot to a delivery timed at 93.4mph in front of square for four.

Nothing appeared more likely than a Rohit century but Anderson, who seemed to be bowling within himself in his first two spells, was very much into his stride in his third.

When Rohit’s departure was quickly followed by that of Pujara, who could have fallen twice before finally poking Anderson to Jonny Bairstow at third slip, England had a sniff.

But the key to the day, perhaps, came when Anderson was only able to have two deliveries at Kohli, who he dismissed first ball at Trent Bridge, before Root deemed it sensible to give him another break. The Indian captain was then quickly into his stride.

Not that Kohli was the star of a partnership of 117 for the third wicket. Rahul came into this series as India’s fourth choice opener but injuries to Shubman Gill and then, on the eve of the first Test, Mayank Agarwal gave him his opportunity.

James Anderson reacts as England toiled away in search of a breakthrough against India

Rohit Sharma plays a shot to the boundary as India's openers made a strong start to the Test

India's openers KL Rahul and Rohit Sharma steered India through a rain-interrupted session

The morning session was interrupted by rain showers in London at the start of the Test

How he has taken it, firstly in Nottingham when he made 84 and then held firm for much of the fourth evening with England pushing hard for breakthroughs and now, superbly, here.

Rahul initially played second fiddle without looking in any way insecure before emerging from Rohit’s shadow, growing in confidence as the day wore on and claiming his place on the fabled Lord’s honours board in the evening sunshine.

He was still there at the close on 127 while Kohli, who had just got away with edging Anderson short of the slips, repeated his mistake to give Robinson his sole reward.

England really should have done better. Robinson gave decent support to Anderson and deserved the wicket of Kohli to further announce his arrival as a bowler of true Test calibre.

Sam Curran reacts to a near miss while bowling during the morning session of the first day

Anderson appeals in vain for a wicket after Joe Root had won the toss and opted to bowl first

But Wood looked like a man with desperately little cricket behind him on a pitch with little pace while Sam Curran, wicketless at Trent Bridge, was again England’s least effective bowler even though there was swing before lunch.

At least the loss of two World Championship points for both sides for a tardy over-rate at Trent Bridge seems to have improved what had become a chronic problem.

The first hour was lost to rain and then the umpires took lunch at a time when really they could have played on. But as the clock crept towards 7.20pm a near full-house at Lord’s saw the full 90 overs bowled. And that is a small victory for Test cricket in itself.

Haseeb Hameed returned to the England side as one of three changes for the second Test
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dean Smith tore into his Aston Villa players for giving Watford a helping hand as he likened their first-half performance to a friendly.

Villa were overwhelmed on Saturday when first-half goals from Emmanuel Dennis and Ismaila Sarr left them an ‘uphill battle’ that they left too late to try and climb in the second half.

‘In the first half they were miles off it from where we need to be at this club,’ said Smith. ‘I told them that in no uncertain terms at half-time.

Dean Smith was furious with Aston Villa's performance in their Premier League opener

Watford went 3-0 ahead and the lead was too great for Aston Villa to complete a late fightback

'I won’t accept performances like that in the first half. We came here to win a football game and do enough to win a football game and we helped Watford on their way.’

Villa improved in the second half, scoring twice through John McGinn and summer signing Danny Ings, but Smith knows first halves like the one at Vicarage Road will see them beaten most weeks at this level.

‘We lacked intensity, on the ball, off the ball, it was almost like we were playing a friendly game and we all know a Premier League game is not a friendly,’ he said.

Ings echoed the sentiments of his new boss, adding: ‘In the two halves we looked like two different teams.

'There was not a good rhythm in the first half and we got punished for it.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nuno Espirito Santo defiantly insisted he expects to keep Harry Kane after his Tottenham tenure got under way with a stirring win over champions Manchester City.

Son Heung-min's strike in the second half secured a euphoric victory for Spurs but the Kane transfer saga remained the topic on everyone's lips.

Spurs supporters made their feelings towards Kane, who wants to join City, crystal clear, chanting: 'Are you watching Harry Kane?', during the closing stages of the clash.

Nuno Espirito Santo (left) said he expects Harry Kane (right) to stay at the club after Tottenham's victory over Manchester City

But Nuno provided a strong indication that he is planning for life at Spurs with Kane, saying: 'What we know is Harry is with us and he is preparing himself to help the team.'

In a later post-match interview, when asked if Kane remains in his plans, Nuno replied: 'Yes, Harry, like Bryan (Gil), Cristian Romero, they joined us later.

'Harry is preparing himself and when he's ready he'll join the group and help the team.'

Sportsmail exclusively revealed on Saturday that Kane had made himself available for Sunday's game despite the fact he had completed just two full training sessions since his later-than-expected return from summer holidays.

Kane is desperate to join Pep Guardiola's side before the end of the transfer window

But Nuno confirmed he took the decision to omit Kane from his squad for the win over Pep Guardiola's side because he felt the striker is lacking the necessary fitness due to his shorter than usual pre-season.

Intriguingly, Sky Sports reported during their coverage of the match that the 28-year-old was at the stadium.

'The delay (in his return to training), all these things, I think Harry needs to work,' added Nuno.

'He worked today and he will keep on working until he can help the team.

'Players who have had not too many sessions need more work.'

City's goalless start to the season heightens concerns they need to sign a striker like Kane

City's goalless start to the season will only serve to heighten concerns they are missing a central striker following the departure of legend Sergio Aguero.

Indeed, Kane is the man Guardiola wants to lead his attack this season but the City boss is adamant Sunday's misfiring display does not amplify their need for a new centre forward.

'We had the same people last season and we scored lots of goals,' added the City boss.

'Days like today happen. We arrived many times (to have chances). We are good enough to create chances and score the goals and we are going to do it.

'Sergio is gone but last season we could not use him much (yet) we won the Premier League.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United and Arsenal are set to battle it out over signing Bayern Munich and France midfielder Corentin Tolisso, according to reports.

The Frenchman, who was part of Didier Deschamps Euro 2020 squad this summer, is set to leave the German giants after being signed with much fanfare for £38million from Lyon in 2017.

Tolisso, 26, has one year left on his contract and as such, Bayern are willing to part with the France international for a hugely reduced fee of around £8.5million in order to recoup some value and get his wages off their books, according to Bild.

Manchester United and Arsenal are set to fight it out over signing midfielder Corentin Tolisso

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer (left) may be planning for life after Paul Pogba (right) at Old Trafford

New Bayern boss Julien Nagelsmann is keen to bring in midfielder Marcel Sabitzer from his former club RB Leipzig, and has to sell in order to make the deal happen with Tolisso the prime candidate to leave.

Bayern initially set a price tag of £17m for Tolisso, but have lowered their expectations after receiving no offers at that price.

News of Tolisso's availability has reportedly pricked ears at Old Trafford and the Emirates, as well as several other clubs.

Tolisso (centre) has managed just 57 league games for Bayern Munich over four seasons

Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta (left) is keen to find a midfield partner to Thomas Partey (right)

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has had a productive transfer window, bringing in both Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane as priorities to plug gaps in defence and attack.

But the United boss is also being pragmatic and scouting for a replacement for Paul Pogba, who may leave Old Trafford this summer for a fee or next year on a free transfer.

For his part, Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta has presided over a huge spending spree this summer, bringing in defender Ben White, midfielder Albert Sambi Lokonga and left-back Nuno Tavares.

Tolisso (left) was part of Didier Deschamp's Euro 2020 squad for France, playing three times

But Arteta's overhaul is not yet complete and his desire to find a complementary midfield partner to Thomas Partey is well-known, despite Granit Xhaka now staying at Arsenal.

Tolisso has struggled since joining Bayern, as he picked up a cruciate ligament injury in his second season at the club. Despite being a player of significant promise, he has managed just 57 league appearances in Germany in four seasons.

As well as United and Arsenal, Tolisso's is reportedly attracting interest from West Ham and Juventus.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi smiled for the camera aboard the private jet. He looked happy. Happy for a man who was leaving a club he didn’t want to leave, to play for a club he didn’t want to join, and relocating to a city where he didn’t care to reside.

He was living the dream: as envisaged by accountants, marketing men, contract lawyers, Qatari sheiks and the fans who gathered outside the airport, hoping for a glimpse.

He wasn’t living Messi’s dream, though, for we all know what that was. To continue playing for Barcelona, and winning trophies for Barcelona, and remaining, with his family, in Barcelona. Even on the day he tearfully announced he had no option but to leave, he was already talking about the day he would return.

Lionel Messi smiled for the camera with his wife Antonella aboard the private jet on Tuesday

Messi’s home is Barcelona. Not just the Nou Camp, but the city. It is where he will live when his professional career is over and, without being morbid, where he will one day die, like Johan Cruyff, another adopted son of the city.

Cruyff went to Barcelona as a player in 1973, returned as manager in 1988 and never really left after that. He died in a Barcelona clinic in 2016 and was cremated in the city the next day.

And, yes, we know behind Messi’s transfer to Paris Saint-Germain lies cold, hard economics — on both sides and, no doubt, Messi’s own — but those tears were real and the wider world felt them. Messi and Barcelona belonged together. The question remains, can they endure apart?

Barcelona’s decline is already apparent. Ultimately, at 34, even Messi’s genius could no longer save them. Their recruitment has been poor, the players lost or ushered into retirement were superior to their replacements, and no coach since Pep Guardiola has possessed the same wit or inventiveness.

Messi, like Johan Cruyff (pictured in 1978), is another adopted son of Barcelona

The Nou Camp crowd unveil a tribute to Cruyff days after he passed away in 2016

Rivals took some of Guardiola’s innovation and further refined it, even modernised it in Jurgen Klopp’s case, while Barcelona kept giving the ball to Messi and hoping for the best.

Recruitment policy reflected austere circumstances and failures of imagination. Having spent much of last season injured, it can hardly be a surprise that summer signing Sergio Aguero is injured again now, and likely to miss the first 10 games of the season. It used to be that Manchester City would swoop up Barcelona’s cast-offs. To see this policy reversed is an indication of how far the Catalans have fallen.

As for Messi, can he learn to love his next best life? Can he, at this late stage in his career, become inspired by sharing a mission in which he had no interest until his circumstances changed irrevocably?

Paris Saint-Germain are driven to win the Champions League. Does Messi share that obsession? Can he ever feel about his new home the way he did about Barcelona? It truly was more than a club to him. Can that be said of PSG?

Neymar, Cristiano Ronaldo, Luis Suarez, Messi’s great team-mates and rivals, have always been guns for hire, played for many clubs, in many leagues.

Contrastingly, Messi’s connection with Newell’s Old Boys in Argentina did not stretch beyond his 13th birthday. Barcelona supported the growth hormone treatment that was essential in making him a player. He came through La Masia academy like a local. By the time he played at Under 17 level he would have been fully entitled to represent Spain.

So this is not like any other major transfer. This is not Neymar to PSG, or Kylian Mbappe. PSG are buying a pillar of Barcelona, the club and the city. They are buying a presence as identifiable as the Sagrada Familia — and as hard to forget, once witnessed. This is not about whether Messi will fit at PSG. A player of his talent will fit anywhere and any jealousies will be quickly cast aside once his team-mates see what he can bring to their game.

The greater riddle is whether Messi will be fulfilled by his new challenge. France is far from a farmer’s league — as the forward quartet of Messi, Mbappe, Neymar and Angel Di Maria proves — yet there is no Real Madrid to be annually overcome, no cussed equivalent of Diego Simeone’s Atletico Madrid, either.

Somehow, PSG lost the league to Lille last season, but before that they had won seven of eight titles dating back to 2013, after the Qatari fortune arrived. It is close to unimaginable that they will not regain supremacy given Messi’s addition.

Messi had a large poster of him on the side of Nou Camp torn down on Tuesday

But is the challenge sufficient for him? Is there motivation in Saturday’s game against Strasbourg, the August 20 visit to Stade Brest?

Neymar played 33, 34 and 30 La Liga games in his final three seasons with Barcelona; and 20, 17, 15 and 18 league matches in his four seasons with PSG. It is hard to reason those numbers do not reflect comparative necessity.

Leaving the Champions League as the holy grail. PSG, like Manchester City, have never won it. Undoubtedly, those behind the project feel one player would make the difference. Yet Barcelona have had Messi all these years and have conquered Europe once since 2011.

If there are flaws elsewhere in the team, the late stages of Champions League football will find them out. PSG lost 4-1 to Manchester City on aggregate in the semi-finals last season. Real Madrid’s famed Galacticos never enjoyed the domination in Europe that a more balanced XI did later under Zinedine Zidane.

Neymar, Cristiano Ronaldo (pictured), Luis Suarez have played for many clubs in many leagues

There is huge pressure on Mauricio Pochettino to finally with the Champions League with Messi, Neymar (centre) and Kylian Mbappe (right) in attack next season

In many ways, then, the greatest pressure is on Mauricio Pochettino. Having gone to a club where it seemed impossible not to win the league, and then failed to win the league, he must now steer a forward line who cannot fail to dominate Europe, and hope the campaign does not end in more reputational damage.

Yet will it be as easy as the team sheet suggests?

Messi was smiling and wearing his newest T-shirt on Tuesday. He had swapped some moribund sportswear on leaving Barcelona for a top with the slogan ‘Ici c’est Paris’. He was still smiling and looked happy. Maybe it hasn’t sunk in yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Roy Keane has admitted he thinks Peter Schmeichel was overrated, recalled his worst game came against Real Madrid after he tried a yoga session and insisted he was better than Patrick Vieira during a hilarious quick-fire Q+A with Gary Neville.

To celebrate the Irishman's 50th birthday, Neville met his former Manchester United team-mate on a dog walk and had prepared 50 quick-fire questions to ask him as they strolled along.

The Sky Sports punditry pair chatted about everything on The Overlap from Keane's toughest opponent, his favourite food and who he prefers between heavyweight duo Anthony Joshua and Tyson Fury.

Roy Keane and Gary Neville did a hilarious quick-fire Q+A on a dog walk for The Overlap

Keane recalls his worst game came against Real Madrid after trying yoga the days before

When asked to name his worst performance during his illustrious career, Keane highlighted one game against Real Madrid where he decided to tweak his pre-match routine.

He said: ‘We played Real Madrid at home one time and I was shocking.

'But I’d just tried yoga at home a couple of days before and I couldn’t get going.

‘I never got a kick. I was taken off and I remember thinking “I’m finished at real top-level football.”'

Keane was then asked who was the best goalkeeper he played with before delivering a withering assessment of ex-team-mate Schmeichel.

Keane insisted he was better than Patrick Vieira, who he used to clash with in Arsenal games

The Irishman and his French counterpart famously clashed in the tunnel at Highbury Stadium

He added: ‘I suppose I’d have to say Peter but I still think he was overrated.

'I just don’t think he was as good as everyone made out but he was very good.'

Keane was known throughout his playing career for his bitter rivalry with former Arsenal midfielder Patrick Vieira.

They enjoyed one of the Premier League's greatest rivalries during Manchester United and Arsenal's enthralling battles for top spot in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

The Irishman and his French counterpart famously clashed in the tunnel at Highbury Stadium and engaged in a fracas on the pitch as the pair attempted to guide their sides to the big trophies.

Keane admitted the moment he still thinks about was snapping his cruciate ligament in a challenge with Alf-Inge Haaland

But when Neville asked who was better out of Keane and the Crystal Palace manager, Keane did not hesitate in his response.

'I thought I was better than Patrick, yeah. Is that what you're saying, who's better? Yeah, me.'

Neville briefly stopped and looked up at the Irishman after he had given his answer, to which the ex-Ireland midfielder said: 'What are you pausing for?'

Another of Keane's fierce rivalries was brought up when he was asked to name the moment in football he still thinks about.

Neville asked who Keane would rather have over himself or brother Phil and Keane said Gary

The Irishman also insisted he thought Peter Schmeichel (right) was an overrated goalkeeper

Keane said it was the first incident with ex-Leeds star Alf-Inge Haaland where he snapped his anterior cruciate ligament.

As Keane lay in pain on the ground, Haaland furiously raced over to him and accused him of feigning injury.

But then in April 2001, Keane sought revenge in a Manchester derby and produced a shocking tackle on Haaland.

Speaking about the first incident, Keane told Neville: 'In football I suppose maybe when I did my cruciate. The Haaland stuff when I got injured.

'It was a bit stupid but I don't think I deserved doing my cruciate for it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's impending move to PSG still seems very hard to fathom - but wait till you see the money at play.

The 34-year-old Argentine great is reportedly set to earn £25m a year after tax as he signs a two-year deal at the Parc des Princes, with a deal likely to be finalised in the coming days.

With seemingly no end to PSG's expenditure this summer, the Ligue 1 club now have an astronomically high wage bill which is way out in front on a global scale.

Sportsmail gives you all the figures and explains how they're outspending sporting heavyweights across a number of different sports.

Lionel Messi said goodbye to Barcelona on Sunday and is set to move to Paris Saint-Germain

The Argentine superstar is reportedly set to earn £25m a year after tax at the Ligue 1 club

10) CLEVELAND BROWNS - £157m

The Browns have spent big money in recent seasons as they eye post-season success.

Wide receivers Odell Beckham Jr. and Jarvis Landry are the highest earners, on base salaries of £10.4m and £9m respectively.

Last season, the Browns clinched their first winning season since 2007, making it to the playoffs for the first time since 2002 - but they lost in the divisional round to the Chiefs.

Source: spotrac

Cleveland Browns wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. earns a base annual salary of £10.4m

9) DALLAS COWBOYS - £158m

The Texas team are the highest-paid NFL franchise, pipping the Cleveland Browns, New England Patriots and Tampa Bay Buccaneers.

Quarterback Dak Prescott is on a base salary of £6.4m, with a large signing bonus of £9.5m, with defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence on £15.8m overall.

That expenditure did not transition into results last year for the Cowboys though, as they finished 3rd in the NFC East with a season-record of 6-10.

Source: spotrac

Quarterback Dak Prescott is on a base salary of £6.4m, with a large signing bonus of £9.5m

8) CHELSEA - £163m

N'Golo Kante is Chelsea's highest earner, after he signed a new deal in 2018 believed to be worth £290,000 a week, which equates to £15m a year.

Timo Werner is second on the list after his signing last summer from RB Leipzig, on £14.14m, while Ben Chilwell, Kepa Arrizabalaga and Mateo Kovacic complete the top-five.

This figure could go up further in the coming weeks though, should Romelu Lukaku complete a sensational £97.5m move back to Stamford Bridge.

Source: Salary Sport

N'Golo Kante is Chelsea's highest earner, believed to be worth £290,000 a week (£15m a year)

7) BAYERN MUNICH - £166m

The Bundesliga champions pay their stars well.

As many as seven players are on more than £10m a year, with Robert Lewandowski the highest earner on £18.3m a year and Manuel Neuer £1.9m behind.

Leroy Sane, Thomas Muller, Lucas Hernandez and Douglas Costa are the others on eight figure salaries.

Source: Salary Sport

Star forward Robert Lewandowski is the highest earner at Bayern Munich, on £18.3m a year

6) JUVENTUS - £184m

The Italian giants are sixth on the list largely down to the wages of one man. No prizes for guessing who.

Cristiano Ronaldo is reportedly on £52m a year, that's £1m a week, and is by far and away the club's highest earner.

Paulo Dybala is some way behind, second on the list, on £12.3m with Matthijs de Ligt on £11.8m.

Source: Salary Sport

Cristiano Ronaldo is by far and away Juventus' highest earner after his move back in 2018

5) LOS ANGELES DODGERS - £193m

The highest-paid non-football sports team is MLB franchise the LA Dodgers, who won their first World Series in 32 years last year.

Trevor Bauer earns the most, at £24.5m, while Mookie Betts was recently handed an astonishing 12-year $365m deal, which works out at $30.4m (£21.9m) a year.

The Dodgers are someway ahead of the second highest-paid MLB team, the New York Yankees who have an annual payroll of £146m.

Source: spotrac

Trevor Bauer earns the most at the Los Angeles Dodgers, on a whopping £24.5million a year

4) BARCELONA - £195m

This is the Messi effect. Before this summer, Barcelona actually topped this list on £238m.

But as the Catalans failed to agree a new contract for their most prized asset, their total wage bill dropped dramatically as they look to rid themselves of the astonishing levels of debt they find themselves in.

Nevertheless, Antoine Griezmann is still on a yearly salary of £30.8m, with Philippe Coutinho now the third-highest earner on £21.2m. New signings Sergio Aguero and Memphis Depay are reportedly on £5m and £4.3m a year respectively.

Source: Salary Sport

3) MANCHESTER UNITED - £201m

The big-money signings this summer of Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane - whose move is not yet fully completed - sees the Red Devils third in the list of the highest wage bills of global sports teams.

Sancho - signed for £73m from Borussia Dortmund - is on £18.2m a year while the club's highest earner is still goalkeeper David de Gea, on £19.5m.

French defender Varane is reportedly set to earn £10.25m per season at Old Trafford, with Paul Pogba, Edinson Cavani, Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford also all earning £10m+ a year.

Source: spotrac

Jadon Sancho - signed this summer for £73m from Borussia Dortmund - is on £18.2m a year

2) REAL MADRID - £212m

The Spanish giants have seen their wage bill reduced somewhat by Sergio Ramos' departure this summer, given their former captain was on £17.5m-a-year according to Salary Sport.

Yet with David Alaba reportedly earning in the region of £10m-a-year, Madrid still retain second spot.

Their highest-earner is Eden Hazard, on an annual wage of £21m-a-year, while Toni Kroos, Karim Benzema and Luka Modric are all above £15m a year too.

Source: Salary Sport

Real Madrid's highest-earner is winger Eden Hazard, on an annual wage of £21m-a-year

1) PSG - £256m

It's been quite the summer for the Parisians.

As well as Messi's £25m-a-year after tax deal, the Ligue 1 club have splashed out on free agents Georginio Wijnaldum, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Ramos for a reported combined annual salary outlay of £29.2m.

It means the Ligue 1 club - backed by Qatari investment - now by some distance have the highest wage bill of any sports team on the planet, at around £256m. A huge renewal of Kylian Mbappe's contract will see that figure increase this summer too.

Source: Salary Sport

Sergio Ramos was among three former free agents who are earning big salaries at PSG

Neymar is the highest-earner at PSG on £44.6m a year while Kylian Mbappe is on £20.9m

Selected others: Tampa Bay Buccaneers - £147m, Man City - £146m, NY Giants - £143m, New England Patriots - £142m, Kansas City Chiefs - £140m, San Francisco 49ers - £140m, Liverpool - £139m, Tottenham - £137m, Arsenal - £136m, Golden State Warriors - £127m, Miami Heat - £95m
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid say they will take legal action against La Liga and the investment fund CVC to stop a proposed agreement between the two that would mean a 2.7 billion windfall for the Spanish League in exchange for ten per cent of television revenue over the next 50 years.

League president Javier Tebas immediately responded with a tweet accusing the club’s president Florentino Perez of employing threatening tactics.

Real Madrid issued a statement Tuesday saying they had decided to: 'carry out all legal action deemed appropriate to annul the possible agreement that La Liga adopts in its next assembly on August 12’.

Real Madrid are looking to oppose LaLiga's £2.3bn deal with American investment fund CVC

LaLiga president Javier Tebas has put together the deal, which Florentino Perez says is unfair

La Liga announced a deal with US investment fund CVC last week that would have seen the 2.7bn divided between the clubs of its top two divisions.

Barcelona were due around 280m euros although they were obliged to spend 42m of that on debt restructuring, 199m on the redevelopment of the Camp Nou, and 42m on players.

At first it seemed the money would enable them to sign Messi. Madrid were due a similar amount of money but like Barcelona and all clubs they had to spend 15 per cent on debt, 70 per cent on infrastructure and 15 per cent on players.

But Madrid rejected the deal and Barcelona eventually followed suit. Both clubs argue that it is unacceptable that the league signs away 10 per cent of TV revenue over such a long period of time when clubs only cede their tv rights for La Liga to sell at periods of three years at a time.

Barca and Real oppose the deal ahead of the Spanish championship kicking-off on Friday

La Liga dispute this and put forward their recent eight-year agreement with ESPN as evidence that no such limit exists.

Madrid threatened legal action at the time of La Liga's announcement of the deal and Tuesday’s statement confirmed they would be pursing that course of action.

La Liga president Javier Tebas tweeted: ‘The threatening method that FP (Florentino Perez) has been using in private for years is now being transferred to the public (sphere).

‘Clubs and institutions have had to put up with their threats for years. Since 2015 against the centralized sale (of TV rights), the constant challenges of agreements, the Superliga. Real Madrid deserves better.’

Tebas and Perez have a long-running feud with the Spanish league constantly at loggerheads

This follows a La Liga statement issued last week that said: ‘La Liga is not concerned about a possible legal action by Real Madrid, as it was a foreseeable reaction given the history of said club of opposing any strategic project that represents an advance and a boost for the competition and its clubs.’

The league says Madrid’s legal moves against their proposals now total over 50. They believe the agreement with CVC will pass with a simple majority at Thursday's La Liga assembly. Even if that means Madrid are not part of it.

The Spanish season begins on Friday but Barcelona's rejection of the new agreement and Real Madrid's statement suggest it does so with Spain’s top two clubs and the body that organises the competitions at loggerheads.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British runner Jessica Judd collapsed from exhaustion and was left begging for water after competing in the Olympic 10,000 metres in 90F heat and 80 per cent humidity.

Judd finished 17th in the gruelling long distance final at the Tokyo Stadium but was left sprawling on the floor afterwards following almost 32 minutes of running.

She spent several minutes asking for water before her team-mate Eilish McColgan - the daughter of former British world champion Liz - brought her a bottle.

Great Britain's Jessica Judd is helped from the track by medical officials after collapsing at the finish of the Olympic 10,000m in Tokyo. The race was ran in 90F heat and 80 per cent humidity

Judd, who finished 17th in the race, needed medical attention after lying on the track

She had to be helped into a wheelchair by medics before being aided off the track in Tokyo

Judd, 26, was then checked over by medics, sitting briefly in a wheelchair, before being helped from the track to recover and rehydrate.

Judd said on Eurosport: 'That is the closest I've come to not finished. When it gets to you, it gets to you. I was desperate for water, I've never been this sweaty in my life.'

McColgan said: 'It's definitely one of the hardest races I've ever run in my life. I couldn't have done much more.

'Those girls at the front, it's absolutely incredible they can run those times in this weather.'

Four athletes failed to finish the race, which was won by Sifan Hassan of Holland, in the stifling heat and humidity in the Japanese capital.

Hassan was unable to celebrate her victory as she crawled on her hands and knees pleading for water with officials too slow to get liquids to the finishers.

Despite the race starting at 7.45pm local time, temperatures were still well above 90F with the intense humidity another factor for the athletes to cope with.

After Judd spent several minutes asking for water, her British team-mate Eilish McColgan brought her a bottle rather than officials

Judd recovered after rehydrating after running for almost 32 minutes in taxing conditions

She briefly sat in a wheelchair while being checked over by medics before leaving the track

Four runners didn't complete the 10,000m race which was held in intense heat and humidity

McColgan finished the race in ninth position as Hassan completed an outstanding Olympics by adding 10,000m gold to 5,000m gold and 1,500 bronze last week.

Judd, from Essex, is far from the first athlete to suffer in the hot conditions at Tokyo during the Olympics.

On Friday, the Japan's Masatora Kawano vomited on himself and collapsed to the ground after suffering problems in the heat during the 50km race, even though the event began at 5.30am.

Somehow, Kawano managed to haul himself back to his feet and though the funny turn ruined his medal chances, he ultimately finished sixth.

Indeed, 20 per cent of the field in the 50km walk failed to finish in 31C heat.

Masatora Kawano appeared to vomit down himself during the 50km race walk in Tokyo

He collapsed to the floor in exhaustion and pounded it in frustration as his medal hopes faded

In the first week of the Olympics, changes were made to play tennis matches later in the day after Spain's Paula Badosa suffered heatstroke and left the court in a wheelchair.

Novak Djokovic and Daniil Medvedev were among the elite players who called for matches to be played in cooler conditions.

Medvedev was heard to say during his match with Fabio Fognini: 'If I die, who will take responsibility?'

Spanish tennis player Paula Badosa suffered heatstroke during a match and had to leave the court in a wheelchair

A shocking simulation showed how athletes competing in the Tokyo Olympics risk heatstroke, dehydration and exhaustion because of the extreme temperatures at what is set to be the hottest games on record.

Running in 90°F (32°C) heat and 90 per cent humidity can raise their core temperature over the 'tipping point' of 102°F (39°C) where it becomes dangerous, experts say.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kal Yafai has gifted his brother Galal a PlayStation 5 with the ex-world champion overwhelmed with pride following the Team GB star's Olympic gold triumph in Tokyo.

Galal outclassed Filipino opponent Carlo Paalam to win Great Britain's first boxing gold at the Tokyo Games in what has been a record breaking Olympics for the squad, who have won six medals in total.

The 28-year-old was inspired to take up the sport by older brothers Kal and Gamal, and he spoke with former world champion Kal after his gold medal victory on Saturday.

Kal Yafai (right) has surprised younger brother Galal (left) with a PS5 after winning gold

The Team GB star was taken by surprise after being put on a call with his older brother

A proud Kal revealed his gift to the Olympic champion in emotional scenes on Saturday

The BBC handed Galal a pair of headphones, with Kal on the other line of the Zoom call, taking the Birmingham fighter by surprise.

Kal, 32, said: 'Galal, last thing I've gotta tell ya, I've got your PS5 out there, waiting for ya.'

Galal responded: 'I can't wait to get home and play on it, can't wait.'

It has been a strong Games for Team GB's boxing squad, who watched on from the stands to support Yafai as he took on Paalam in the flyweight gold medal match.

The Birmingham fighter won Britain's first gold in boxing at the Tokyo Gamers this summer

Yafai knocked down Filipino rival Carlo Paalam to cruise to gold with a dominant victory

Yafai downed his opponent in the first round with a crisp shot through the guard, before putting in a classy performance to keep Paalam at bay for the remaining two rounds to clinch gold.

Britain have won one gold in boxing thanks to Yafai, while Ben Whittaker, 24, and Pat McCormack, 26, both won silver in the light-heavyweight and welterweight ranks respectively.

Super-heavyweight Frazer Clarke, 30, and featherweight Karriss Artingstall, 26, have taken the bronze medal home after losing their respective semi final match-ups.

Yafai has won Britain's fifth boxing medal, with GB guaranteed six medals in Tokyo this summer

Team GB could add another gold to their boxing tally tomorrow night when Welsh southpaw Lauren Price, 27, takes on China's Li Qian, 31, in the middleweight final.

Clarke, GB's team captain, could not contain his delight in seeing Yafai take gold.

'Other than my kids being born, this is the greatest day of my life,' he tweeted on Saturday.

'I didn't think it was possible to feel so much joy for another person Galal. Not just a great fighter but an amazing person and great friend.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jason Kenny missed the first of his three chances to move clear of Sir Chris Hoy's Olympic gold medal tally as Great Britain took silver in the men's team sprint in Izu.

Kenny, tied with Hoy on six, rode alongside Jack Carlin and Ryan Owens, but the trio were comfortably beaten by all-conquering Holland, who set a new Olympic record of 41.369 seconds.

With the British riders struggling to hold one another's wheels they finished three seconds down on the Dutch, who have not been beaten in a team sprint event since 2017.

Great Britain have won the silver medal in the men's team sprint at the Tokyo Olympics

World champions Holland were comfortable winners as they won by more than three seconds

Despite the final defeat, Kenny wins his eighth Olympic medal to go level at the top alongside Sir Bradley Wiggins in the most decorated British Olympians of all time.

But the trio will be disappointed with their performance in the final. In the first round they had set a time of 41.829 and though that would still have been beaten by the Dutch, it was proof the final was nowhere near Britain's best.

Kenny still has two more chances to add to his medal haul in these Games, due to compete in Friday's individual sprint before Sunday's keirin, but the challenge of beating the Dutch has clearly got no easier.

Kenny told the BBC: 'We poured our heart into the second ride to get to the final and then just rolled the dice in the final.

'We geared up and just went for it, and obviously we knew we had a bit of ground to make up. I had nothing in the final, I was rubbish.'

Jason Kenny's silver medal puts him level with Bradley Wiggins in the most decorated British Olympians of all time

Owens added: 'It's a dream come true. This team has got a pretty good track record and there's a lot to live up to.

'It's been a different few months but to come through it with these guys is amazing.

'We got our best out on the day, you have to show up in every race and there's no pacing it in the team sprint.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britain's Emma Raducanu failed to repeat her Wimbledon heroics as she returned to the court with a straight sets loss in the first round of the Mubadala Silicon Valley Classic.

Playing in her first match since her memorable SW19 run ended a month ago, the 18-year-old crashed out with a 6-3, 6-2 loss to China's 51st-ranked Zhang Shuai.

Raducanu dazzled on the grass at Wimbledon this year, becoming the youngest British woman to make the last 16 of the tournament in the Open Era.

Emma Raducanu suffered a straight-sets defeat to Zhang Shuai in San Jose on Tuesday

However, she retired in the second set against Ajla Tomljanovic due to breathing difficulty, later saying the 'whole experience caught up with me'.

Raducanu, whose ranking leapt from 338 to 175 due to her Wimbledon run, has since switched coaches, moving from the experienced Nigel Sears to the less well known Andrew Richardson, former head coach at the Bromley Tennis Centre in south-east London.

Her first assault on the US hardcourt season began disappointingly, however, with her 32-year-old opponent winning in an hour and 22 minutes.

Crucially, Raducanu won only five of 22 points on her second serve for the match, while Zhang won nine of 16.

It was the Brit sensation's first time back on the court since her Wimbledon heroics last month

The Briton made only 65 per cent of first serves in the opening set to Zhang's 89.7 per cent, and faced six break points against her serve.

She fought hard to save four of them, but was ultimately overpowered by Zhang, who saved one of two break points against her own serve.

Raducanu improved her first serve percentage slightly to 70 per cent in the second set while Zhang's dropped to just 52 per cent.

But the Chinese again set up up six break points and converted twice, while staving off the two chances Raducanu had to break her serve.

Zhang will now play third-seeded American Madison Keys in the round of 16.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tyson Fury has hit out at 'big sausage' and 's***house' Deontay Wilder as the Gypsy King returned to the gym for the first time since contracting Covid-19.

Fury and Wilder were set to meet for their trilogy fight last month but a coronavirus diagnosis for the British boxer following an outbreak in his camp forced a delay to the contest until October 9.

Wilder has since accused Fury of lying about having the virus in order to put off the idea of completing the fight, but the Morecambe-born boxer has revealed he is back in the gym and is 'coming for the big, useless dosser'.

Tyson Fury has returned to the gym for the first time since his coronavirus diagnosis

Fury (left) had to postponed the July 24 clash with Wilder (left) due to getting coronavirus

Speaking about Wilder in an Instagram story video, Fury said: 'Another morning in the gym. I'm coming for the big dosser, the big useless dosser, the excuse maker.

'The big man who is not of carat, you big sausage. You big s***house.'

Wilder did respond to Fury's claims by captioning the story 'you are a w*****' but the post has since been deleted.

The trilogy fight was postponed on July 8 when the outbreak in Fury's camp was revealed, but the Gypsy King sparked outrage after he was spotted in several public Las Vegas locations just days after the bout was postponed.

Fury angered fans by appearing in Las Vegas just days after his virus diagnosis was revealed

On July 14, Fury was seen at Royal Exotic Cars Shop in Las Vegas and then a casino, though it is not known when Fury first tested positive for the virus.

When the clash was first postponed, Wilder reacted with anger to Fury's Covid diagnosis, telling his manager Shelly Finkel: 'Again now, he did wrong and I'm the one being penalised.'

And when their fight should have taken place in late July, Wilder claimed Fury and his camp were pushing 'the COVID-19 lie' that forced the postponement.

'Yo bro, @malikkingscott (coach) say it ain't so... Not the COVID-19 lie... They're going to hell for that one!!! Oct 9th can not come any faster,' the Bronze Bomber wrote alongside a video of himself hitting pads with his trainer Malik Scott.

Wilder accused Fury of 'lying' about testing positive for coronavirus alongside a training video

Fury has since hit back at his rival on Twitter, labelling him a 'real piece of work' and a 'p****'

But Fury hit back at both Wilder and Scott on Twitter last week, posting: 'This man is a real piece of work. A real bully excuse maker.

'Not a warrior or a man at all. Beat the mug 2 times. I've battered him and his trainer. But still talking s***. Real p*****s.'

Fury and Wilder first faced off in December 2018 but the clash resulted in a controversial split decision draw that the Gypsy King is adamant that he won.

The Morecambe-born boxer then won a Las Vegas rematch in February of last year to win the WBC and vacant Ring Magazine heavyweight titles.

Fury (right) won the second fight between the pair in February 2020 after the first was a draw

Fury was due to take on Anthony Joshua in an all-British unification fight that would have brought all five heavyweight belts together - but a court ruled that the 32-year-old must face Wilder in a trilogy fight as a mandatory challenger.

Joshua has since found a new challenge in Ukrainian boxer Oleksandr Usyk, who the 31-year-old will face at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium on September 25.

However, Joshua may have to wait another round of boxing contests to take on Fury to determine the undisputed heavyweight champion of the world as Briton Joe Joyce was confirmed as the mandatory WBO challenger to face the winner of the Usyk clash.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liverpool's pre-season preparations have stepped up a gear with the return of several key players, as new signing Ibrahima Konate admits he's finding Jurgen Klopp's sessions gruelling.

Fabinho and Roberto Firmino have joined the camp in Austria, with Mo Salah also pictured getting stuck into training.

The Brazilian pair were late arrivals after their season was extended all the way until the Copa America final when Brazil's run was stopped by Argentina.

Fabinho and Roberto Firmino have joined up with the Liverpool squad for training in Austria

The Brazilians are back for Jurgen Klopp's fast-paced training camp to prepare for the season

Sadio Mane, Curtis Jones, Andy Robertson and Mohamed Salah are ramping up preparations

Fabinho suffered three stints on the sidelines with injury last season and will be looking to get fit and avoid more issues, while Roberto Firmino must find his shooting-boots after a modest season in front of goal.

Meanwhile, the new Anfield arrival Ibrahima Konate has been already been hard at work preparing for his debut Premier League season after a £35m move from RB Leipzig.

Konate has already pulled on a red shirt for friendlies against Mainz, Stuttgart and Wacker Innsbruck as he assimilates into the squad.

The centre-back has given an insight into the intensity of Klopp's sessions, as he gets up to speed with the Red's hard-running style of play.

Ibrahima Konate has already featured in pre-season games and is set to slot in at centre-back

The Frenchman has said he is enjoying getting to know his team-mates and finding it easy

'For sure [it's tough], but I don't care about this,' Konate told the club website.

'We are here, we are a good and big team and we have to run and we have to win the intensity in the games. For this, the training is hard but when the work is hard we will be better.

'I'm sleeping well because I have to sleep and don't have a choice! When I go to my bed I am tired and I have to sleep. I sleep immediately!'

Konate will need to be ready to be involved from the start when the Reds kick-off their season against Norwich on August 14, with the Anfield side still missing two key men.

Joe Gomez and Virgil van Dijk's injuries were at the heart of Liverpool's collapse out of the title race last season, and the pair are still building back towards match fitness after a long time out.

The Reds are aiming to bounce-back from a disappointing season, starting at Norwich

Diogo Jota was involved with Portugal at Euro 2020, and has been getting into target practice

Konate is feeling ready, revealing he is enjoying mixing with his new team-mates after his summer move.

'I am very happy to start my first minutes with the team,' the Frenchman added.

'I have a good relationship with all the players in the team and for this, I am very happy to be here.

'I can speak French with some players, but I can also speak English with other players – and German, too. It is easy to speak with the players and communicate, I don't have a problem with this.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Premier League referee Kevin Friend got the Aston Villa fans cheering after he jokingly gave them a yellow card in response to their request to give them a wave.

The incident happened towards the end of Aston Villa's pre-season friendly against Bristol City, which the Villains won 3-0.

At first the fans chanted 'you're just a sh*t Mike Dean' as Ashley Young prepared to take a free-kick in Bristol City's half, but that chanting became a bit friendlier, with the fans chanting 'Kevin, give us a wave'.

Premier League referee Kevin Friend saw the funny side of the Aston Villa chants

While they might've been expecting a wave, they got cautioned instead! Friend jokingly dished out a yellow card, to the delight of the fans.

And the fans can be thankful that he went to the book - of all the Premier League referees to have officiated last season, Friend handed out the least amount of yellow cards out of those to have featured in 25 or more games.

Ironically, Mike Dean handed out the most. They both officiated in 25 games, with Dean handing out 93 cautions as opposed to Friend's 59.

Aston Villa fan Sebastian Bacon shared the incident on Twitter, saying 'I got a yellow card from Kevin Friend today'. Watch the video below:

Aston Villa fans watch on at Ashton Gate Stadium on Saturday as Villa thrash Bristol City 3-0

WARNING - SWEARING IN VIDEO
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harvey Elliott is being considered for a first England Under 21 call as Liverpool prepare to give one of the Premier League’s future stars his big chance.

The 18-year-old already holds the distinction of being the youngest player to appear in the top flight – he was 16 and 30 days when coming on as substitute for Fulham against Wolves in May 2019 – and Liverpool are ready to reward his progress with a bigger role this season.

Elliott, who signed a new long-term deal at the beginning of July, sparkled last year on loan at Blackburn but Liverpool have no intentions of letting him leave this time and he is pushing to be included in the starting line-up for Saturday’s opening fixture at Norwich.

Liverpool youngster Harvey Elliott is under consideration for his first England Under 21 call-up

If he isn’t in the team at Carrow Road, it will only be a matter of time before the exciting forward starts in the Premier League as Liverpool are adamant he is ready. He is a major reason why Liverpool would not look to sign a replacement if they sell Xherdan Shaqiri, who is a target for Lyon.

Jurgen Klopp – and many of his squad – have been impressed by the strides Elliott made during their summer training camp and his development has been noted by the Football Association, who recently appointed Lee Carsley to the role of Under 21 Head Coach.

Carsley is well aware of Elliott’s potential – he watched him play for Liverpool in an FA Cup tie at Anfield in February 2020 – and he is looking to build an exciting new squad; his first games next month are a friendly in Romania and a European Championship qualifier against Kosovo.

Recently-appointed England Under 21 coach Lee Carsley is well aware of Elliott's potential

Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp is prepared to give the 18-year-old a bigger role this season

‘He made a big step this pre-season,’ said Klopp. ‘If Harvey stays fit then the football world can be really excited.

‘In pre-season we wanted to see him in a deeper role because as a young player you have to learn a lot of things.

‘When you are a bit more outside (on the pitch) you get the ball from time to time and we wanted him to be a bit more involved. I liked his performance during pre-season. Good for us and good for him.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's groundhog day for Arsenal supporters heading into the new Premier League season - which kicks off with a tricky task away to newly-promoted Brentford on Friday under the lights.

After that, it's Chelsea at home and Manchester City away - and the mood around the Emirates is a glum one following a rather fruitless summer in terms of pre-season results but more importantly after their lack of summer business.

After a turbulent 2020-21 campaign which saw them finish a lowly eighth and without European football altogether, there is a real fear that things could soon get worse with their rivals pulling clear. Put clearly, many fans are dreading the new season.

And after a poor pre-season which culminated in a drab 1-0 defeat by north London rivals Tottenham on Sunday, Sportsmail has decided to take a look at the five key issues that are still plaguing Mikel Arteta's side...

The pressure is well and truly on Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta heading into the new season

LACK OF CREATIVITY REMAINS

For many years at Arsenal, it has been the defence and a lack of backbone that has been the main cause for concern.

But those who watched the Gunners closely last season will have noticed that it's now in fact the attacking side of things that are letting them down with Arteta having improved the backline.

The Gunners only scored 55 times in the Premier League last campaign, with eight other teams scoring more than them - including Leeds in ninth. It's a far cry from the scintillating football played under Arsene Wenger.

Creativity has plagued Arsenal recently, and that hasn't been addressed in the transfer window

But while Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette failed to deliver the goods, they certainly weren't helped by a lack of creativity behind them.

Willian, who endured a horror debut campaign for Arsenal, produced the most assists with just five to his name in the Premier League with Emile Smith Rowe behind him on four, and Aubameyang, Dani Ceballos, Bukayo Saka and Kieran Tierney all one further back.

It's simply not good enough for a club that pride themselves on their free-flowing football. And their alarming attacking rhythm was evident during pre-season, struggling to create any clear cut chances in both the defeats against Chelsea and Tottenham in the Mind Series friendlies.

They have been heavily linked with a move for James Maddison while Martin Odegaard has been mooted with a return, but weeks have past, and they are no closer to signing either player. The time is ticking, or Arsenal will have the same problems in attack.

OVER-RELIANT ON YOUNGSTERS

The only positive, and it must be said it was a big one, that came out of last season was the emergence of their youth stars - specifically England international Saka and Emile Smith Rowe.

Without those two in the starting line-up, who knows where Arsenal would have finished under Arteta last campaign.

When the going got tough last term, and that was often, it was Saka or Smith Rowe that hauled Arsenal out of trouble - the same happened in the Europa League too.

The Gunners remain over-reliant on youngsters Emile Smith Rowe (left) and Bukayo Saka

That's a lot of pressure on the shoulders of a 19-year-old and 21-year-old still needing to gain vital experience playing week in week out in the Premier League. They need their senior stars to step up to the plate and be counted for.

Gabriel Martinelli will be hoping to follow in Saka and Smith Rowe's footsteps next season but still, Aubameyang needs to rediscover his form and quickly to get Arsenal out of this rut.

Arsenal's experienced stars, and the ones you'd expect to make the difference, have been far too inconsistent under Arteta.

SENIOR STARS NOT PULLING THEIR WEIGHT

This one carries on from above but there have been certain senior individuals who simply haven't been anywhere good enough in recent times, and aren't repaying the faith shown in them.

Specifically in attack, Arsenal have had real issues with Aubameyang suffering a massive dip in form while Lacazette continues to flatter to deceive.

Aubameyang failed to replicate his form from the 2019-20 campaign, scoring just 10 times in the Premier League last term and far too often being on the periphery of games. And Lacazette struggled to convince in front of goal, a problem he has had during his whole time at the club.

Arsenal need captain Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang to step up to the plate from the off

But all over the pitch, the Gunners have senior stars not pulling their weight under an inexperienced manager in Arteta.

The less said about Willian the better, while the likes of Mohamed Elneny just aren't good enough for where Arsenal want to be.

Thomas Partey struggled for consistency in his first season in north London, largely due to bad luck with injuries, and his issues certainly didn't help the Gunners in their quest for European football.

There are high hopes for him this season, but yet another injury (ankle) just weeks before the new season, has dampened the mood around the Emirates even further.

STILL CAN'T SHIFT DEADWOOD

Arsenal have been and still are plagued by years of neglect from the top, specifically when it comes to their transfer business.

It is already well-documented but the Gunners have paid premium money for stars past their peak, or players who simply aren't cut out to represent the club.

And that has come back to haunt them, with the club struggling to offload their well-paid players, who are too comfortable at the club - and that is subsequently making it harder for Arsenal to do business of their own.

Until Arsenal get rid of Willian and Co, they will continue to be hindered in the transfer market

The likes of Willian, Sead Kolasinac, Lucas Torreira and Hector Bellerin are just a few senior names that Arsenal are struggling to shift.

Furthermore, Matteo Guendouzi and William Saliba's loan deals have left many fans puzzled - especially the latter after having spent £27million in the summer of 2019 with high hopes on his shoulders, only to be left out in the dark by Arteta.

Arsenal also haven't been proactive in getting money for their young players, who aren't getting a sniff in the first team.

The likes of Reiss Nelson, Eddie Nketiah and Ainsley Maitland-Niles could all command a fairly decent fee considering their age and nationality but their futures are still unclear.

TOO MUCH DITHERING IN THE TRANSFER MARKET... AGAIN!

Until Arsenal raise vital funds and free up space on their wage bill, they simply won't be able to bring in their desired targets.

It is hurting Arsenal, and with their rivals going on the attack in the summer transfer window, Arteta's side are getting left even further behind.

Arsenal's priority remains an attacking midfielder - in the shape of Maddison or Odegaard - and they would have loved to have brought one in before the season started, but that's not going to happen anymore.

James Maddison remains the dream but Arsenal desperately need to raise funds first

The Gunners have been linked with the pair for months now, but the wheels are moving excruciatingly slowly.

Arsenal are also eyeing a back-up goalkeeper, with only Bernd Leno reliable in between the posts at present, while they also need a right back and arguably another striker - having been linked with Tammy Abraham and Lautaro Martinez.

But as already mentioned, Arsenal's transfer business hinges on departures. And until they get money through the door, the frustrations will continue to spoil over.

Arsenal are set to part ways with Newcastle-bound Joe Willock for £22million, but that's only a start. If the Gunners want to be competitive next season, then they must bring in a couple of fresh faces. Maddison definitely would excite fans...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Edin Dzeko is inching closer to officially sealing his move from Roma to Inter Milan, with the veteran striker reportedly set to undergo his medical imminently.

Dzeko, 35, was given the green light by his club to complete his switch to the San Siro, and was spotted at the airport before his flight to Milan.

Sky Sport Italia claimed that the frontman was poised to jet out for the final checks, and he is expected to put pen to paper on a two-year deal.

Roma striker Edin Dzeko will have his medical today ahead of joining Serie A rivals Inter Milan

Questioned by journalists on his way to wrap up the transfer, Dzeko, formerly of Manchester City, said: 'Greetings to the fans? Let's talk later.'

But with the final details believed to have been completed on Roma's part, Dzeko will join their Serie A rivals today and is said to be earning €5million (£4.2m) per season.

Dzeko enjoyed a fine spell at the club after joining from City in 2015, having scored 119 goals in 260 appearances in all competitions.

Dzeko (left) has been allowed to jet into Milan for his final checks and will sign a two-year deal

This formidable record quickly made him a favourite among supporters, who did their best to beg him not to leave for Milan recently.

A social media post from reporter Daniele Mari appears to show one person urging Dzeko to stay by shouting at him after he left his car at Roma's training ground.

The tweet, which was accompanied by the caption 'attempts at persuasion in Trigoria', captures the supporter yelling 'Edin!' to grab his attention.

They then added: 'Sign a new contract with Roma! Don't go to Inter! I'll come and get you at the airport and drag you back here!' Dzeko did not respond.

Roma supporters had begged Dzeko (pictured) to stay at the club but their efforts were in vain

He will replace Romelu Lukaku at his new club, with the Belgium ace set to seal his return to Chelsea this week for £98m.

And this in turn may spark a merry-go-round that sees Tammy Abraham leave Stamford Bridge - and he could be the man to fill the void Dzeko has left at Roma.

Sportsmail revealed that Roma have proposed a £34m deal to sign Abraham, with the offer entailing an initial loan with an option to make the deal permanent.

Dzeko leaving Roma could see the club swoop in for Chelsea ace Tammy Abraham this summer

Abraham, 23, is yet to agree to the move and is also courting interest from Arsenal. He scored 12 goals last season and looks set to be frozen out this time around.

Despite already rejecting a move to Italy with Atalanta, Abraham is open to joining Roma and working with their new manager Jose Mourinho.

It is understood that Arsenal are still in the frame, but their swoop will depend on Alexandre Lacazette's future being resolved first.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Professional Game Board of the Scottish FA are set to consider whether Gordon Strachan's return to Celtic in a consultancy role represents a breach of their dual interest rules.

Strachan, 64, has returned to the club he managed to three SPFL titles on a short-term basis to assess the workings of the youth academy, women's team and B team before reporting his findings to Chief Executive Dominic McKay.

In an unusual arrangement, however, the former Scotland manager plans to retain his role as Technical Director at Premiership rivals Dundee.

Gordon Strachan is Technical Director at Dundee but is also working with Celtic

Surprised by the development the SFA will now consider if that constitutes a breach of Article 13 of their regulations and whether one of the roles will have to be publicly relinquished.

Existing rules say that no person 'involved in any capacity whatsoever in the management or administration of a club' can simultaneously be involved in any capacity in the management of administration of another club unless they have obtained 'the prior written consent of the Board.'

Sportsmail understands that neither Celtic or Dundee sought the green light from the SFA before announcing the new arrangement publicly on Wednesday afternoon.

SFA sources say dual interest rules are principally designed to deal with shareholding issues.

Strachan will not be working with the Celtic first team but may still be prevented from holding both roles at rival clubs simultaneously depending on the verdict of the eight-man panel

While there is no suggestions of Strachan influencing first team matters at Celtic or working as a Director of Football, however, the unambiguous nature of the rules means an eight-man PGB headed up by vice-chairman Mike Mulraney will now be forced to discuss whether he can legitimately hold roles at the same time.

'I am really looking forward to returning,' Strachan told the Celtic website.

'The development of young players is a real passion for me and I will do anything I can to support the club in these areas.

'I also look forward to continuing my work at Dundee, where I have established a great working relationship and close bond with the manager, managing director, staff and coaches.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After the shock and exhilaration of silver comes the shock and shame of a doping investigation.

It is quite astonishing that precisely one week after CJ Ujah launched the British 4x100m quartet on their way to second place in Tokyo, the same man might have sent them skidding on their faces back at home.

It ought to be stressed that an investigation into the 27-year-old is ongoing and nothing has been concluded, with no guilt or wrongdoing proved.

Tokyo medalist CJ Ujah has provisionally been suspended for an alleged doping violation

Ujah, Zharnel Hughes, Richard Kilty and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake took silver in the men's 4x100m relay race

But, if the adverse analytical finding which was announced on Thursday escalates to a conviction, it will be one of the darkest moments in Britain’s recent Olympic history.

There has long been a sneering ignorance over here that doping is a temptation that exists only in other countries, but that has always been nonsense.

There could be an innocent explanation for the presence of Ostarine and S-23 in Ujah’s sample, and the investigation will determine if that is the case, but one can hope such an outcome is reached quickly and emphatically because that shiny silver medal is fading by the minute.

Team GB narrowly lost out to Italy and will now be hoping that Ujah is found innocent

It was won in the most dramatic circumstances, with a less-than-fancied team storming their way to the brink of gold.

It was only on the line that they were beaten by Italy, who won by 0.01sec, prompting Britain’s Richard Kilty to say: ‘Forget the Roman Empire, Nero, all that nonsense. This is as big as it gets for them. They’d better soak it in. We’re better than them and we’ll beat them next year.’

A penny for Kilty’s thoughts right now as he processes his team-mate’s situation. Likewise Zharnel Hughes and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake. They had all collected the prize of a lifetime and now a fight of law and science will commence to keep it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain pulled out all of the stops to secure the signing of Lionel Messi this summer and are propping up the lucrative salary package of football's biggest star with the inclusion of cryptocurrency assets, Sportsmail can reveal.

The sporting world is still reeling from Messi's switching of allegiance from Barcelona to the French capital, after it was confirmed that he could no longer be re-registered at the Nou Camp due to their financial mismanagement.

Eyebrows were raised when PSG immediately became frontrunners for the superstar, despite already boasting the likes of Neymar and Kylian Mbappe on their books, along with summer signings Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Georginio Wijnaldum and Achraf Hakimi.

Sportsmail can reveal PSG handed Lionel Messi (centre) 'a large number' of cryptocurrency tokens as part of his blockbuster summer move to join as a free agent from Barcelona

The 'fan tokens' are powered by cryptocurrency $Chiliz and are sold to supporters in order for them to have a controlling say on the club's affairs

And, despite Messi's eye-watering £1million-per-week, two-year deal which sees him remain as the world's highest paid footballer, PSG struck a deal with the player and his representatives to see a portion of his payment package made up of '$PSG fan tokens.'

Back in September 2018 PSG announced an innovative partnership with blockchain company socios.com, kick-starting a process whereby supporters of the club could begin to purchase $PSG fan tokens, powered by $Chiliz cryptocurrency.

The company became the 'official branded cryptocurrency partner' of PSG, and now a breakthrough moment has arrived with the virtual currency playing a defining role in what is arguably the football deal of the century.

Messi remains the world's highest paid footballer on a £1million-per-week deal in Paris

On Thursday morning the Parisian club confirmed that 'Leo Messi received a large number of '$PSG Fan Tokens' during the completion of his contract, providing vast value to his pay packet with the Ligue 1 giants.

The tokens function as a digital currency and hold value of their own, while enabling supporters to essentially cash these in with the club in order to have a say on how operations are run on an internal level.

Previously, PSG fan token holders have been able to determine end of season awards for the club, along with having the power to make physical changes in the players' dressing room.

Though the total value of the package remains unknown, PSG chief Nasser Al-Khelaifi this week insisted the club have not broken financial fair play guidelines and remain secure in the knowledge that they are operating within their means.

Speaking during Messi's unveiling press conference in the French capital on Wednesday, Al-Khelaifi said: 'Regarding the financial aspect, I will make it clear - we know the rules of FFP and we will always follow the regulations.

PSG's Qatari owners insist that UEFA's Financial Fair Play rules have not been breached by the signing of Messi and that his enormous commercial potential will offset his exorbitant salary

Messi took part in a press conference before being unveiled to the PSG fans and ultras

'Before we do anything, we check with commercial, financial and legal people. We have the capacity.

'If we sign Leo, it's because we can, otherwise we would not have done it.

'What Leo brings to the club is huge, which you can see just outside (the stadium, where thousands of fans had gathered). He is a big asset.'

He added: 'I hope Leo will not ask for a raise of salary, but what we have is fantastic.'

PSG are one of a host of European clubs to have signed up to the cryptocurrency movement, along with the likes of Juventus, Inter Milan, Atletico Madrid, Manchester City, Arsenal and Messi's former club Barcelona.

Marc Armstrong, chief partnerships officer of Paris Saint-Germain said of the deal: '[We are] fully embracing Socios.com and $PSG Fan Tokens has proved a massive success for the club.

In March, Messi's rival Cristiano Ronaldo joined the cryptocurrency movement and was handed 770 $JUV tokens after breaking the all-time club goal scoring record

'We have been able to engage with a new global audience, creating a significant digital revenue stream.'

The last 12 months has seen a huge growth in the presence of cryptocurrency within world football, with Italian giants Juve having previously rewarded their talisman Cristiano Ronaldo - Messi's renowned rival - with crypto tokens for breaking the goal scoring record.

In March Ronaldo was presented with 770 $JUV Fan Tokens after becoming the all time leading goalscorer in club football, and was handed a specially printed 'G.O.A.T' on the pitch at the Allianz Stadium.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A damning investigation by Al Jazeera has accused football middleman Christopher Samuelson of offering to use offshore bank accounts to help an investor with criminal convictions buy second-division Derby County.

Samuelson, who is nicknamed 'The Magician', is a trust fund manager that has played key roles in takeover deals at Aston Villa and Reading previously.

Undercover reporters met with Samuelson on behalf of an investor they referred to as 'Mr X' and they were walked through how he could help their 'boss' in getting around the English Football League's Fit and Proper Persons' test for takeover deals.

Christopher Samuelson has been accused of offering to use offshore bank accounts to help an investor with criminal convictions buy Championship outfit Derby County

Samuelson is a trust fund manager that has played key roles in takeover deals at Aston Villa and Reading previously

The EFL's owners and directors' test dictates that anyone with an unspent criminal conviction which holds a custodial sentence of more than 12 months is banned from purchasing a club.

Samuelson, who was covertly filmed by the broadcaster's two reporters, is seen on camera saying that he can help move assets to 'secure locations' and his close relationships with banks in Liechtenstein can help conceal both identity and assets.

Mr X, the fictitious investor from China who, it was said to Samuelson, has been convicted for bribery and money laundering, was looking into a deal to buy Derby County.

Samuelson, who gained prominence in the 1990s as he built one of the biggest offshore trust companies in the world in Valmet, valued the total takeover deal at £99million.

Derby owner Mel Morris was introduced to the two reporters working on behalf of the fictitious Mr X but there is no footage to show Morris or Derby being made aware of any criminal convictions held by the fake Chinese investor.

A proposed takeover of Derby County has been at the centre of a new Al Jazeera investigation

Concerned that Mr X would fall foul of the Fit and Proper Persons' Test, the undercover reporters sought clarity on just how Samuelson would be able to ensure a smooth takeover process.

'We create the bio,' he told them. 'We'll say his business was real estate investment, and other sectors… We'll just manufacture it.

'I'm an expert. When I did the Aston Villa application, I wrote the whole thing myself and I took the information I needed and left the rest out.'

He added: 'I'll hold a gun to their head. I can pressure the Football League… it will be approved. And if we have to threaten them with legal action – watch them fall over.'

Samuelson was born to a well-off family in 1946, and attended Sherborne, the private boarding school situated in Dorset.

His rise in the 90s saw him gain some of the richest people in the world as clients. Russian oligarchs and Middle Eastern sheiks are both reported to have had business dealings with him.

As part of the discussions Al Jazeera learned that Samuelson's fee for the entire process was three per cent of the sale price, plus a club director role for himself.

Derby were left disappointed back in May when the proposed takeover of the club by Spanish boxing promoter Erik Alonso failed.

Alonso agreed a deal to buy the Rams' with owner Morris in April, with the club insisting it had seen proof of funds.

However, as revealed by Sportsmail, Morris was forced to finally accept defeat in this latest attempt to sell the club to Alonso's No Limits Sports and an EFL source confirmed it was 'dead in the water'.

Two undercover reporters working for the broadcaster were looking to buy the club on behalf of Mr X, a fictitious Chinese businessman, and middleman Christopher Samuelson helped them secure a meeting with Derby County owner Mel Morris about a potential takeover

One of his most prominent roles as a middleman saw him help broker the deal for Tony Xia to purchase Aston Villa in 2016.

Samuelson is said to have arranged for the Chinese businessman to buy Villa for a reported $105m (£75m). As part of that deal he was to take on the role as deputy chairman.

But financial issues plagued Xia and by 2018 the Midlands club was mired in financial crisis. Now owned by the NSWE group, an Egyptian company owned by billionaires Nassef Sawiris and Wes Edens, Villa is thriving.

Xia was sued for allegedly defaulting on loans back in China which are believed to be worth tens of millions of dollars. The businessman is currently in jail in China pending a police investigation. He denies all charges.

The covert investigation into talks over the sale of Derby County also saw the emergence of a secret Dutch police report from 2005 which included allegations levelled against Samuelson.

In the report, Samuelson is described as the 'de facto leader of an international money laundering operation'.

Samuelson previously helped Tony Xia buy Aston Villa in 2016 before financial concerns saw him sell in 2018. Xia is currently in jail in China pending a police investigation. He denies all charges against him

The undercover reporters allege that they stressed to Samuelson the need to conceal the identity of Mr X from everyone, including the EFL.

Samuelson is said to have claimed he had used offshore trusts to deceive the Football League previously, citing the time he helped arrange the sale of a majority stake in Reading FC back in 2012.

In response to the investigation, Samuelson's lawyers told Al Jazeera that he had never been told that Mr X had a criminal conviction for money laundering and bribery.

They added that had Samuelson known of any criminality on the part of Mr X, he would have ended discussions over the Derby sale immediately.

Derby, in their own statement to Al Jazeera, said the club would only be sold to 'appropriate custodians' and that they have not had any 'formal association' with Samuelson for some time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona are reportedly monitoring Arsenal strikers Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Alexandre Lacazette.

As reported by Sport, Barcelona manager Ronald Koeman has admitted that he would like to bring in a new striker.

However, the Catalan club would only be able to fulfil that objective if they are able to sell Martin Braithwaite for a significant fee.

Barcelona are interested in Arsenal's Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (L) and Alexandre Lacazette (R)

Barcelona would have to sell striker Martin Braithwaite to pursue a deal for either player

Due to their financial struggles Barcelona wouldn't be able to afford a fee for either Aubameyang or Lacazette so any deal would have to involve a player exchange.

Barcelona have previously expressed an interest in both players and according to the report they would both be open to the prospect of joining the club.

Following Lionel Messi's departure to Paris Saint-Germain, Barcelona are determined to bolster their attacking options. They can already call upon Antoine Griezmann, while wingers Memphis Depay, Ansu Fati and Ousmane Dembele are also capable of making a major impact.

Braithwaite, who has scored eight goals in 53 appearances for the club, will be allowed to leave if a suitable offer is made.

Barcelona boss Ronald Koeman has admitted that he is looking to bring in a new striker

However, Sergio Aguero, who joined the club this summer, is set be out for around ten weeks after injuring a tendon in his right calf.

Aubameyang and Lacazette were both missed Arsenal's defeat to Brentford on Friday with illness cited as the reason for their absence.

Last season was a challenging one for Aubameyang, whose performances were often well below his usual standards.

The Gabon international signed a new contract with Arsenal last year that runs until the summer of 2023.

Lacazette, meanwhile, has just one year remaining on his current deal.

Barcelona's financial problems have been well documented, with defender Gerard Pique having to take a pay cut so that Aguero and fellow new signing Eric Garcia could be registered to play in LaLiga.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lazio are interested in signing Barcelona midfielder Philippe Coutinho on loan with an option to buy him permanently thereafter for £25million.

Coutinho has been heavily linked with a departure from the Nou Camp this summer and there have been suggestions that the former Liverpool player has been offered to Premier League clubs on loan.

According to La Gazzetta dello Sport, Barcelona would be willing to pay half of Coutinho's £200,000 a week wages to allow him to join Lazio.

Lazio are interested in signing Barcelona's Philippe Coutinho on loan with an option to buy

If Lazio are able to sell Joaquin Correa, who is wanted by Inter Milan, it would provide them with funds to sign Coutinho.

Lazio are said to be demanding £34million for Correa, with Inter willing to offer £25.5 million.

It was previously reported that Coutinho is reluctant to join Lazio as Maurizio Sarri's side will be playing in the Europa League this season and he wants to feature in the Champions League.

Coutinho is reportedly reluctant to join Maurizio Sarri's side as they are in the Europa League

A deal for Coutinho is dependent on whether Lazio are able to sell Joaquin Correa

Barcelona are eager to get Coutinho off their books, with the Brazilian's No 14 shirt having been given to Rey Manaj, who has been promoted from the B team.

Having arrived at Barcelona for an initial fee of £105million in January 2018, Coutinho has struggled for consistency, while he missed the end of last season through injury.

Coutinho had a loan spell at Bayern Munich in the 2019-20 campaign during which he won the Champions League and he could now be set for another temporary switch.

There are two years remaining on Coutinho's Barcelona contract and Barcelona are looking to make savings by sending him on loan and only having to pay half of his wages.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea academy product Trevoh Chalobah admitted that his emotional first goal against Crystal Palace reduced him to tears.

The 22-year-old has been at the club since he was eight but only made his Premier League debut in the win over Palace following his first appearance for the club in the UEFA Super Cup win over Villarreal on Wednesday night.

Chalobah dropped to his knees after firing home a breathtaking third for the Blues as they got their season off to a winning start.

Debutant Trevoh Chalobah sent Stamford Bridge wild with a goal on his Premier League debut

The 22-year-old fell to his knees as the enormity of the goal sank in and his teammates joined in

And the Blues rookie admitted he could not contain his emotions, saying: ‘It’s been an amazing week for me. I’ve watched a lot of games at Stamford Bridge, been a ball boy, watched Champions League nights with family.

‘When I scored, I didn’t know what to do — I was crying, really. I’m happy for myself and for my family. I’ve had to work hard and stay patient. I need to keep doing that.’

His manager Thomas Tuchel added: ‘It was well-deserved, he’s been so solid in pre-season.

TEARS IN MY EYES 🥺 Trevoh Chalobah, Chelsea’s academy defender scores on his Premier League debut from OUTSIDE THE BOX ! pic.twitter.com/5RbqtnW67l — Cydon Bowen (@cydonbowen) August 14, 2021

My bro makes his first start in the prem for Chelsea, he then scores in that game, then my team wins first game of the season .. think it’s time to shake this sickness off!! #whataday — Nathaniel Chalobah (@chalobah) August 14, 2021

‘He is a humble and calm guy. He took his chance. It’s not a gift that he plays, it is deserved.

‘He gave a really big performance against Villarreal on Wednesday and he was robust enough to then play another game in the Premier League.

‘It is super nice and I truly believe that you can have the best and most famous players from abroad, but it’s also about young guys from the academy and to show them the way to make it in the Premier League — that is very important for us.’

Chalobah was mobbed and was clearly still taking in his goal several minutes after it registered
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has been impressed by teenager Mason Greenwood's accelerated progress having 'turned into a man' over the summer.

The 19-year-old academy graduate has scored 30 goals in 106 first-team appearances, having made his debut in the remarkable Champions League triumph at Paris St Germain in March 2019.

Greenwood's latest strike came in Saturday's 5-1 season-opening defeat of Leeds, when the United forward raced onto a fine Paul Pogba pass before firing home a low strike.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer (left) says Mason Greenwood (right) turned into a man over the summer

It is the kind of ability that saw Gareth Southgate name the teenager in his provisional Euro 2020 squad, only for injury to see him withdraw from contention.

The England boss was in the stands at the weekend to see the way Greenwood benefitted from a summer off, with Solskjaer excited by the strides he is making.

'I think you can see the benefit in his... I think you can see how much work he has put down this pre-season in his summer,' Solskjaer said. 'He's turned into a man.

The United boss said the 19-year-old has 'filled out' and benefitted from a summer break

'He's filling out, he's stronger. His stride is stronger - you know, when he ran away from the defender and scored his goal, it was a joy to see.

'His approach, attitude, application, everything he has done every day has been just better and better and I think that's maturity as well in the kid.'

Asked if versatile attacker Greenwood thrives on responsibility as the focal point, Solskjaer said: 'I don't know. He just loves playing football wherever he is on the pitch.

'He's so clean on the ball, strong. I think he enjoyed taking corners.

'When you've got kids who just play with courage, no fear whatsoever. It doesn't really matter where he's at.

'But he's more than capable now of using his body, as I said. He's filled out so much more. He could play through the middle dealing with bigger centre-backs.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sir Andrew Strauss is reflecting on the huge changes in his life since the death of his wife Ruth in 2018 to a rare form of lung cancer aged just 46.

'One of the big things I've learnt, without getting too deep, is how important purpose is in life,' said the man who led England to their last away Ashes success, 10 years ago.

'When you're playing cricket your purpose is very clear but it's not quite so apparent when you finish. The foundation has given me a real motivation, desire and drive to make it a success and that helps me every single day.'

Former England captain Sir Andrew Strauss hopes to raise £1m for the Ruth Strauss Foundation

Strauss will be at Lord's on Friday — dressed in the red suit he hopes will still fit — along with his sons Sam, 15, and Luca, 13, for the third 'Red for Ruth' day that will raise funds for the foundation set up in his wife's name.

The first such day, during a rain-affected Ashes Test in 2019, saw £500,000 raised for the Ruth Strauss Foundation's twin objectives of providing support for families to prepare for the death of a parent, and raise awareness of the need for more research into non-smoking lung cancers.

Last year, when fund-raising continued during England's Test against West Indies at Old Trafford even though it was staged behind closed doors, the figure went up to £850,000. This time, with the weather set to be fine, it is hoped to top £1million.

At the centre of it is the impressive Strauss, one of England's most successful captains and a brilliant team director until his life took a tragic turn.

Sir Andrew lost his wife Ruth (left) in 2018 to a rare form of lung cancer at the age of just 46

'The truth is, you start building a new life, a new normal,' said Strauss on Tuesday as he talked about the two and a half years since the loss of Ruth.

'At the start it's very confusing and disorientating but over time you get a little more comfortable with it. So I've come to terms with what being a single parent is like and the boys are doing fantastically well.

'We all miss Ruth unbelievably, all the time, but we have to keep looking forward. The boys are getting to senior school and learning loads of things and I'm just incredibly proud of how they reacted.

'Never underestimate the resilience that kids can show, the courage they can show and the ambition to grab life with both hands.'

Friday will be the third 'Red for Ruth' day at Lord's, where people wear red to support the cause

This year's campaign will raise awareness of the charity's new family support service which will help families prepare for grief, death and dying.

'We were blown away last year by how engaged everyone got with the day virtually but it's not quite the same when you're in an empty stadium,' said Strauss.

'It's going to be an incredible spectacle this year and I just hope people will remain engaged with the day itself, wearing red and showing support for what we're doing. We know this is relevant to so many people's lives and I think Friday will be a phenomenal experience.'

Then, after a run near his Berkshire home, Strauss was off to try on that suit. 'I'm like a boxer trying to make the weight,' he said. 'Desperate measures, but I'm very excited about the day.'

To make a donation or find out more see: www.RuthStraussFoundation.com/donate.

Compromise will solve this Ashes family crisis

It is crunch time now in crisis talks between ECB and Cricket Australia over the potentially Ashes-derailing prospect — first highlighted by Sportsmail — of families being stopped from joining players in Australia this winter or being forced into a draconian period of quarantine.

It is becoming clear, with England seemingly adopting an 'all for one and one for all policy', that a postponement is a very real possibility.

Strauss is hoping for a compromise

But Sir Andrew Strauss is hopeful the greatest cricketing show on earth will still go on as scheduled this winter.

'The solution to all this is to find some sort of middle ground,' said Strauss on Tuesday, briefly returning to his former guise as an administrator while promoting the Ruth Strauss Foundation.

'The Australian government, Cricket Australia and the ECB have to make it as easy as possible for families to get out there and have as few restrictions as possible.

'The last thing anyone wants is for players to have to make the choice between 'my family can't come so I'm not going to go' or 'I'm going to go without them'. I think a compromise can be reached and that's what everyone should be working towards, rather than worrying about something that may or may not happen.'

Brydon Carse (second left) and Saqib Mahmood hope to make it into the Ashes squad

With Jofra Archer out England need to find other quicks

If England do get to Australia they will have to try to win the Ashes without at least two of the bowlers of real pace — the injured Jofra Archer and Olly Stones —identified as crucial to their hopes of emulating Strauss's England by coach Chris Silverwood.

So expect some new fast bowling candidates to emerge over the next four Tests against India and when the County Championship resumes with 'Super September'.

Here are two uncapped at Test level who World of Cricket expect to challenge for Australia — Durham's Brydon Carse has the pace that will be lacking in the absence of Archer while Lancashire's Saqib Mahmood has the skill to not only thrive in Australia but also become the long-term successor to Jimmy Anderson.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Everton are preparing to make a move for Antwerp defender Aurelio Buta, according to reports.

Buta was born in Angola and raised in Portugal - where he made his breakthrough with Benfica before moving to Antwerp in 2017.

However, it was the 24-year-old's performances last season that caught the attention of Rafa Benitez.

Everton are preparing to make a move for Antwerp defender Aurelio Buta, according to reports

According to The Sun, Buta - who has just one year remaining on his contract with the Belgian side - impressed several Everton scouts last term.

As a result, Benitez has made him one of Everton's primary transfer targets as he looks to sure-up their defence ahead of the 2021-2022 campaign.

Buta would provide additional support to Seamus Coleman and Jonjoe Kenny in Everton's backline.

Buta (above) made his breakthrough with Benfica before moving to Antwerp back in 2017

However, it was his performances last season that caught the attention of Rafa Benitez

However, Benitez will have to fend off interest from Celtic - who have also registered an interest in the 24-year-old.

The Scottish giants have already table an offer of £1million for the defender - but were rejected as the Belgian side value Buta at around £3m.

It is believed their asking price is set at such a price because they are still contracted to paying a 50 per cent back to Benfica.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's face was removed from outside Barcelona's Camp Nou stadium on Tuesday as the Argentine closes in on a free transfer to Paris Saint-Germain.

The 34-year-old's shock departure from the Spanish side was announced last week and Messi waved goodbye to the club he spent his entire career at in an emotional press conference on Sunday.

Sportsmail revealed on Tuesday that he is set to commit to French side PSG on a two-year contract worth £1m a week and Barcelona have started their new era by removing pictures of their former captain from the club's surroundings.

Lionel Messi's face was taken off the side of Barcelona's Camp Nou stadium on Tuesday

Messi had a large poster of him and other Barca stars on the side of the 99,000-strong stadium

Messi took centre stage in a large image of multiple Barcelona stars including goalkeeper Marc-Andre Ter-Stegen, Gerard Pique and Antoine Griezmann, but construction workers took down the strips showing Messi's face.

The entire poster on the side of Barcelona's 99,000-seater stadium has been removed following Messi's departure, while club officials were also seen taking down smaller, street-side posters with the Argentina's face on it.

The Argentine forward, who scored 672 goals in 778 matches for Barcelona and won 35 trophies in the process, is flying to France on Tuesday to complete his free transfer to PSG just over 48 hours after waving goodbye to the Catalan club.

An emotional Messi broke down in tears at a farewell press conference and called for 'humility and respect' from the club after he left.

The entire poster is being removed after the Argentine superstar left the Catalan club

Club officials were seen tearing down any poster with Messi's face on it on Tuesday

'I tried to behave with humility and respect and I hope that is what remains of me when I leave the club.'

Messi also revealed how much he was willing to sacrifice in order to stay at Barcelona. The Catalans agreed a new contract with the Argentine over the summer but the club were unable to get the deal approved by LaLiga due to Barcelona's financial problems.

He said: 'I took a 50 per cent wage cut and we had closed the deal. The club did not ask anything else from me. They did not ask me to take a further 30 per cent cut, that's a lie. We did everything possible.

Messi demanded humility and respect from the Barcelona community in his farewell speech

'Honestly, when the elections happened (in March), I spoke with (club president Joan) Laporta, we had dinner and after that I was convinced I would be staying,' he said.

'My contract was never the issue... What I know is that I did everything I could. The club say it could not happen because of LaLiga.

'I can guarantee you that I did everything I could to stay. Last year I didn't want to and I said that, but this year it was different.'

Barcelona fans were crushed by the news of Messi's departure on a free transfer last week

Messi was watched on at the press conference where several members of the Barcelona first-team, along with club legends from the past, attended to give one of the club's greatest ever players an appropriate send-off.

On the night Barcelona announced Messi would no longer be remaining at the club on Wednesday, several Catalans supporters took to the Camp Nou to express their sadness at the decision.

Barcelona were also told they are not allowed to retire Messi's No 10 shirt as it would cost them a place in their matchday squad for the forthcoming season. Spanish FA rules state LaLiga teams must assign their 25-man squads the numbers 1 to 25 for each league campaign.

PSG fans have been waiting at the Parc des Princes all week for Messi to arrive at the club

Meanwhile, Messi is set to be greeted by thousands of supporters in Paris waiting by PSG's Parc des Princes stadium and Le Bourget airport looking to catch a glimpse of French football's biggest new star.

Messi's lawyers had been pouring over the contract proposal put forward by PSG since Sunday but gave it their approval on Tuesday morning. The final points of negotiation are understood to have concerned the six-time Ballon d'Or winners image rights, as well as the breakdown of his wages and various bonuses.

A press conference to welcome Messi to the club is set to take place on Wednesday at the Parc des Princes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Great Britain's Olympic heroes have landed back in London following a sensational Tokyo Games in which 65 medals, including 22 golds, were won.

Golden couple Jason and Laura Kenny were among the first athletes pictured at the top of the steps of the British Airways plane just moments after they touched down at Heathrow. They were greeted by Union flag-waving staff as they passed through arrivals.

Earlier on Monday, British Airways released pictures of the Kennys showing off their medals en route back from Japan.

Katie Archibald, who won madison gold alongside Laura Kenny, was another of the returning stars as well as Jack Carlin, who took silver in the team sprint and bronze in the sprint race.

Joseph Choong, who won modern pentathlon gold on Saturday, and boxer Frazer Clarke, bronze medallist in the super heavyweight division, were also on the flight as they prepare to return home to a hero's reception.

Welsh boxer Lauren Price, the final Team GB medallist in the middleweight category on Sunday, was also among those touching down again in the UK.

Another boxing champion, Galal Yafai, who won gold in the flyweight division, was lifted triumphantly into the air as he emerged into arrivals. Among those greeting him was brother Kal, who has bought him a PlayStation 5 as a reward.

All competitors were required to vacate the Olympic village within 48 hours of their last event finishing because of Covid-19 protocols, meaning a staggered return to the UK and preventing the triumphant Team GB homecoming seen after other Olympics.

Team GB's Olympic stars touched down at Heathrow Airport on Monday afternoon after their glorious performances in Tokyo

Cyclists Jason Kenny (left), Jack Carlin, (second left) and Laura Kenny (third left) were among the first members of Team GB to emerge from their plane after landing at Heathrow on Monday afternoon

Cyclists (front row) Jason Kenny, Laura Kenny, Katie Archibald, (second row) Edward Clancy and Jack Carlin. (back group) Boxers Galal Yafai, Frazer Clarke and Lauren Price and fellow Great Britain team mates arrive back at Heathrow

Jason and Laura Kenny pass through arrivals at Heathrow Airport as they arrive back in the UK following the Olympics

Welsh boxer Lauren Price, who won Britain's final gold medal of the Tokyo Games on Sunday, poses for a picture at Heathrow

Olympic champion boxer Galal Yafai is lifted into the air as he arrives back at Heathrow Airport on Monday afternoon

There were brilliant scenes of excitement as Yafai, draped in the Union flag, was hoisted into the air at Heathrow

Boxer Frazer Clarke, who won bronze in the super heavyweight competition, gives the thumbs up as he touched down

Clarke touched the ground as he stepped off the plane carrying Great Britain's Olympic heroes back from Tokyo

Frazer Clarke was also mobbed by friends and family at Heathrow as Britain's Olympians received a hero's welcome home

Modern pentathlon gold medallist Joe Choong is greeted by family at Heathrow Airport upon his arrival back from Japan

But those medal winners during the final few days of the Tokyo Games still enjoyed a terrific reception after the 12-hour flight home.

Diver Tom Daley, who won two medals at the Olympics, returned to the UK on Sunday night. The 27-year-old smiled and posed for pictures with well-wishers after stepping off his flight from Tokyo.

The British team equalled their medal haul from the London Olympics in 2012, winning 22 golds, 21 silvers and 22 bronzes to finish fourth in the medal table behind the United States, China and Japan.

It was their joint-second best return in any post-war Olympics Games with only the 67 won at the 2016 Rio edition surpassing it.

However, there was more diverse success for Team GB with medals won in 25 different sports compared to 19 in Rio, with 15 athletes winning more than one.

As has become familiar, cycling was our most successful sport in Tokyo with 12 medals won when successes in BMX and mountain biking are included.

Earlier in the flight, British Airways posted pictures of Team GB's golden couple as they showed off their medals from Tokyo

A member of the British Airways cabin crew on the flight home takes a closer look at Laura Kenny's Olympic medals

Britain's modern pentathlon gold medallist Joseph Choong shows off his precious metal on his flight home from Japan

British Olympic star Tom Daley appeared in high spirits arrived back at Heathrow Airport from Tokyo on Sunday evening

Daley hugged fans and showed his gold and bronze medals following his success in the Olympic Games in Tokyo

TEAM GB STARS TO BE HONOURED AT BBC HOMECOMING CONCERT Team GB athletes will have a chance to celebrate their Tokyo 2020 glory in a homecoming concert broadcast on BBC One on Sunday night. BBC Radio 1 duo Greg James and Clara Amfo will host the event at Wembley Arena, which will be played out in front of an audience of 8,000 people. Key workers have been gifted tickets as a result of their efforts during the Covid-19 pandemic. Artists lined up to perform in the show included Rag 'n' Bone Man, Bastille, Anne-Marie, Yungblud, Nile Rodgers and Griff, among others. There will also be footage from the Games, including some of Team GB’s very best moments from Tokyo, as well as exclusive interviews with some of the athletes. Advertisement

Jason Kenny won the keirin in spectacular style on Sunday to win his seventh Olympic gold and ninth medal overall

Jason and wife Laura Kenny, who won the madison with Katie Archibald as well as silver in the team pursuit, pose with their medals on the final day of the Olympic Games

There was a glorious conclusion for Britain in the velodrome, with Jason Kenny, the country's most decorated Olympian, winning the seventh Olympic gold of his illustrious career and his ninth medal overall by dominating the final of the men's keirin on Sunday. Kenny had earlier taken silver in the team sprint.

His wife Laura Kenny became the most successful female cyclist in Olympic history by winning gold alongside Katie Archibald in the women's madison having earlier taken silver in the team pursuit. Kenny now has six Olympic medals across three Games, including five golds.

Britain won 11 medals in the Tokyo Aquatics Centre with Adam Peaty winning the 100 metre breaststroke before being part of the quartet that took gold in the 4x100m mixed medley relay.

Divers Daley and Matty Lee won gold in the 10m synchro platform diving before Daley claimed bronze in the 10m platform competition for his fourth Olympic medal overall.

The Olympics finished with a flourish for Team GB, with boxer Lauren Price winning boxing gold in one of the last finals to be held on Sunday.

Saturday had seen modern pentathlon gold for Joe Choong, just 24 hours after Kate French won the women's event, plus boxing success for Galal Yafai.

Britain's chef de mission Mark England hailed the team's achievement as the greatest in their Olympic history, saying: 'Following Beijing we had no idea that British athletes would deliver 65 medals in London.

'We knew we were in great shape for Rio but it had never been done before, matching and then surpassing London's number of medals.

'I just think that finishing this Games with two gold medals, and for this team to deliver 65 medals, is absolutely extraordinary.

'Not only has the team made history but it has probably made history on the back of the most complex and most challenging and difficult environment that we will face certainly in my lifetime.

'It has been against all the odds and I think it is the greatest achievement in British Olympic history. It has been the miracle of Tokyo and it has been wonderful to be here.'

Simon Gleave, head of sports analysis at Nielsen Gracenote, also shared his delighted at GB's achievement.

He said: 'At Rio 2016, Great Britain became the first country to improve on its medal tally in the Olympics after being the host - and Team GB have now become the first to equal or win more medals at each of the next two Games.'

Six-time Olympic cycling gold medallist Sir Chris Hoy told BBC Sport that the British team 'should be incredibly proud' of their achievements.

He said: 'Expectations were mixed going into it. Certain sports didn't perform as expected, others overachieved.

'You get payment in kind for a gold. We have a limited pot of money and you have to use that as best you can. It's about intelligent use of money, thinking outside the box and being inventive.

'They have done us all proud - a great performance.'

Duncan Scott was also among several British athletes that made history at the Games - winning a record number of medals for a Briton at a single Olympics, a gold and three silver.

However, it was the United States who led the medal table with 39 gold medals – one more than second-placed China. The USA also finished with the highest medal total (113).

Sprinter Allyson Felix also created history, becoming the most decorated woman and American in track and field with her 10th and 11th Olympic medals, bronze in the 400m and gold – her seventh – in the 4x400m relay.

While the host nation, Japan, secured 58 medals and finished third in the ranking for gold medals - claiming a total of 27.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Netherlands women's hockey team have slammed an 'arrogant' Team GB after their humiliating 5-1 semi-final win over the former Olympic champions at Tokyo 2020.

The Dutch side totally dominated Team GB, who had previously run them close after a 1-0 defeat in the group stages of the competition.

After the match, Netherlands captain Eva de Goede did not mince her words when talking about the huge motivation she and her side had to beat Team GB, and how much they are revelling in their victory.

The Netherlands women's hockey team have slammed their Team GB rivals as being 'arrogant'

Dutch captain Eva de Goede (left) said GB had 'bravado' and she's glad to 'knock them all out'

'I think everyone had their own personal reason why we wanted to beat them so badly,' she told Dutch Hockey's official website.

'We have the feeling that those girls always have a lot of bravado, almost arrogant.

'We really wanted to show today that they certainly don't come near us. I'm glad we were able to play our own game and knock them all out.'

The Dutch, widely regarded as the best national team in the world, took sweet revenge for their Olympic final defeat to Team GB at Rio 2016, in which goal-keeper Maddie Hinch saved four penalties in a shoot-out.

Holland wanted revenge for their defeat to Team GB in the final at the Rio 2016 Olympics

This time in Tokyo the Netherlands thrashed Team GB 5-1 in a totally dominant semi-final win

Hinch was quoted as part of the Dutch hockey association's article, in which she claimed the Netherlands may carry some scarring from the Rio final.

'2016 is still in the back of their (Netherlands') minds, Hinch said ahead of the Tokyo semi-final. 'I'm sure they'll say no, but that's about it.

'Moreover, it helps us that we scared them in the group stage. We have players in the team who have proven that you can win at the Olympic Games against the Netherlands.'

It would appear Hinch's words only fired up an already angry Netherlands team, who were ruthless in attack and had scored four before GB managed a consolation before conceding once more.

Holland will face the winner of the other semi between Argentina and India for the gold medal

Margot van Geffen, who played in the Rio 2016 final defeat, said Team GB's win was 'pure luck'

Dutch player Margot van Geffen – part of the team who lost in Rio – said in response to Hinch's comments: 'I can remember a lot of quarter-finals, semi-finals and other tournaments where we humiliated them.

'Take, for example, the European Championship in 2019, in which we won 8-0. That hurts, too, don't you think?

'You also see today: It was pure luck what they put down in Rio. It's great that we're sending them home like this.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After so much anticipation about Dina Asher-Smith’s bid to establish her name in sprinting history as the first British winner of the Olympic women’s 100m, after so much talk about how, for the first time in 21 years, the race was going to upstage the men’s 100m, the blue-riband event of the Tokyo Games burst into life last night. Unfortunately, Asher-Smith was not in it.

She was not there when the lights went down at the Olympic Stadium a few minutes before 10pm local time.

She was not there when the straight was lit up like a runway in the darkness.

A heartbroken Dina Asher-Smith recounted in detail how a torn hamstring had wrecked her dreams of Olympic gold after she failed to reach the final of the 100metres

Asher-Smith failed to make the 100m final and revealed she had a hamstring tear weeks ago as she also withdrew from the 200m later this week

Heart-breaking for Dina 😭



Following a hamstring injury leading into the Games, and narrowly missing out on the 100m final, Dina Asher-Smith is pulling out of the 200m



❤️ But, there's plenty more championships for her to come and kill ❤️#bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/OXTcYM2bHE — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) July 31, 2021

She was not there when her rivals Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce and Elaine Thompson-Herah were introduced to the empty arena. She was not there when Thompson-Herah hurtled across the line first in a new Olympic record time.

Instead, Asher-Smith was downstairs in an underground car park that has been converted into an area where athletes speak to the media, her emotions oscillating wildly between tears and laughter, her words pouring forth in an animated 20-minute stream of consciousness as she sought to explain where it went wrong.

This was the woman who was supposed to be the golden girl of these Olympics for Team GB, talking us through the agony of failing to qualify for the final after finishing third in her semi-final and missing out by five hundredths of a second on sneaking in to the event she had dreamed of competing in, as a fastest loser. She was out of the 200m, her favoured event, too, she said.

The words kept spilling out. Asher-Smith was Team GB’s best hope of gold on the track and now that hope was ruined.

It was as if, if she spoke quickly enough, her thoughts might outrun the pain of her broken dreams.

After leaving the arena, Asher-Smith outlined to journalists in great detail what went wrong

Asher-Smith (second left) is left trailing as she ends up third in her semi-final

She had won a silver in the event at the World Championships in Doha two years ago, she said, and she had believed she could go one better on the biggest stage of all.

All sorts of dread must have been coursing through her mind. She is 25 now and at her peak. Maybe by the time Paris comes around in 2024, her best may be behind her. But she kept speaking. She had not been able to do herself justice on the track but this was a brave performance in front of massed ranks of microphones gathered to record her heartbreak.

She had damaged her hamstring in the British Olympic trials in Manchester on June 26 when she appeared to win the 100m comfortably, she said. She had not told anyone but her closest friends. ‘Dina Asher-Smith breezes to win,’ the headlines had said later that evening but they did not tell the story. If only they had known the truth, Asher-Smith said.

Asher-Smith finished behind Elaine Thompson-Herah and Ajla del Ponte in her semi-final

She had been in the form of her life, she said, but now she had been told she had ruptured her hamstring. She would need an operation and it would be four months until she walked again and a year until she sprinted again. She was in floods of tears, she said.

But later she was told there might be hope, that she might not need surgery, that she might make it to the start here after all. At that point, she clasped her hands together, as if in prayer.

For a minute, she could not speak. Then she began to cry. She composed herself and began again. She talked about a chaotic scene at Heathrow, desperately trying to persuade British Airways to allow her to fly to Munich, to get treatment at the clinic of the renowned physician, Hans-Wilhelm Muller-Wohlfahrt, who had given her the revised diagnosis.

She talked about the negotiations and how, in the end, she was cleared to fly to Germany.

It was at the British Olympic trials in Manchester on June 26 that Asher-Smith did the damage

She clung to little pieces of hope. She was still intending to run in the 100m relay later this week, she said, and someone ventured that if she were able to win a medal in that, what a triumph it would be. ‘It would be great, it would be great, it would be great,’ she said, as if by repeating it, it might happen.

She broke down again before talking about the treatment she got in Germany. She talked about rest and recuperation. She went through the hopes she harboured she might recover in time, she went through the emotions that assailed her.

‘I was on crutches, off crutches, learning how to fully extend it again, walk, drills, jog, run,’ she said. ‘We’re counting down. They tried so, so hard with me every day. We came back to the UK, as it was time to fly to Tokyo.

'I came here on July 20 and put on spikes on the 21st. It’s been a crazy, intense and heart-breaking period. I was in the shape of my life. Without a doubt. I’m not trying to sound arrogant but that is where I was.’

As Asher-Smith gave emotional interviews in an underground car park at the Olympic Stadium, Jamaica claimed a 1-2-3 in the 100m final upstairs

She broke down again. But she still wanted to explain why she had tried so hard to make it to the final. ‘The easiest thing,’ she said, ‘would have been to turn around and say: “I’m not going to get on the plane.” That would have saved my pride.

‘But I’m an incredibly talented sprinter and I know what kind of calibre of athlete I am. I’ve been dreaming about this for so long. Unless I couldn’t stand or do anything on that leg, it wasn’t an option for me to give up because this is what… my life.’

This is her life and it was hard to see her talking about how the dream of gold in Tokyo had broken apart. She kept talking.

Asher-Smith glances anxiously at the big screen recording times and positions after crossing the line

Perhaps she knew that when she stopped, when she got back to a quiet place with no voices and no questions and only her thoughts.

She said one last thing when asked about a speech she had given, as captain of the Team GB athletics squad, to the other athletes in Tokyo. ‘I said that the future is completely unwritten,’ she said.

‘When you stand on the line it doesn’t matter what’s going on next to you, the reason why the lane or the runway in front of us is empty, or the throwing circle, is because it’s up to all of us to write what our story is.

'All those other people might have done amazing things in the past but the past does not dictate the future.’

Except this time, Asher-Smith’s past did dictate her future.

An injury, ‘a poorly-timed injury’, she called it, shattered her dreams and sunk our golden girl before her Games had even started, and left her in this underground car park while the queens of the track raced on without her to glory.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phil Foden believes Manchester City are again the favourites to win the Premier League ahead of the new season and is relishing the challenge of trying to win back-to-back titles.

City stormed to the title after a disastrous title defence from Liverpool and stop-start campaigns from Manchester United and Chelsea.

They are expected to be in the race to be crowned champions again this season and reinforced their status as title favourites after signing Jack Grealish for a Premier League and British record transfer fee of £100million.

Phil Foden was in confident mood and believes Man City are 'the team to beat' this season

Foden helped City win last season's Premier League title but knows it will be tough to retain

'I believe once you've won it it's really hard to retain it so going into the season we're going to be the team to beat,' the City midfielder told Sky Sports News.

'But we're gonna have to live up to that with the players we've got, I'm confident and just can't wait to go.'

City were beaten 1-0 by Leicester in the Community Shield last Saturday and begin their campaign with a testing trip to Tottenham on August 15.

They should also expect a tougher title race this season as Liverpool have recovered Virgil van Dijk and Joe Gomez after being ravaged by injuries last season while Manchester United have made two huge signings in Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane.

Foden celebrates a third title in four years with Kyle Walker, John Stones and Raheem Sterling

City made a statement this summer by signing Jack Grealish for a league record £100m fee

Chelsea, meanwhile, are sure to target a first league title since 2017 in their first full season under Thomas Tuchel after the German led them to last season's Champions League, beating City in the final.

Foden was reluctant to say which team will pose the biggest threat to City and is expecting strong competition from across the board.

'I dont really know there's so many great teams, that's the fun of the Premier League,' he added.

'Everyone's strengthened so it's going to be a really challenging season.'

But Man United have also made big moves such as buying England winger Jadon Sancho
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British sprinter CJ Ujah has been provisionally suspended for an alleged doping violation just one week after playing a role in Team GB’s 4x100m relay silver medal at the Tokyo Olympics.

In an astonishing development, the Athletics Integrity Unit revealed on Thursday evening that Ujah returned an adverse analytical finding from testing conducted during the Games.

The AIU said they were looking into the presence in the 27-year-old’s sample of the anabolic aid Ostarine and S-23, which aids muscle building.

If the findings lead to a conviction, the relay quartet and Team GB will be faced with the immensely embarrassing scenario of being stripped of the silver medal they won last Friday.

Ujah had led the quartet of himself, Zharnel Hughes, Richard Kilty and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake out of the blocks in one of the most exhilarating races of the Games.

The British team led until the final metres when Mitchell-Blake was passed by Italy’s the Filippo Tortu, costing them a gold medal by only 0.01sec. If they lose the medal, China would be upgraded to bronze.

Team GB 4x100m relay silver medallist CJ Ujah has been provisionally suspended for an alleged doping violation

Ujah, Zharnel Hughes, Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake and Richard Kilt won silver in Tokyo

Sportsmail understands that figures at UK Athletics were left stunned by the news, which they heard barely an hour prior to the official announcement.

They will not comment on an active investigation, while there has not yet been a response from Ujah’s representatives.

A British Olympic Association spokesperson said: ‘We are aware of the Athletics Integrity Unit statement, and the BOA will respect due process in this matter.’

The UK Anti-Doping Agency (Ukad) website describes Ostarine as having ‘a similar effect to testosterone’, adding: ‘Dietary supplements containing Ostarine typically claim to promote muscle building. Unscrupulous manufacturers may market such products as “legal steroids” or “steroid alternatives”.’

Ujah had been at risk of falling off the 100m map after some underwhelming seasons in the wake of a stunning 2017, in which he won both the Diamond League title and a 4x100m world championship gold medal.

Italy pipped Team GB to the men's 4x100m Olympic gold medal in a dramatic tight finish

Injuries cost him his place at the 2019 worlds, but ahead of the Olympics he had declared himself ‘the most confident I've ever felt in my track career’. Arriving in Japan on the back of a number of promising performances, he attributed his revival to adopting Zen Buddhism and morning meditation sessions.

However, after making it through his 100m heat in 10.08sec, he flopped in his semi-final, crashing out in fifth place in 10.11sec.

Speaking after the relay silver medal, Ujah said: ‘Every major championships since the last Olympic Games we have won a medal and we’re probably the most decorated team when it comes to 4x100m over the last cycle. Just watch out for us. It’s a growing team and a young squad and I am proud of these guys.’

Born in Enfield, north London, Ujah has been one of Team GB's top track athletes in recent years, with the 27-year-old winning the 4x100m world title in 2017 and then the European title in 2016 and 2018.

Ujah is one of Great Britain's best 100m runners and is a two-time European champion

He became the fifth and youngest Brit to break the 10-second barrier in the 100m race, with the best time of 9.96 (with a +1.4 tailwind) set in Hengelo, Netherlands in June 2014.

Having grown up in north London, Ujah went on to study mathematics and science at Walthamstow’s Sir George Monoux College before graduating to Middlesex University in the capital, where he is currently studying sports science.

In 2016, Olympic legend Usain Bolt appeared to give the Brit the cold shoulder before they competed in the the World Championships, which Ujah brushed off in an exclusive interview with Sportsmail.

'We didn't chat,' Ujah told Sportsmail in 2017. 'I don't know if it was because of headlines that he maybe saw before. Possibly. Some said something like, "CJ Ujah is going to overthrow Bolt", but I didn't say that.

The 27-year-old athlete currently has approximately 27,000 followers on Instagram

'I said he was not the same Bolt that he was years ago, and that the 100 metres was more open.

'But it got misconstrued and I don't know if he saw it and thought, "This little kid is arrogant". In previous years we were talking so I actually think he did see it.

'When I next see him I will talk to him about that, put it right.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona sensation Pedri has been back in the running at the club's training ground ahead of the new LaLiga campaign on Sunday – just five days after his punishing schedule last season came to a close at the Olympic Games.

The 18-year-old had to settle for a silver medal as Spain suffered an agonising 2-1 defeat to Brazil in the final in Tokyo, adding even more minutes to the youngster's count in an exhausting year after the showdown went to extra time.

Pedri played 4,996 minutes last season, turning out 73 times for club and country in his first term for Barca, and there was little time for the midfield maestro to reflect on his marathon of games in the aftermath of his nation's defeat.

Pedri's bosses will be keen to find the right balance after a gruelling debut season for the star

The 18-year-old sensation was a mainstay for Barcelona as part of a 73-appearance campaign

Just five days later, he has been pictured going through his paces with his club while the squad comes to terms with the seismic departure of its talisman, all-time Barca record scorer Lionel Messi.

The shock exit of Messi to Paris Saint-Germain will put more pressure to perform constantly on the likes of Pedri, whose future could be as bright as the striker he will no longer see ahead of him on the pitch.

Such is the maturity of Pedri's precocious talent that he was considered a mainstay by Blaugranes boss Ronald Koeman in his maiden season, as well as becoming a key figure in Spain manager Luis Enrique's starting lineup.

Since winning his first cap last August – almost exactly a year after his professional bow as a 16-year-old for Las Palmas – Pedri has played 10 times for La Roja.

The dependable dynamo figured in all but one minute of Spain's patchy Euro 2020 adventure, earning the consolation of being named the Young Player of the Tournament after their exit to winners Italy in the semi-finals.

Just five days after the Olympic men's football final, Pedri was back at Barcelona for training

Asked by Catalunya Radio recently whether he is worried about burnout, Pedri replied: 'I try to enjoy it.

'My legs are good enough. Holidays? I'll do what Barca tells me.'

Shorn of their superstar and buckling under widely-publicised financial problems, Barcelona will be relieved to hear Pedri articulate his willing attitude.

Koeman will be wary of the risk of injuries after losing record-breaker Ansu Fati for nine months just when the 18-year-old was beginning to look like one of the world's most formidable strikers.

Despite a heartbreaking end, Pedri emerged as an ever-present gem for Spain at Euro 2020

The youngest ever scorer in El Clasico had also been making his mark for Spain, but has only just returned to training alongside the likes of Pedri after knee surgery.

Barcelona are desperate not to lose any more of their leading lights to long lay-offs, although Koeman will be sorely tempted to use Pedri again on Sunday.

By his extraordinarily durable standards, Pedri will have had a relatively luxurious pause of eight days between games by the time Real Sociedad visit the Camp Nou.

That will be the first of three games in two weeks in LaLiga, followed by a potential run of three matches in seven days for Spain at the start of September.

The Euro 2020 Young Player of the Tournament has hailed his former teammate, Lionel Messi

Whatever he achieves this season, Pedri clearly feels he will owe some of it to one of the most influential presences in his senior career so far.

'Of all the experiences I have had in the last year, playing alongside him has been one of the most incredible,' he admitted after icon Messi's departure.

'I have had the opportunity and pride of learning every day from the best footballer and meeting a great person.

'Leo, I keep what we shared during this year together. Enjoy this new stage and thank you for everything.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jurgen Klopp has confirmed that Virgil van Dijk and Joe Gomez will be available to start Liverpool's opening game of the Premier League season at Norwich on Saturday.

The pair have been recovering from long-term knee injuries, with the Dutchman and his team-mate making their long-awaited returns against Hertha Berlin last month.

Despite the fact Van Dijk has only played 70 minutes against Athletic Club and Gomez has only managed an hour against CA Osasuna since, Klopp believes both players will be ready to start their league opener at Carrow Road if called upon.

Jurgen Klopp confirmed that Virgil van Dijk (above) will be available to start against Norwich

Klopp revealed that defender Joe Gomez is also ready to play Liverpool's season opener

The German manager is confident that both players will be available for the fixture this weekend, but did caveat that no final decisions over their involvement had been made.

'I think so, it looks like [they are available to start]. But how it is with these kind of things, we have nothing to rush in this department,' Klopp told Liverpool's official website.

'We just have to make then a decision on who will start, who will come on, things like this and if I think they are ready for 90 minutes then they are ready to start.

'If I think we have to take them off earlier then it makes no sense because centre half is not actually a position where you want to change during a game and so we will see.

However, he did caveat that no final decisions over their involvement had been made

'But both look really good. An intense season is coming up. We will see how we decide that.'

Despite playing the majority of the game in second gear, Van Dijk showed the Liverpool boss what he had been missing by playing a 60-yard ball straight to the feet of Mohamed Salah.

The wonder-pass provided Liverpool with the attacking threat that they lacked during their disappointing 2020-2021 season.

Nevertheless, Klopp will be unlikely to risk playing Van Dijk for the opening game of the season if he is not 100 per cent fit.

The German manager - who selected two different teams for Liverpool's friendlies against their Spanish opposition - has plenty of options to choose from for this weekend.

Klopp will be unlikely to risk Van Dijk for the opening game if he is not 100 per cent fit

Therefore, he could use Joel Matip in central defence - who has returned back to full fitness

Joel Matip has returned back to full fitness - having recovered from an ankle injury which saw him miss the end of last term - and is expected to feature alongside new boy Ibrahima Konate should Van Dijk and Co not be available.

Klopp referred to his selection issue as a 'welcome problem', saying: 'It sends a good message actually: that's the way we have to play, that's the way you have to perform.

'If you want to be in the team that's actually the lowest level allowed and so that's what we have to try now to figure out.

'Yesterday [Tuesday] was a day off, today [Wednesday] and tomorrow [Thursday] sessions, and then Friday the [matchday] -1, so there are some decisions to make but these decisions are for one game, not for the season. So it's not that much of a headache, to be honest.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jamie Carragher has said teams could look to take advantage of Ben White after Arsenal's opening day defeat to Brentford.

Goals from Sergi Canos and Christian Norgaard gave the Bees a stunning victory, in a disappointing Premier League debut at the Gunners for Arsenal's £50m signing.

Carragher who was on punditry for Sky Sports, said White might not get the chance to step in with the ball as much as he did while playing a back three at Brighton.

Ben White had a disappointing debut for Arsenal as they fell to a 2-0 defeat to Brentford

Jamie Carragher said that White needs to be 'stronger' and 'cleverer' in aerial duals

He also admitted he didn't want Liverpool to sign White because he's 'not tall enough' or 'good enough in the air'.

After the game he said: 'I spoke to Ben White in the interview before the game and I mentioned about how many opportunities he'll get to step in with the ball and I mentioned in commentary in the first-half because Callum Chambers wasn't going forward and at times he was in the right-sided centre-back position.

'So Ben White isn't going to get as many opportunities to step in with the ball to show his quality that we all associate with him.

Carragher added that White is not 'tall enough' or 'good enough' currently in the air

'Now, you want to see him do well, it's a big price tag but I must say as soon as Arsenal bought him and he was linked with Liverpool for the last 12-18 months and my fear was "I wouldn't want him to come to Liverpool," because he's not tall enough or not good enough in the air.

'When he played in at a back three at Brighton the two next to him were giants, Webster and Dunk. So you can step in with the ball, not so much of a problem with set-pieces or long throws.

'But your two centre-backs in a back four need to be good in the air. That's coming from me, I couldn't dominate anyone in the air. Sami Hyypia's job was to really dominate and I'd hopefully win 60-70% of my headers.

'But when I said in commentary about being clever, it's about using your body, being clever as the ball's coming, ease someone out but he is a young player.

The ex-Liverpool defender added that he did not want his former club to sign White

'He's not gonna get any taller so he's going to have this problem. People are gonna watch tonight and think 'just play long balls on Ben White's head' and you're going to get joy as proven tonight.

'So he either has to get somebody in front of him, or be a lot stronger and cleverer in his body movement.'

Carragher criticised Arsenal's defending during the game saying they were 'weak and bullied' by Brentford for their opponents' second goal of the game.

It was a disappointing defeat for Mikel Arteta's side who have tough games coming up against Chelsea and Manchester City.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mikel Arteta has admitted his Arsenal side were 'not good enough' after a 2-0 defeat against newly promoted Brentford on Friday.

The Gunners were beaten 2-0 at a raucous Brentford Community Stadium in the first match of the new Premier League season.

And Arteta told Sky Sports that the performance was lacking, before apologising to their fans following a limp performance.

Mikel Arteta has admitted his side (above) were second best versus newly promoted Brentford

The Arsenal manager (pictured) apologised to Gunners fans after a limp showing in a 2-0 loss

He said: 'I'm disappointed. It's not the way we wanted to start the season. We didn't start well, conceding a goal in an isolated incident. We didn't cope well with the second balls or long balls. And that's all they needed to create problems for us. Then we conceded from a long throw.

'The biggest worry was our threat in front of goal. The amount of times we got around the box and got in great situations but it wasn't enough threat or shots on target. If you don't do that in the Premier League then you won't win.'

Sergi Canos scored in the first half before Christian Norgaard headed home after the break, with Arsenal complaining that the ball had gone off the pitch before the opener and that Bernd Leno was fouled before the second goal.

Arsenal complained about both goals but that cannot disguise the fact they were second best

However, the north London side could not pretend they deserved anything out of the game, and despite having more possession created little in attack apart from chances created via the effervescent Emile Smith Rowe and left back Kieran Tierney.

Arteta added: 'I don't want excuses - we missed players but I don't like to hide. We were not good enough to beat them. We did not do the basics. We have started in a disappointing way but we will review and speak with cool heads and try to put it right as soon as possible.'

'First of all, thank you because of the support that they are giving to the team, the travelling fans that were here. And after that, I apologise for the result and we know that we have to improve. We have two big games coming up right now and we need a different performance to get a different result.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kostas Tsimikas was once again given the James Milner treatment as the veteran midfielder was caught slapping his Liverpool team-mate during a 3-0 win at Norwich.

Liverpool appeared back to their free-flowing best and put on a brilliant display to sweep Norwich aside at Carrow Road.

But when Premier League debutant Tsimikas, in for the injured Andy Robertson at left back, gave the ball away on the edge of his own area, Milner was furious.

James Milner (right) was seen raging at team-mate Kostas Tsimikas in the win at Norwich

Tsimikas gave the ball away on the edge of his own box and Milner gave him a quick slap

The veteran midfielder was keen to ensure the Reds' Premier League debutant knows the level

The chance eventually came to nothing, Norwich unable to capitalise, but Milner wanted to make sure the Greek defender knew exactly the kind of high standards expected at Liverpool.

Tsimikas is seen taking too long to pick out a pass and a high press sees him robbed of the ball before the eventual effort is sent high over Alisson's bar.

He appears disappointed with his lapse in concentration as he heads up the pitch but not before he has Milner ringing in his ears.

The 35-year-old races over, shouts at Tsimikas in a bid to liven him up before clipping him on the side of the head.

Tsimikas (centre) was thrust into the line-up with Andy Robertson ruled out through injury

It is not the first time Milner has taken aim at Tsimikas, acting like an older brother to the Greek defender.

Tsimikas put in a decent performance against Stuttgart last summer in pre-season as he made his debut for Liverpool.

But nonetheless he was still on the end of Milner's foul-mouthed outburst when he failed to return the ball to the Reds' skipper.

Having received the ball on the left from the veteran midfielder, Tsimikas opted not to play the one-two with Milner, who made a darting run down the wing.

As Tsimikas played the ball safe to Takumi Minamino instead, an irritated Milner can be heard saying: 'Ah Kostas! F***ing hell.'

The Greek full-back joined the club in a £11.75million deal in August 2020 to provide competition for Robertson at left back.

Jurgen Klopp was pleased with how the Greek defender got on in helping keep a clean sheet

Despite Milner's rather aggressive approach, Klopp was pleased with how Tsimikas fared on his Premier League debut.

'Very good, very good,' Klopp said of Tsimikas' display.

'I would say for at least 80 minutes very good, played good, was involved in all the offensive stuff, defended well. Then obviously someone pulled the plug a little bit!

'That's normal after that long period, so it was a really good debut.

'From the start in an away game, he played a really good game.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It does not get much worse than this. Not for an England side seemingly on course for an incredible win when they sent back Rishabh Pant on Monday morning. Instead it turned into Joe Root's worst nightmare and a famous triumph for Virat Kohli.

What a dramatic, highly charged second Test this was. What a victory for the animated, vocal and often snarling figure of Kohli and an India team very much in their captain's image.

And what a damaging defeat this is for an England side who had dragged themselves towards a winning position only to throw it all away with staggering ineptitude in the field and then another pitifully brittle display with the bat.

India have won the second Test against England at Lord's by 151 runs after a batting collapse

Mohammed Siraj (left) bowled England's last man James Anderson (third left) to seal the win

It was all over when Mohammed Siraj rifled a delivery through Jimmy Anderson —whose bowling had done so much to keep England in the game — to hit the top of off-stump with 49 more balls left to survive. Cue pandemonium for Siraj and India.

But the damage had been done long before Jos Buttler gave England a glimmer of hope of emerging from a second successive Test with unlikely parity by belying his white-ball instincts to hang on for dear life for 96 deliveries.

This was a truly miserable day for England. One when any pretensions they had of maintaining home Test superiority were ruthlessly exposed by an India side led by a captain pushing the boundaries of acceptable behaviour to the limit.

It will be a long way back for Root and England from here. They may only be one down with three Tests to play but the scars from this bad-tempered affair may take a long time to heal. They were battered, bruised and beaten by what is clearly a superior India team.

The facts tell you England were dismissed for 120 at 6.35pm on the final day in their nominal pursuit of 272 to win in 60 overs once Kohli had the luxury of declaring on 298 for eight. But there was so much more to what became a remarkable Test than that.

England lost openers Rory Burns and Dom Sibley (above) to ducks in the first ten balls faced

Joe Root kept England in it but Haseeb Hameed (right) was trapped by Ishant Sharma for lbw

It really should have belonged to England when Ollie Robinson dismissed both Pant and Ishant Sharma on the final morning to leave India 182 ahead with only two wickets left.

England's chase may have been a nervous one if they had quickly wrapped up the innings then, but they would have expected to achieve it.

Yet what followed was perhaps the worst hour of Root's captaincy, an extraordinarily clueless session in which two members of what is supposed to be the worst tail in world Test cricket ran them ragged and took the game way beyond England's reach.

So many of England's woes were self-inflicted. Root lost the plot because England tried to match Kohli's nastiness.

They picked a fight with Jasprit Bumrah, who had peppered Anderson with short-pitched bowling on Saturday.

Virat Kohli's lbw review saw Jonny Bairstow (left) fall to Sharma (right) in the last ball before tea

India, led by captain Kohli, celebrated wildly and raucously after dismissing the Yorkshireman

Bumrah was the target of a verbal lashing from Root and Buttler as soon as he came in and was then quickly struck a nasty blow on the helmet by Mark Wood. But far from unsettling him, it strengthened his resolve.

A 'rabbit' who had scored just 43 runs in 20 Tests before this series, soaked up everything England could throw at him in the company of fellow supposed walking wicket Mohammed Shami. Their unbroken stand of 89 transformed the last day and the Test.

All Root could do in response was spread the field and rely on short bowling rather than actually attacking the stumps. The captain, sublime with the bat, was tactically inept.

Root may have taken the blame afterwards because he is one of life's good guys but he did not appear to receive any help from his senior players. Nor the coaches, when he disappeared for brief respite and guidance to the dressing room.

By the time India's assault was over — Kohli surprisingly delaying his declaration until 10 minutes after lunch — England were on the canvas and now facing a battle for survival.

Mohammed Shami hit a surprise half-century as India's tailenders frustrated England's bowlers

Shami (middle) and Jasprit Bumrah (right) hit a 70-run stand to frustrate England at Lord's

They could not even achieve that on a Lord's pitch which barely deteriorated over the five days. All too predictably, their top order was yet again exposed.

Rory Burns was rapped on the gloves and surrounded by menacing Indian fielders off the first ball and then dismissed by the third legitimate delivery from Bumrah.

Then Dom Sibley edged Shami's fourth ball and walked off before awaiting Michael Gough's decision. Both England openers were dismissed for ducks in the same innings of a home Test for the first time ever and it will surely mark the end for Sibley.

Haseeb Hameed avoided a king pair but never looked comfortable before falling to Ishant, and Jonny Bairstow became the victim of the first wrong decision in the match by the peerless Gough. His not out call on another Ishant lbw shout was overturned on review.

It all came down yet again to Root but even a captain in the best form of his life could not save England this time.

Ollie Robinson removed Ishant Sharma and Rishabh Pant early on day five in an English boost

But Joe Root (left) dropped Bumrah (right) on 22 in a frustrating moment for the hosts at Lord's

He edged Bumrah's third delivery after tea to Kohli and departed, head down, with the Test all over bar the shouting of Kohli, his team and the large Indian contingent in the big last-day crowd.

The end may have been delayed when Kohli dropped Buttler on two but with Sam Curran becoming the first batsman dismissed for a king pair in a Lord's Test and surely another who will not survive the third Test cut, this was India's day.

England must now ponder yet more changes to a line-up that was supposed to be settled and ready for the Ashes by now.

Instead they are back to square one, Root having been let down by the ECB in the shameful lack of red-ball preparation ahead of this series.

Kohli in contrast is bristling his way towards a defining achievement. It will take an almighty turnaround to stop him now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alleged homophobic chanting by Liverpool supporters aimed at Norwich's on-loan midfielder Billy Gilmour has been condemned by Kick It Out.

The abuse is alleged to have taken place during Liverpool's 3-0 win at Carrow Road on Saturday.

A statement on Twitter from anti-discrimination organisation Kick It Out said: 'We are disappointed that only two weeks into the English football season, we have already seen numerous incidents of discrimination at stadiums up and down the country.

Kick It Out have condemned alleged homophobic chanting by Liverpool fans at Billy Gilmour

Scotland midfielder Gilmour is spending the season on loan at Norwich from Chelsea

'The use of the term 'rent boy' in chants by a portion of Liverpool fans at Carrow Road was unquestionably homophobic and has no place in our game.

'We have also had reports of incidents at other games and are awaiting further clarification.

'As always, we thank those who reported these incidents to us, and urge fans to do the same if they witness discrimination of any kind in football in the future.

Liverpool fans reacted after the match to a Tweet posted by fan group Kop Outs

Kop Outs referred to a 'rent boy' chant while claiming abuse was directed at Gilmour

'We will continue to liaise with all relevant clubs and the football authorities to identify and hold accountable those responsible.'

On Saturday, Liverpool LGBT+ fans group Kop Outs tweeted: 'Great result today marred by homophobic chanting by some of our fans targeting Chelsea loanee Billy Gilmour. If you can't support without resorting to bigoted nonsense, you don't understand.'

That was retweeted by the official account of Liverpool, who said: 'The chant is offensive and inappropriate - a message we have repeatedly communicated alongside Kop Outs.

The Kick It Out group noted how discrimination has already been seen in the opening weeks

'We urge supporters to remember the inclusive values of the club and to refrain from using it in the future.'

Scotland international Gilmour, 20, made his competitive debut for Norwich in Saturday's game after joining the club on a season-long loan from Chelsea in July.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bruno Fernandes benefitted from an eye-catching display from Paul Pogba during Manchester United's 5-1 mauling of Leeds, which saw the French star register four assists.

Pogba provided assists for his fellow midfielder to seal an opening day hat-trick as well as help Mason Greenwood and Fred find the net.

The outstanding performance saw the 28-year-old join the Premier League history books, equalling the record for the most assists in one game - a feat achieved by only seven other players.

Paul Pogba registered four assists to help Bruno Fernandes seal a hat-trick on the opening day

The Portuguese insisted Pogba could break records with 'five or six [assists] in one game'

But Fernandes insisted that Pogba is capable of breaking records, not just matching them as the Portuguese international claimed his team-mate 'could do five or six [assists] in one game'.

'Amazing,' said Fernandes on MUTV. 'He's doing really well and he's such a big player. Everybody knows that and I hope he can keep getting better and better, because I think he can still do so much more.

'I'm pretty sure Paul could do five or six [assists] in one game.

'Paul is a quality player; we all trust him, we all know his qualities. The point is making those performances and to help the team do better and I'm pretty sure Paul is here to do that.'

Pogba highest tally for assists in a Premier League season came in the 2017-18 with a total of 10

The Frenchman provided assists for Fernandes, Fred and Greenwood in the 5-1 win over Leeds

Pogba's impact against Leeds meant he has already bettered his tally of three assists for the entire 2020-21 campaign.

After one game Pogba could have the belief he can challenge for the record of most assists in a season.

Kevin De Bruyne and Thierry Henry currently hold the record with 20 assists each and while Pogba remains a long way off the record, the four he notched up at the weekend have set him on his way.

Pogba highest tally for assists in a Premier League season came in the 2017-18 campaign when he registered a total of 10 but made 11 for Juventus in 2015-16.

The midfielder has already bettered his tally of three assists for the entire 2020-21 campaign

The World Cup winner has entered the final 12 months of his contract at Old Trafford

Pogba's unplayable display comes amid intense speculation over his future with the Red Devils.

The World Cup winner has entered the final 12 months of his contract with United and an extension has yet to be agreed.

After a summer of free transfer arrivals at the Parc des Princes, Paris Saint-Germain are reportedly looking to capitalise on another free transfer opportunity for Pogba next season.

PSG are reportedly gearing up to make a mega-money offer of £510,000-a-week to Pogba if he joins them on a free next summer.

Mauricio Pochettino's side were said to be interested Pogba this summer but Messi's shock switch to PSG stopped any move from happening.

However, his opening-day performance sent a message to the Old Trafford faithful and the rest of the English top flight regarding his intentions for 2021-22.

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer will hope that the midfielder remains consistent throughout the campaign to play an important part in the Red Devils' quest to end their four-year silverware drought.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid face a crucial week in their bid to finally sign Kylian Mbappe, who was booed by fans in Paris Saint-Germain's first home game of the season on Saturday.

Spanish newspaper Marca said on their front cover on Monday that Real were entering the 'final stretch' of their long bid to sign the 22-year-old phenomenon in what would be their most stellar signing since Cristiano Ronaldo in 2009.

And television show El Chiringuito has said the forward has requested a meeting with PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, urging him to negotiate with Real over a move to the Santiago Bernabeu.

Kylian Mbappe is holding firm on his vow to not renew with PSG, according to reports in Spain

Spanish paper Marca said Real Madrid are entering the 'final stretch' of their bid to sign him

The Marca report says Mbappe has made it clear on repeated occasions that he will not renew his current deal with PSG, which expires next June.

But he is facing 'maximum pressure' from the club as well as team-mates to stay and form a world-beating front three with Lionel Messi and Neymar.

The fans are also putting on their own form of pressure after booing Mbappe before their 4-2 win over Strasbourg at the Parc des Princes, making it clear how they feel about him not wanting to renew.

The Marca report believes the boos, which subsided when Mbappe scored PSG's second goal, could help Real's pursuit as they give the forward 'a taste of things to come' for the rest of the season should he continue to resist a new contract in his bid to join the Spaniards for free next year.

And the report says Real have an oven-ready offer for Mbappe which they are going to present to PSG shortly before the transfer window closes to test the French club's resolve.

Mbappe was booed by fans before PSG's 4-2 win over Strasbourg at the Parc des Princes

But he got back on their side by scoring, celebrating his goal with Georginio Wijnaldum

PSG's players are reported to be applying pressure to Mbappe to get him to stay at the club

The offer is reported to be in the region of €120million (£100m) and would allow PSG to break even after a summer of outlandish spending on wages - they have signed Messi, Sergio Ramos, Georginio Wijnaldum and Gianluigi Donnarumma on free transfers and paid €60m (£50m) for Achraf Hakimi.

PSG are not under immediate pressure due to UEFA softening its financial fair play regulations as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and the French Football Federation postponing its requirement for club's wage bills to be a maximum of 70 per cent of annual revenue for another year.

But they cannot sustain their current level of spending forever and a sale of Mbappe would help them balance the books and be a far better outcome than him leaving for free next year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British Olympic sprinter CJ Ujah is expected to argue that a labelling error led to him unwittingly taking two banned substances before helping Team GB to a silver medal in the 4x100m relay.

Ujah, who insisted at the weekend that he was not a cheat, has been provisionally suspended after testing positive for muscle-building ostarine and S-23.

If a back-up sample confirms the drugs' presence, the 27-year-old's lawyers are likely to argue that the banned substances were not listed as components in a supplement he took ahead of the final.

CJ Ujah tested positive for two performance enhancing drugs after the 2020 Tokyo Olympics

The sprinter awaits a B-sample, after he helped GB to win silver in the 4x100m men's relay

But even if Ujah proves that he took the drug in error, the chances of him being entirely exonerated by the Court of Arbitration for Sport are slim.

Hopes of the British relay team holding on to their medal were looking increasingly bleak.

Though Ujah's relay team-mates have not commented on the development, the brother of Richard Kilty has said that the 31-year-old would be 'absolutely devastated' if he were to be stripped of his medal.

Kilty's brother Kevin said: 'He has done nothing wrong. He worked so hard for this, ever since he was a little lad.'

Ujah has maintained that he is a clean athlete but is unlikely to keep his silver medal now

Kilty, Zharnel Hughes and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake all face a nervous wait to see if their Olympic medals will be stripped from them. The process could take a month.

Ujah said in a statement: 'To be absolutely clear, I am not a cheat and I have never and would never knowingly take a banned substance. I love my sport and I know my responsibilities both as an athlete and as a team-mate.'

lseven-time Olympic gold medallist Jason Kenny has lauded the Government for providing £232million of funding for Paris 2024. 'I think it is a massively positive thing,' he said. 'It gives anyone with a bit of talent a chance to go and perform.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham are continuing their rebuild under Nuno Espirito Santo and are looking at Portugal international Joao Palhinha to bolster their midfield, according to reports in the Portuguese media.

Palhinha was a crucial part of Sporting Lisbon's run to the Portuguese title last season, their first in 19 years, and was named in Portugal's squad for Euro 2020, making two appearances including starting in their 1-0 defeat by Belgium in the last 16.

Nuno, who was Portuguese super agent Jorge Mendes' first ever client, was renowned for signing players from his home country for previous club Wolves and is now looking to the same market to improve Tottenham's squad for the new season.

Tottenham, managed by Nuno Espirito Santo (R), are keen to sign Portugal's Joao Palhinha (L)

A report from Portuguese newspaper A Bola said the coach is a long-time admirer of Palhinha, 26, and has given Spurs the green light to make an approach for him.

Palhinha is highly valued by Sporting after a long spell at the club which saw him rise through their youth ranks before being farmed out on various loan spells in the top flight.

He had his breakthrough season while on loan with Sporting Braga in the 2019-20 campaign and established himself as one of Sporting Lisbon's most influential players on his return to the capital.

After he helped the club make a storming start to the last campaign, Sporting signed him to a new contract last season containing a release clause of 60million euros (£50m).

But the huge gulf in wealth between the Premier League and the Portuguese championship means they would be likely to accept a lower offer for the player.

Palhinha had a stellar a season for Sporting last term after various loan spells in the top flight

He made 28 starts in the league and was crucial to Sporting winning a first title since 2002

Palhinha would certainly bring some extra power and strength to Spurs' midfield.

He is 6ft 3in and is a colossus in the air and adept at winning the ball back and recycling possession, skills which have also seen him picked at centre back.

The A Bola report added that Wolves, who still have strong ties with Mendes, are also looking at Palhinha.

But Spurs would be able to outbid them for the player, while European football would be an added attraction for the player should he have to make a choice between Molineux and the shiny new Tottenham Hotspur stadium.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Aston Martin are determined to have Sebastian Vettel's disqualification from the Hungarian Grand Prix overturned, despite seeing their attempt to have the decision reviewed dismissed by the FIA.

Vettel finished second in Budapest in a race of chaos, which also saw Alpine's Esteban Ocon reach the chequered flag as the shock winner, but his podium place was wiped out due to the team not being able to provide the required fuel sample.

And with Vettel disqualified, the invaluable 18 championship points he would have picked up by coming home as the runner-up were also taken away in the tightly-fought drivers' championship.

Aston Martin are set to continue to appeal against Sebastian Vettel's Hungary disqualification

Vettel's second-placed finish was ripped up due to his car not having enough fuel post-race

Aston Martin were adamant that there was enough fuel left in the car to take the one litre sample required in the regulations, but the governing body rejected their new evidence because it 'did not make a difference'.

Announcing its decision to wave away the first protest from the team, the FIA said: 'The stewards only assumed the fact that there was not enough fuel in the tank. The question of what caused that situation was left out of consideration.

'F1 Technical Regulations unequivocally call for a remaining amount of one litre and do not allow any exceptions under which circumstances or for what reasons it could be dispensed with.

Vettel (pictured with his second-placed trophy) also lost the 18 drivers' championship points

'Therefore, for the assessment of whether or not the one-litre requirement was broken, it does not make a difference why there was less than one litre. There may be a couple of explanations why at the end of a race the remaining amount is insufficient.

'In any case, it remains the sole responsibility of the competitor to ensure that the car is in conformity with the regulations all times and it shall be no defence to claim that no performance advantage was obtained.

'Aston Martin would have had to present facts that actually more than one litre of fuel was remaining. The explanation why this requirement could not be met is not relevant to the decision as to whether a breach of the regulations has occurred.'

This came despite Aston Martin's claim that there was 1.44litres of fuel left in Vettel's car, although the FIA technical delegate was only able to take 0.3litres in total.

Esteban Ocon (seen celebrating with Vettel) had come home as the shock winner in Budapest

On Monday, the stewards spoke with members of the Aston Martin team, including team principal Otmar Szafnauer, who claimed that a 'fuel system failure' was the reason behind them lacking the necessary amount of fuel.

The FIA waved this explanation away and, despite the setback, Szafnauer confirmed they are now likely to use the full force of the appeal procedure.

'Sebastian drove brilliantly in Hungary and we are pleased to have been given the opportunity to show significant new evidence we discovered since the race,' he said.

'We felt the evidence we presented was relevant and demonstrated to the FIA he should have been reinstated following his disqualification.

Aston Martin team principal Otmas Szafnauer said they will weigh up the 'full appeal process'

'Unfortunately, the FIA took a different view and, despite the fact that the accuracy of our new evidence was not contested, Sebastian's disqualification has been upheld on the basis that the new evidence was not deemed "relevant".

'That is disappointing, and we will now consider our position in respect of the full appeal process.'

Lewis Hamilton, who initially crossed the line in third place, was moved up to second spot, handing him a slender advantage in the thrilling title battle, and Ferrari's Carlos Sainz moved up to third place.

Hamilton now holds an eight-point lead over Red Bull hotshot Max Verstappen, with the sport currently on its summer break. The season will resume at the next round at Spa-Francorchamps in Belgium on August 29.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi was reportedly seriously considering a sensational reunion with best friend Luis Suarez at Atletico Madrid before agreeing to join PSG.

The Argentine star is currently in Paris with his wife and children where he is finalising a move to the Ligue 1 giants and is expected to put pen to paper on a £1million-per-week, two-year deal.

Messi is currently a free agent after failing to agree terms on a new deal with Barcelona, who could not afford to pay him due to their current financial woes. And now it appears that Atletico made a last-gasp bid to try and tempt him to the Wanda Metropolitano, according to Movistar.

Lionel Messi 'seriously considered' linking back up with Luis Suarez (right) at Atletico Madrid

The Argentine is on the cusp of completing his move to PSG after arriving in Paris on Tuesday

Movistar and TNT Sport journalist Ignacio Miguelez has claimed that Atletico boss Diego Simeone even contacted compatriot Messi directly in a bid to bring him to Madrid.

Miguelez goes on to claim that Messi and his family were 'tempted' by the offer of staying in Spain.

The allure of playing alongside Suarez once again – who he played with at Barcelona – would have been one of the main selling points for the 34-year-old, given the pair became best friends in the process after their time at the Nou Camp.

Suarez and Messi wreaked havoc together up top for Barcelona, which saw the two score a combined total of 478 goals together, lifting 13 trophies since Suarez joined the Catalan club in 2014 in a £75million deal.

Atletico boss Diego Simeone reportedly contacted Messi in a bid to bring him to Madrid

Messi and Suarez became best friends after their six-year stint together at the Nou Camp

Suarez set up Messi to score 47 times while the Argentine repaid the favour by assisting the Uruguayan 37 times in their six-year stint together at the Nou Camp.

Neymar appeared to confirm Lionel Messi will complete a transfer to PSG on Instagram

However, their relationship on the pitch came to an end when Barcelona boss Ronald Koeman decides Suarez was surplus to requirements last summer and sold him to Atletico.

Suarez would have the last laugh with Atletico after they went on to win LaLiga while Messi was left with the choatic surroundings at Barca.

And with Messi unable to sign a new deal with Barcelona, he was reportedly tempted by a reunion with old pal Suarez.

However, while Atletico were reportedly unsuccessful in their attempts to reunite two old friends, it seems PSG have had no such trouble.

Alongside Messi and Suarez, PSG star Neymar completed one of the most deadly front-threes in all of football, with the trio branded as MSN before Neymar was sold to the Parisian giants for £198m in 2017.

Neymar has long wanted Messi to join him at PSG and it appears the Brazilian has got his wish.

Alongside Messi and Suarez, Neymar completed one of the most deadly trios in all of football

The former Barcelona team-mates have remained close friends ever since Neymar left for PSG

Messi got the better of Neymar and Brazil to win the Copa America in Rio de Janeiro last month

As Messi's camp prepares to put the finishing touches to his move on Tuesday, Neymar could not hide his excitement and seemingly confirmed the switch on Instagram.

He posted a picture of them together, saying 'back together' with a red and blue heart.

Neymar and Messi spent four years together at the Nou Camp. They won two LaLiga titles, three Copa del Reys and a Champions League.

Messi was pictured at Barcelona airport alongside his wife Antonella and their three children, Thiago, eight, Mateo, five, and Ciro, three, on Tuesday.

Antonella later posted a selfie alongside her husband as they sat on their private jet waiting to fly to France.

Sources at the French club confirmed Messi's lawyers had been poring over the contract proposal since Sunday but gave it their approval on Tuesday morning.

Messi was all smiles on a private jet alongside wife Antonella as they boarded a flight to Paris

PSG's passionate fans gathered in large numbers on Tuesday in the hope of seeing Messi arrive

The final points of negotiation were understood to have concerned the six-time Ballon d'Or winners image rights, as well as the breakdown of his wages and various bonuses.

Italian journalist Fabrizio Romano confirmed in the hours following Messi's arrival in Paris that he had completed his medical and would move to his hotel to complete formalities over his big-money move, with the player expected to be unveiled as a new PSG player Wednesday morning at 11am, local time.

Messi's annual salary will be in the region of €63m (£53m), putting his earnings at just over £1m a week. He will sit in France's highest tax bracket of 45 per cent, leaving his take-home pay at around £550,000 per week.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Middlesbrough have revealed defender Sol Bamba has officially joined the club in a player-coach capacity after his recovery from cancer in May.

Bamba, 36, underwent treatment for Non-Hodgkin lymphoma earlier this year, having been diagnosed just before last Christmas.

The news became public in January, and Bamba received several rounds of chemotherapy before briefly returning for Cardiff on the final day of last season.

Middlesbrough have officially signed Sol Bamba as a player-coach after his cancer recovery

Absolutely delighted to join @Boro, thankful to have the opportunity to keep playing but also start my journey as a coach 🙏🏿 A new challenge where I will be happy to bring all the energy and the experience our season will require. Blessed to be back after all. See you guys soon❤️ pic.twitter.com/xFj9nNclhS — Sol Bamba (@Sol14Bamba) August 10, 2021

Now recovered, Bamba began to train with Middlesbrough this summer, and has signed a one-year deal that will see him work alongside Neil Warnock once again.

It has also been revealed that the centre back will take up a coaching role with the club's academy, having helped them out in pre-season.

'Initially Sol had asked if he could come and train with us, and I was more than happy. He's a great lad to have around,' Warnock said.

Bamba reunites with Neil Warnock at the club and will help coach their academy this season

'When we were away in Cornwall he was at Rockliffe and helped with the under-23s and under-18s, and everyone was really impressed with him.

'I have to be honest, I didn't expect him to look as sharp as he has done after everything he's been through, but he's done remarkably well.

'At the moment the priority for him is to concentrate on his fitness and being in the squad, but we want him to be involved with the under-23s as well.

'I feel he's just the type of person we need to be involved with that age group.

Defender Bamba (left) has featured during pre-season and Warnock insists he is a 'real asset'

'He has bags of experience and he will be a real asset for us both on and off the pitch. I'm delighted to have him on board.'

Revealing he received the all-clear from cancer earlier this year, Bamba shared a heartfelt message with his social media followers.

'Hey everyone, just a quick message to inform you that I'm now cancer free!' he said.

'It is of course incredibly heart-warming news for my family and I, we are over the moon right now.

Bamba had taken to Twitter to reveal he was cancer free alongside a picture of himself smiling

'I really want to thank each and everyone that has been supporting me, whether it's been with a comment, a message, a like or whatever, that definitely gave me extra strength to go through this.

'Above all, I want to thank the family at the NHS who took such good care of me, I will always be grateful for your job.

'Thank you to all my family, my friends and of course the club and everyone in the football industry that has helped me facing this challenge.

Bamba spent five seasons with Cardiff and will continue his career at Middlesbrough this year

'I wish you all a blessed day and hopefully will see you soon again on the pitch. Sol.'

Bamba joins Middlesbrough after spending the last five seasons at Cardiff, where he helped the club win promotion to the Premier League in 2018.

He ruptured his cruciate ligament during their sole campaign in the top-flight, but has now battled back to return to fitness and win his battle with cancer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sergio Aguero has allayed any fears among Barcelona fans that he will be leaving the club just over two months after joining following the bombshell news of Lionel Messi's exit.

Messi's departure has rocked Barcelona - who are in the midst of a financial mess - even further with the club failing to extend his illustrious stay after his contract expired at the start of last month.

And recent reports from Beteve's 'La Porteria' programme claimed that Aguero had told his lawyers to find a way out of his Barcelona contract, following the departure of his close friend and compatriot Messi.

Sergio Aguero joined Barcelona on a free transfer at the end of May from Manchester City

❗️Amid rumors of a departure, Sergio Aguero confirms he is staying: “You’ll have me all year long, don’t worry” #Transfers 🇦🇷🔵🔴pic.twitter.com/H6jpfHNzPj — Reshad Rahman (@ReshadRahman_) August 7, 2021

Aguero has allayed fears he will be leaving straight away, confirming to fans 'you'll have me all year long'

Aguero moved to Barcelona on a free transfer from Manchester City at the end of May on a two-year deal, and made no secret that he joined the club ahead of several other European giants because he wanted to play alongside Messi.

But the Argentine striker - who was said to be incensed that Messi has left after he was promised that they would play together - has quickly put to rest any concerns Barcelona supporters may have.

When asked by worried fans - who stopped him while he was driving in a video published on social media by a reporter who covers Barcelona - about his future, Aguero replied: 'You'll have me all year long, don't worry.'

After moving to the Nou Camp earlier this summer, Aguero spoke of his great desire to play alongside the six-time Ballon d'Or winner.

'Of course I hope to play with Lionel. I know him so well, we’re good friends,' he said.

'What happens with Leo is a decision that he and the club will make. It is a pride to play with him. I’ve played with him in the national team.'

There were reports that Lionel Messi's bombshell exit had made Aguero reconsider his future

Messi's departure has spun the summer transfer window into chaos, and PSG are said to have quickly made their move - with the Argentine reportedly on the brink of moving to the French capital, where he will be reunited with former Barcelona team-mate Neymar.

French giants PSG have reportedly offered Messi a two-year deal worth around £70million.

Khalifah Bin Hamad Al-Thani, a relative of PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, appeared to confirm on Twitter on Friday evening that negotiations were 'officially concluded' and full details would be announced 'later'.

Messi made an emotional public address to Barcelona supporters from the Nou Camp on Sunday to put his side across regarding the dramatic end to his remarkable 21 years at the club.

He struggled to hold back the tears as he revealed he did not want to leave - but that he would be joining a European rival of the Catalan side so he can keep winning trophies.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patson Daka made an immediate impression for Leicester in an entertaining game at Loftus Road, as they drew against QPR.

The Zambian, who signed this summer from Red Bull Salzburg, scored one and earned a penalty as the Premier League side twice came from behind.

Rangers looked impressive throughout the contest, and deservedly took the lead when the pace of Ilias Chair was too much for a flat-footed Leicester defence. His cut-back to Charlie Austin was finished off in fine style, past the outstretched Eldin Jakupovic.

Patson Daka impressed for Leicester as the Foxes played out an entertaining 3-3 draw at QPR

Brendan Rodgers would have been delighted to see his new signing hit the ground running

Brendan Rodgers subbed Harvey Barnes for Marc Albrighton at half time, after the 31-year old extended his stay at the King Power.

Rangers continued to look the more energetic of the two sides. Chris Willock could have doubled the lead on 53 minutes, but his fierce shot ricocheted off the post and away.

However, the second goal QPR threatened came soon afterwards, when Yoann Barbet headed home from close range after a flick-on.

Leicester made a further nine changes on the hour mark, in addition to Albrighton at the beginning of the half.

QPR twice came from behind as they build up to the Championship season getting underway

Marc Albrighton came on at half-time having recently signed a new contract at the King Power

The planned substitutions appeared to finally kick-start their pre-season campaign into life, with two goals in the space of three minutes.

Their first goal of the game – and in pre-season – came on 74 minutes, when Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall pounced on a loose ball in the area to fire home from close range.

Three minutes later, Daka ran through on to a through ball, with the Zambian finishing off in style with his first goal for Leicester.

QPR retook the lead on 82 minutes when Rob Dickie was first to the ball after it came off the post.

The pace of Daka forced keeper Seny Dieng to upend the 22-year old with three minutes remaining, and Kelechi Iheanacho made no mistake from the spot.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alenquer will be an unexpected runner in Wednesday’s Group One Juddmonte International Stakes at York after it was decided his season should change direction.

The William Haggas-trained winner of the King Edward VII Stakes at Royal Ascot, who finished third to Hurricane Lane in the Grand Prix de Paris on his latest start when staying on from too far off the pace, will drop back down in distance to run in the International.

The move means plans to run Alenquer in next month’s mile-and-three-quarter Cazoo St Leger at Doncaster — Alenquer was 8-1 third favourite for the final Classic of the season — have also been scrapped.

Alenquer will be a surprise runner in the Group One Juddmonte International Stakes at York

Alenquer is 20-1 for the International Stakes but had been quoted as 5-2 favourite for the Great Voltigeur Stakes, one of the most significant St Leger trial races which is also on next Wednesday’s York card.

Haggas said: ‘I am happy to go to the Juddmonte International and I don’t think the Leger is on the radar any more. We don’t want to run him over that far. We didn’t get a race in Paris. He never got in the race at all. If we put a line through that and start again, he is still a fair horse.’

Haggas will be two-handed in the International Stakes with Mohaafeth also in the field.

He won his first four races this season, including the Hampton Court Stakes at Royal Ascot. That sequence ended when Mohaafeth finished third to Bangkok in last month’s Group Two Sky Bet York Stakes, a race Haggas described as a tactical ‘balls-up’.

William Haggas-trained Alenquer won the King Edward VII Stakes at Royal Ascot back in June

The International, which will get York’s Ebor meeting off to a bang, promises to be one of the races of the season.

The line-up is headed by the Eclipse Stakes winner and third, St Mark’s Basilica and Mishriff, Irish 2,000 Guineas winner Mac Swiney and possibly Sussex Stakes winner Alcohol Free.

However, Pyledriver will be missing from the race.

Co-trainer Willie Muir said the Coronation Cup winner has not yet recovered from the groin issue that ruled him out of the King George at Ascot last month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the most memorable experiences of last season was attending the Champions League final in Porto.

It felt as though a little normality had returned. There were fans in the stadium and as such there was an atmosphere. It’s amazing how much noise 16,000 people can make when they really care.

Just as importantly, it was a good game and one that took place between two teams who should have a real run at this season’s Premier League title.

Chelsea's signing of Romelu Lukaku is a game-changer in their bid to win the Premier League

Lukaku, pictured with director Marina Granovskaia, has returned to Chelsea for £98m

City are bolstered by the arrival of Jack Grealish but have not yet signed a top class striker

Manchester City — vanquished so unexpectedly that night in Portugal — will defend their domestic crown bolstered by the arrival of Jack Grealish but, so far at least, without a centre forward of repute.

Therefore, I expect Chelsea to be much closer to them than they were last May, when the gap was an enormous 19 points.

Grealish’s move to City from Aston Villa was a statement signing. The 25-year-old is a super player with an appetite for work. It will be fascinating to watch his new manager Pep Guardiola endeavour to shape him into a footballer good enough for his team and his methods.

Nevertheless, he may not be the most important signing of the summer. That may well turn out to be Chelsea landing Romelu Lukaku from Inter Milan. If that one works then it can move Thomas Tuchel’s team through the field to sit right on the shoulder of Guardiola’s champions.

There have been other big arrivals since the European Championship. Manchester United have signed quality at both ends of the field in Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane.

Liverpool have a new central defender — the Frenchman Ibrahima Konate — who will help to insulate them from the problems that derailed them so spectacularly last time round.

Lukaku, 28, may transpire to be a last-piece-in-the-jigsaw kind of player for Chelsea's title bid

Thomas Tuchel’s impact at Chelsea last term was profound and we can expect more from him

But at Chelsea, Lukaku may transpire to be a last-piece-in-the-jigsaw kind of player. I have expressed reservations about the Belgian before and they remain.

I saw familiar frailties in big moments during the Euros.

But if the 28-year-old brings goals to a team who can also expect more impact this term from forwards Timo Werner, Christian Pulisic and Kai Havertz, then it is not difficult to see where that may take them.

Tuchel’s impact at Chelsea last season was profound and we can expect more from the German. The same can be said of some of his players. The three young Englishmen, Mason Mount, Ben Chilwell and Reece James, spring to mind.

At the very least, we should get a proper title race this season. That did not happen last time and nor the year before, when Liverpool romped to the line.

And what of the 2020 champions? Last season’s problems were clear. No team could have sustained the injuries suffered by Jurgen Klopp’s side and hoped to successfully defend a title.

Ibrahima Konate should help insulate Liverpool from the problems they faced last season

Man United have backed Ole Gunnar Solskjaer (right) by bringing in Jadon Sancho (left)

Equally, for a spell in the middle third of their season, Liverpool mislaid the tempo, desire and power that characterise their football under the German. It is this, just as much as Virgil van Dijk and Joe Gomez, that Liverpool must welcome back over the next nine months.

There is no reason why it cannot be done. Liverpool still have the best forward line in the Premier League and last season’s finish — eight wins and two draws — was indicative of how monotonously effective they can be when their blood is up.

However, they face Chelsea, Leeds and both Manchester clubs before the middle of October, so it appears we may have some answers pretty soon.

As usual, we will hope for someone to jump from the pack as Brendan Rodgers’ admirable Leicester have done recently.

Everton under Rafael Benitez? Maybe not this season. Aston Villa? They will need a big season from Ollie Watkins. Leeds? With defensive players back from injury and a crowd inside Elland Road for the first time in the top division for two decades, they would not be the worst bet for a place in the top six.

Word from Yorkshire is that coach Marcelo Bielsa has already had his squad on three training sessions a day in pre-season, something pretty much unheard of in this country. Players have not been going home until 7pm.

Marcelo Bielsa has been whipping his Leeds side into shape with three daily training sessions

Leeds could rival Leicester as best of the rest behind Man City, Man United, Chelsea and City

The benefits of such intense work were perhaps seen in the way Leeds played last season. With the ball, they were match for just about anyone, but at the same time shipped 54 goals, only one fewer than Burnley in 17th.

If Leeds can find a way to be more parsimonious this time, then they may well move up alongside Leicester as the best of the rest. That does not say much for the two north London clubs, perhaps. But neither Tottenham nor Arsenal have done a lot in the summer to point to great improvement on last season.

Tottenham’s pursuit of a new manager was hard to watch at times. Ultimately they ended up with a good coach but whether Nuno Espirito Santo will be able to work as effectively without a stream of players supplied to him by Jorge Mendes’ Gestifute agency — as was the case at Wolves — remains to be seen.

In the upwardly mobile category, we may be able to place Brighton, West Ham and Southampton.

Neither Tottenham nor Arsenal have done a lot to point to great improvement on last season.

The progress of Graham Potter at Brighton will be interesting, in particular. Admired by Guardiola — who has said he would like to play for him — and considered briefly by Spurs in the summer, the likeable Englishman must now do something to justify that hype.

His first two campaigns in Sussex brought 15th- and 16th-place finishes with 41 points accrued each time. Now is surely the time to move forwards.

Burnley and Crystal Palace have done little to suggest much will change for them — Palace’s appointment of Patrick Vieira as coach was baffling — while the season’s new arrivals Brentford, Norwich and Watford come with differing ideas on how to stay up.

It would be heartening if a couple of them could pull it off.

So Chelsea for the title, Leeds for the top six and Brighton for the top 10.

As always, my advice is to keep your money in your pocket.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain starlet Ismael Gharbi had a moment he will never forget on Thursday when Mauricio Pochettino invited him to meet his idol Lionel Messi in training.

The 17-year-old midfielder, who only made his professional debut on August 1 coming on as a substitute in the Trophée des Champions loss to Lille, was a little starstruck as he was involved in training on Thursday.

And when he told Pochettino that six-time Ballon d'Or winner Messi - who signed a two-year £1m per season deal this week - was his idol, the first-team boss took him over to meet the man of the moment, and Gharbi heartwarmingly said: 'If you need something, I am here for you!'

PSG starlet Ismael Gharbi (left) met his idol Lionel Messi (right) during training on Thursday

With boss Mauricio Pochettino present, Gharbi said: 'If you need something, I am here for you!'

The all-time great walked out onto the pitch yesterday for the first time since Argentina's Copa America final triumph earlier this summer, and was put through his paces at PSG's Camp des Loges training complex.

Despite only arriving in Paris on Tuesday, he is reportedly already desperate to feature this weekend.

His return was marked with simple exercises, with Messi's workload set to gradually increase while he gears up for the new season. The run-out caught on camera saw him race towards some cones and high-five a coach.

'I've been out of action for around month and I need to get physically ready. I hope to be ready as soon as possible, because I can't wait to play,' Messi admitted during his official unveiling at the Parc des Princes.

According to Marca, Messi is keen to hit the ground running in France and make a positive impression. He did just that after reporting to the club's facility almost two hours early, at 9.15am, to take in his new surroundings.

Messi has already taken part in his first training session at PSG since joining the club this week

RMC in France have even claimed that the clearly-eager Messi wants to be a part of PSG's squad for their league fixture against Strasbourg this Saturday, despite his lack of a pre-season after returning from his holiday.

It is said Messi wants to be starting games as soon as possible, although the club's coaching staff would prefer him to work on his sharpness first.

The same outlet suggests his keenness may be a 'publicity stunt' to allow him to prove his desire to start work immediately after his move.

Kylian Mbappe met new team-mate Messi before training and posted a photo on social media

Meanwhile, before training he was also introduced to the squad, including his strike partner Kylian Mbappe.

The young striker shared a photo of them greeting each other on his own Instagram account, with the caption: 'Welcome to Paris, Leo.'

His expectations are set high, after he openly claimed he has moved to Paris to target a fifth Champions League win - while refusing to admit whether his new team are the favourites to lift the trophy.

'The best teams in the world have not won the Champions League, it's a special competition,' he said.

'My objective is to lift another Champions League and I'm at the right place to do it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jake Paul has drawn up a 'hitlist' fighters he is looking to take on, as he plots his way to becoming a boxing world champion.

Paul will be in action on August 29 when he takes on one of the ten fighters in former UFC welterweight champion Tyron Woodley in the main event of a pay-per-view card in Cleveland, Ohio.

Other names to feature on the list written on a whiteboard, which he shared an image of on Twitter, include Conor McGregor, Canelo Alvarez and his own brother Logan Paul.

YouTube star Jake Paul shared a 'hitlist' of ten fighters he is looking to take on

Jake Paul and Tommy Fury (right) will be in pay-per-view action later in August

Tyson Fury's half-brother Tommy Fury also features, and with a feud currently simmering between Paul and Fury, the Brit's name is written on the board as 'Timmy.'

Fury is also on the same card as Paul for the event later in August as he takes on MMA veteran Anthony Taylor on the undercard.

Paul's list features 13 names in total, including three fighters he has already defeated and crossed out including AnEsonGib, Nate Robinson and Ben Askren.

The list also includes MMA brothers Nate and Nick Diaz, although Paul appeared to indicate he would only want to fight one of the pair.

Paul's ultimate goal to become world champion is to take on boxing star Canelo Alvarez

Former UFC champion Conor McGregor is also being targeted by the social media star

But the YouTube star's ultimate target is Canelo as he hopes to become the first social media star to land a major title.

'Anything is possible – my goal is to become a world champion to laugh and say I did it. Ultimate fight would be against Canelo,' the YouTube sensation told talkSPORT.

'It’s about making history and proving people wrong – I want to leave an everlasting legacy. I know I can become one of the best in the world in this sport. Boxing is the perfect way to prove haters wrong.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Spurs goalkeeper Hugo Lloris says he is ‘calm and relaxed’ despite no sign of new contract talks as he enters his 10th season at the club.

His six-year deal ends next summer, with speculation mounting that the club might be prepared to sell their 34-year-old captain in this transfer window rather than see him leave for nothing in a year’s time.

The arrival of Atalanta keeper Pierluigi Gollini, 26, on a one-year loan but with a view to a permanent move, has put Lloris’ place in the plans of new boss Nuno Espirito Santo under the spotlight.

Hugo Lloris could be playing his last season for Spurs with there being no sign of an offer

Pierluigi Gollini has signed from Atalanta and thrown the Frenchman's place into question

Lloris, who earns about £100,000 a week, says the club have not opened a dialogue over a contract extension. He is free to talk to foreign clubs from January.

‘There is nothing from the club, to be honest,’ said the France goalkeeper, who has previously indicated he wants to end his career in his home country.

‘I don’t have to show my loyalty towards the club after nine years and season No 10 that is coming.

The World Cup winner get his league season underway against Manchester City on Sunday

'I’m just calm and relaxed and focused on myself and make sure that I’m ready to compete on the first game.

‘I always give my priority to Spurs and we will see what will happen. I’m not affected about that, I’m just enjoying football.

'My only reason to wake up every morning is to work, enjoy the training session and enjoy the competition.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pixie Lott made sure all eyes were on her as she donned a leggy pink mini dress while sipping on quirky cocktails at a swanky restaurant on Monday night.

The Cry Me Out singer, 30, looked gorgeous as she took to Instagram to document the evening for a friend's birthday.

She opted for the asymmetrical patterned number on the boozy night, which she paired with chunky black heels.

Wow: Pixie Lott made sure all eyes were on her as she donned a leggy pink mini dress while sipping on quirky cocktails at a swanky restaurant on Monday

Her iconic bright blonde tresses were left in a natural style and fell in curls over her shoulders.

Pixie's make up matched her dress as she swept pink eyeshadow across her lids and opted for a bright pink manicure.

The restaurant MY&SANNE, based in Chelsea and opened in 2020 serves cocktails for up to £16 a pop.

Gorgeous: The Cry Me Out singer looked gorgeous as she took to Instagram to document the evening for a friend's birthday

Swanky: The restaurant MY&SANTE, based in Chelsea and opened in 2020, looked very high end, where the magnificent cocktails can cost up to £16

The cocktails may seem worth the hefty price tag, as the hitmaker looked very impressed as her friend filmed her popping a smoke bubble over her drink.

The drinks sat pretty with Pixie's ensemble, as they all matched the colour perfectly.

At the end of last year, the singer revealed that she wants to have a 'big family' with her fiancé, Oliver Cheshire, when they feel the 'time is right'.

Fancy drinks: The cocktails may seem worth the hefty price tag, as the hitmaker looked very impressed as her friend filmed her popping a smoke bubble over her drink

Cute: The drinks sat pretty with Pixie's ensemble, as they all matched the colour perfectly

She told The Sun: 'I'm a big family girl, a very big family girl. Family is everything for me so I would love to have my own family when I can find the time.

'When the time is right I would love that. It's such an amazing thing to have.'

The couple's wedding was affected due to the pandemic, so they decided to wait and resume planning when lockdown restrictions have lifted completely.

She continued: 'We were planning to have our wedding this year and now ­everything is so up in the air, we've just delayed it.

'There's still a lot of planning behind the scenes but we are waiting for the time there are no restrictions and rules, because we don't really want to have that on the special day.'

Boozy night: The two friends drank the fancy cocktails all night
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaley Cuoco and Pete Davidson goofed around Wednesday while filming their upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City.

The 35-year-old actress and her 27-year-old co-star were dressed casually while shooting outdoors on the street in the Brooklyn area.

Kaley got into character and looked roughed up while filming an action scene with the help of a stunt double.

Movie star: Kaley Cuoco was spotted Wednesday filming her upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City

The Big Bang Theory star had an abrasion on her cheek and unkempt hair as she filmed a scene wearing a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants.

Pete, meanwhile, wore a striped sweater and green pants.

Kaley and Pete later shared a laugh in-between scenes and she was seen cracking up amid photographers.

They were also spotted walking together with Kaley using a hand fan to keep herself cool.

On set: Pete Davidson filmed with Kaley in the Brooklyn area

Roughed up: The 35-year-old actress looked roughed up while filming

Leading lady: The Big Bang Theory star stars in the romantic comedy along with Pete

Funny guy: The Saturday Night Live star smiled between scenes

Pete smoked a cigarette and drank a Coca-Cola between scenes.

Meet Cute is a play on the film and television term for a scene in which two people who later will become a couple meet for the first time usually under a 'cute' circumstance.

The 'meet cute' scene has been a staple of romantic comedies in Hollywood for decades.

Casual style: Kaley wore a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants

Good times: Pete and Kaley enjoyed a laugh in between scenes

Staying cool: Kaley kept cool with a small hand fan

Shades on: The actress wore sunglasses while walking with Pete

According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Meet Cute is being directed by Alex Lehmann from a script by Noga Pnueli.

Alex previously directed the Netflix dramedy Paddleton that he co-wrote with Mark Duplass.

Rom com: According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Into it: Kaley got into character as she looked unkempt

Bruised up: The actress dances on the set with bruises

Touch up: A make-up artist touched up the actress

Kaley stars in the HBO Max series The Flight Attendant in the title role after her production company Yes, Norman Productions optioned the rights to the novel.

The Flight Attendant premiered in November 2020 and was renewed for a second season in December 2020.

Kaley has received nominations at the Primetime Emmy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Screen Actors Guild Awards, and the Critics' Choice Award for her work on the HBO Max series.

Cute smile: Kaley flashed her cute smile for the cameras

Good times: The actress took a wide stance while laughing

Brooklyn set: The cast and crew filmed in Brooklyn and masked up amid the pandemic

Smoke break: Pete smoked a cigarette between scenes

Pete in April 2021 was cast as Joey Ramone in the upcoming Netflix biography I Slept With Joey Ramone.

The Saturday Night Live star recently played Blackguard in The Suicide Squad.

Pete also has the thriller Bodies, Bodies, Bodies currently in post-production.

Stunt double: Kaley and Pete looked on as a stunt double worked with them

Strong resemblance: The stunt double looked just like Kaley

Fooling around: Pete fooled around with photographers while on set
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Justin Bieber leads this year's list of nominees at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards.

The pop star is followed closely by Megan Thee Stallion, Billie Eilish, BTS, Doja Cat, Drake, Giveon, Lil Nas X and first-time nominee Olivia Rodrigo.

The Canadian artist has seven nods, including video of the year and best direction for POPSTAR, artist of the year, best cinematography for Holy and best pop song, best editing and best collaboration for Peaches.

Scroll down for a list of nominations...

Way to go: Justin Bieber leads this year's list of nominees at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards. Seen in July in LA

Megan Thee Stallion is right behind with six nominations.

They are mostly from her hit song WAP, triggering nods for video of the year, artist of the year, best collaboration and best hip-hop song.

She also was nominated for a second time in the best hip-hop song category for her work on Lil Baby's On Me (The Remix).

Props to her: Megan Thee Stallion is right behind with six nominations. They are mostly from her hit song 'WAP,' triggering nods for video of the year, artist of the year, best collaboration and best hip-hop song. She also was nominated for a second time in the best hip-hop song category for her work on Lil Baby's 'On Me (The Remix)'

Eilish, BTS, Doja Cat, Drake, Giveon, Lil Nas X and Rodrigo each have five nominations.

Bieber and Megan Thee Stallion will compete with Ariana Grande, Doja Cat, Olivia Rodrigo and Taylor Swift for artist of the year.

The video of the year category is filled by WAP by Cardi B featuring Megan Thee Stallion; POPSTAR by DJ Khaled featuring Drake and Bieber; Kiss Me More by Doja Cat featuring SZA; Ed Sheeran's Bad Habits; Lil Nas X's MONTERO (Call Me By Your Name); and The Weeknd's Save Your Tears.

So many nominations: Eilish (pictured), BTS, Doja Cat, Drake, Giveon, Lil Nas X and Rodrigo each have five nominations

On top: Bieber and Megan Thee Stallion will compete with Ariana Grande (pictured), Doja Cat, Olivia Rodrigo and Taylor Swift for artist of the year

WAP is also up for song of the year.

So is Mood by 24kGoldn featuring iann dior; Leave The Door Open by Bruno Mars, Anderson .Paak and Silk Sonic; Dynamite by BTS; Dua Lipa's Levitating and Rodrigo's drivers license.

The best new artist nominees are: 24kGoldn, Giveon, The Kid LAROI, Olivia Rodrigo, Polo G and Saweetie.

New: The best new artist nominees are: 24kGoldn, Giveon, The Kid LAROI, Olivia Rodrigo (pictured), Polo G and Saweetie

Best rock song nominees are Evanescence's Use My Voice, Foo Fighters' Shame Shame, John Mayer's Last Train Home, The Killers' My Own Soul's Warning, Kings Of Leon's The Bandit and Lenny Kravitz's Raise Vibration.

The 2021 VMAs will return to New York City, airing from the Barclays Center in Brooklyn on September 12.

The show will simulcast across CMT, Comedy Central, Logo, MTV2, Nickelodeon, Paramount Network, Pop, TV Land, VH1 and The CW Network.

As Covid cases continue to surge nationwide, MTV stresses that the health and safety of artists, fans, staff and partners remain the number one priority, and it and Barclays Center are working closely with state and local officials to implement best practices in order to safely bring together music fans from around the globe, according to a report this week from Deadline.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's the latest female bombshell to enter the Love Island villa.

And in posts shared to her Instagram, Priya Gopaldas, 23, has shown off her natural beauty in blue scrubs as she regularly forgoes makeup while working in hospital.

The 5th year medical student, who is a budding orthopaedic surgeon, often uploads glamorous snaps but a few show her sporting a more stripped-back look as she uses her talents in the NHS.

Natural beauty: In posts shared to her Instagram, Priya Gopaldas, 23, has shown off her natural beauty in blue scrubs as she regularly forgoes makeup while working in hospital

Love Island viewers have come to know Priya looking sensational in bikinis and dolled up on dates while flirting with love interest Matthew MacNabb.

But Priya is no stranger to covering up in medical clothing and PPE while working on the Covid-19 Intensive Care Unit earlier this year as she completes her studies at University College London.

She volunteered her services on the Covid ward post-Christmas, after students based at the UCL hospital were contacted asking if they could assist helping with the mounting cases.

She worked six day, 12 hour night shifts in the understaffed department, supporting doctors and nurses.

Wow! The 5th year medical student is the latest female bombshell to enter the Love Island villa

Medical professional: But Priya is no stranger to covering up in medical clothing and PPE while working on the Covid-19 Intensive Care Unit at University College London earlier this year

Speaking in January, Priya said: 'I decided to throw myself in at the deep end and take on the challenge of a 12-hour night shift, despite having never done one before.

'I was shocked to see how ill the patients were. Most patients were intubated, ventilated and sedated, needing round the clock monitoring and care.'

Away from her studies, Priya is a keen runner and was aiming to complete a challenge of six marathons in six days later this year.

The Londoner is also a glamorous globe-trotter, visiting countries including Tanzania, Macedonia, North America, Italy, Jamaica and France over the past two years.

Amazing! She worked six day, 12 hour night shifts in the understaffed department, supporting doctors and nurses during the Covid-19 crisis

Game, set, match: Love Island viewers have come to know Priya looking sensational in bikinis while flirting with love interest Matthew MacNabb

During Tuesday night's installment of Love Island, Priya said of Matthew: 'I had to shut my jaw. It's like mouth open, admiring the piece of art that is his body'.

Thankfully for the Priya, the feeling is mutual - with Matthew telling the other boys: 'There's so much substance in her conversations and she is beautiful. I was looking at her eyes and I was like, holy s**t.

'Even in the gym there, I was like, this is like a carbon copy of me!'

'What's coming across to me is she's ambitious, she's very caring, she's spontaneous, she's very smart… the more I talk to her the more I'm learning and like, 'Woah this is getting stronger,'' Matthew says.

He adds in the beach hut: 'Priya's the whole package, it's crazy. Every time I talk to her I learn another trait to her that's a positive.'

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish and his Manchester City teammates Kyle Walker and Riyad Mahrez enjoyed a night out in their home city on Thursday.

The players appeared at ease as they left the city's Ivy restaurant, despite being quickly swamped by fans as they made their way home.

Jack, 25, looked typically trendy in a luxury white sweatshirt teamed with distressed jeans, with Riyad, 30, rocking a near-identical look in ripped jeans and a white T-shirt. Kyle, 31, donned black jeans and a black varsity jacket.

Night out: Jack Grealish, 25, and his Manchester City teammates Kyle Walker, 31, and Riyad Mahrez, 30, enjoyed a night out in their home city on Thursday

At ease: The players appeared at ease as they left the city's Ivy restaurant, despite being quickly swamped by fans as they made their way home

The trio were escorted out of the up-market restaurant by security.

Riyad kindly took time out of his evening to sign autographs for fans.

The athletes were swiftly escorted to a waiting car and whisked away.

The outing comes two days after Jack revealed a conversation with John Terry helped convince him to leave Aston Villa and join Manchester City.

Trendy: Jack looked typically trendy in a luxury white sweatshirt teamed with distressed jeans and trainers

The attacking midfielder became the most expensive English player of all time when he moved from hometown club Villa to the Premier League champions for a whopping £100million transfer fee on August 5.

And as reported by The Sun, Jack took heed of John's words when the Chelsea and England legend emphasised the prestige of playing European football to him.

He said: 'I remember speaking to John Terry at Villa and he said when you stand there and hear that Champions League anthem there is nothing better.

Keeping warm: Stepping out towards the end of the week, Kyle donned black jeans and a black varsity jacket

Matching: Wearing a similar outfit to teammate Jack, Riyad rocked ripped jeans and a white T-shirt

'It has been difficult watching (Champions League) games. I remember watching City v PSG last year and the first half was amazing. To be involved would be a dream come true.

'When you see a club paying that much for a player it means they trust and value you highly and see so much potential. Now I just hope I can repay this football club by winning as many titles as possible — and winning that trophy we all want.

'The club were so close to winning it last year, they were one goal away. That is exactly why I have come here. I look around the changing room and there is so much talent and depth and I fully believe we can win it this year.'

Jack, who made his City debut as a substitute in Saturday's 1-0 Community Shield final loss against Leicester, and City will kick off their domestic campaign against Tottenham on Sunday August 15 looking to defend their title.

Security: The trio were escorted out of the up-market restaurant by security and were swiftly whisked away by a waiting car
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before their relationship became romantic, Megan Fox hit Machine Gun Kelly with a pistol and forcefully jammed it in his mouth.

In an exclusive movie still obtained by DailyMail.com, the 35-year-old actress is shown pointing a gun at the battered 31-year-old rapper's head in a tense scene from their film Midnight In The Switchgrass.

In the film Megan plays Rebecca Lombardo as she is one of three FBI agents - Karl Helter (played by Bruce Willis) and Byron Crawford (Emile Hirsch) are the others - trying to catch a predator who has been targeting sex workers in a sting operation.

Scroll down for video

Uh oh: In an exclusive movie still obtained by DailyMail.com, the 35-year-old actress is shown pointing a gun at the battered 31-year-old rapper's head in a tense scene from their film Midnight In The Switchgrass.

No doubt her character is trying to get information from MGK's (real name Colson Baker) character who is uncredited on IMDB.

Director Randall Emmett said that Megan was a little tentative filming the scene at first as it was a bit violent and she had to make actual physical contact with MGK using the actual weapon.

The 50-year-old - who was making his directorial debut - said in an interview: 'This was a scene I really enjoyed directing. Machine Gun Kelly as a director, you give him an inch and he'll give you a mile, you know.

Dynamic duo: In the film Megan plays Rebecca Lombardo as she is one of three FBI agents including Karl Helter (played by Bruce Willis) trying to catch a predator who has been targeting sex workers in a sting operation

Mustachioed: Byron Crawford is the third FBI agent as he is played by Emile Hirsch

Casting: Director Randall Emmett said that Megan was a little tentative filming the scene at first as it was a bit violent and she had to make actual physical contact with MGK using the actual weapon. He's seen with wife Lala Kent at the film's premiere above

'Originally when I was directing the scene the pacing was a little slow, and I said to Megan a couple of times, "I want you to tap the gun on his head and then put it in his mouth, jam it in his mouth."

As Megan expressed hesitation to be that aggressive, it was MGK who encouraged her to really get into the scene.

Emmett explained: 'And she had said to Machine Gun Kelly, "I don't want to hurt him... is it gonna hurt?" And he said, "Hit me with the gun!" He was like, "I don't care you know, just be aggressive, don't worry about it!" I said "jam it in his mouth to get him to shut up!."'

The 50-year-old director said in an interview: 'Originally when I was directing the scene the pacing was a little slow, and I said to Megan a couple of times, "I want you to tap the gun on his head and then put it in his mouth, jam it in his mouth"'

'So what I love about Megan is she will try whatever you give her and she'll keep going until it's perfect': The partner of Vanderpump Rules star Lala Kent praised Megan's devotion to her craft, she is seen in a shown in a scene with Lukas Haas

Tense moments: Fox and Willis are seen having a coffee together

The partner of Vanderpump Rules star Lala Kent praised Megan's devotion to her craft.

He said: 'So what I love about Megan is she will try whatever you give her and she'll keep going until it's perfect.

'So you know, that was really fun getting to direct somebody like that. This is exactly why I love Megan Fox. She's just got such strength in everything she does.'

The director also revealed that MGK had declined the role at first but he wouldn't take no for an answer.

Loved up: Megan and MGK's chemistry on the film set continued off screen as they have been dating since May 2020, as they are seen in May 2021

Shining star: Sylvester Stallone's daughter Sistine, 23, is also in the film as she plays a disheveled, glassy-eyed informant who reveals key information that could lead to the serial killer Fox's FBI agent character Lombardi is hunting down

Emmett explained: 'And Colson (Baker) here, Machine Gun Kelly, he really brought this character to life. I was so set on him being in this movie, and I fought to get him into this film.

'And when he originally passed, I called his friend and I told him to call Machine Gun Kelly and I got a cell phone number, I did whatever it took to get them into the film. And he says, "You were one persistent dude." So I'm really thankful that he brought that role of life. '

Megan and MGK's chemistry on the film set continued off screen as they have been dating since May 2020.

Sylvester Stallone's daughter Sistine, 23, is also in the film as she plays a disheveled, glassy-eyed informant who reveals key information that could lead to the serial killer Fox's FBI agent character Lombardi is hunting down.

Midnight In the Switchgrass is available for digital download on August 13th and DVD on August 16th, via Lionsgate UK.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They announced their engagement last year.

And actress Nicola Peltz and her fiancé Brooklyn Beckham, 22, looked every inch the loved-up couple as they stepped out for coffee in New York City on Friday.

The eldest son of Victoria and David Beckham placed an affectionate arm around the 26-year-old beauty, who made a statement in Gianni Versace's iconic £8,654 ($12,000 USD) Crystal Cross beaded black leather biker jacket from 1993.

Going hell for leather! Nicola Peltz, 26, sported Gianni Versace's iconic £8,650 biker jacket as she stepped out for coffee with fiancé Brooklyn Beckham, 22, in New York City on Friday

Nicola teamed the one-of-a-kind garment with a black tank top, skinny-leg blue jeans and chunky black platform boots.

The Bates Motel star also wore a protective black face mask and black cap, and carried her belongings in a black Hermès Birkin bag, worth £18,750 ($26,000 USD).

Nicola kept her jewellery to a minimum, placing focus on her sparkling engagement ring, reportedly worth £350,000, and styled her semi-wet blonde tresses out.

Life of luxury: The actress teamed the one-of-a-kind garment with a black tank top, skinny-leg blue jeans and chunky black platform boots. Brooklyn carried Nicola's black Hermès Birkin bag, worth £18,750 ($26,000 USD), as they made their way to a waiting car

Ever the gentleman, a smitten Brooklyn wrapped one arm around Nicola's petite frame as he led them to a waiting car following their coffee run.

The budding photographer also used his black cowboy hat in an attempt to perhaps shield camera lenses away from Nicola's face.

Brooklyn matched his fiancée in an all-black ensemble, consisting of a T-shirt that revealed his array of arm tattoos, jeans, lace-up boots and a cap, worn backwards.

Also on Friday, Nicola and Brooklyn both took to their Instagram Stories to share the same loved-up snap of the couple cozying up to one another while in a studio.

Lovebirds: Also on Friday, Nicola and Brooklyn both took to their Instagram Stories to share this loved-up snap of the couple cozying up to one another while in a studio.

Nicola's striking facial features were enhanced with glamorous makeup, and proud beau Brooklyn nestled in close, clearly enjoying quality time together.

'My girl,' Brooklyn captioned the sizzling snap, alongside a love heart emoji.

Brooklyn - who is the eldest of David and Victoria Beckham's four children - popped the question last June.

Exactly 12 months after he got down on bended knee, he shared a gushing Instagram post, telling his followers how Nicola made him 'a better person'.

Smitten: Brooklyn - who is the eldest of David and Victoria Beckham's four children - popped the question last June

Brooklyn wrote: 'This exact day 1 year ago I asked this gorgeous woman to marry me.

'She makes me a better person everyday and is my best friend. I can't imagine my life without you because you continuously make me laugh and smile x happy 1 year baby.'

Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a sweet Instagram post.

Sharing a stunning snap of the couple, he wrote: 'Two weeks ago I asked my soulmate to marry me and she said yes xx I am the luckiest man in the world. I promise to be the best husband and the best daddy one day. I love you baby xx.'

Engaged: Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a gushing Instagram post in which he called himself the 'luckiest man in the world'

In October it was claimed that the pair planned to exchange vows in two celebrations on both sides of the Atlantic.

It's thought that Brooklyn will have his brothers Romeo, 18, and Cruz, 16, as his best men for the ceremony, with proud mum Victoria designing Nicola's wedding gown.

According to The Sun, Brooklyn's sister Harper, 10, will be chief bridesmaid, while Brooklyn's father David will act as the master of ceremonies.

The two ceremonies - held in Nicola's hometown of Florida and the Beckhams' estate in the Cotswolds - will ensure that both Brooklyn and Nicola's loved ones can be in attendance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Former Neighbours star Craig McLachlan has listed his apartment in Sydney's Potts Point for auction.

The one-bedroom property, which is located near cafes, shops and bars, has a price guide of $1.5million.

The penthouse apartment features high ceilings, a spacious living area and timber flooring throughout.

On the market: Actor Craig McLachlan has listed his $1.5million Potts Point apartment for sale. Pictured McLachlan and girlfriend Vanessa Scammell

It also has a fireplace, and the bedroom features a classic tiled en-suite bathroom with full bath.

McLachlan has owned the apartment for two decades.

According to the Daily Telegraph, McLachlan lives elsewhere with his girlfriend partner Vanessa Scammell, and has been renting out the property.

Spacious: The one-bedroom property, which is located near cafes, shops and bars, has a price guide of $1.5million

Views: The property is an easy walk to the harbour foreshore and has water views

It comes after McLachlan was found not guilty of indecently assaulting actors during the running of hit musical Rocky Horror Show.

He had maintained his alleged sexual offending while working on the production was no more inappropriate than a cricketer giving a teammate a pat on the bum.

In a 105 page decision, Melbourne Magistrate Belinda Wallington found McLachlan not guilty of all charges on December 15.

Moving on: McLachlan has owned the apartment for two decades

Sunny: It also has a fireplace, and the bedroom features a classic tiled en-suite bathroom with full bath

He had endured months of scrutiny which saw him and his partner Vanessa Scammel forced to make their way through media packs outside of a Melbourne court.

In handing down her decision, Ms Wallington made the unusual decision to praise each of the alleged victims.

They had endured fierce criticism throughout the trial, with one young mum forced to give evidence to the court on four separate occasions.

Police had alleged McLachlan either indecently assaulted or assaulted four complainants in Melbourne between April 26, 2014 and July 13, 2014.

The allegations became public after one of his alleged victims went public following the worldwide scandal involving disgraced film producer Harvey Weinstein.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Syesha Mercado is now in a battle to keep custody of both of her young children.

The former American Idol finalist, who's been trying to regain custody of her 18-month-old son after he was placed in foster care earlier this year, had her newborn daughter taken away from her during a roadside encounter with sheriff department officers in Florida on Wednesday.

Mercado's 10-day old daughter remains in state protection following an August 12 court hearing, according to the Miami Herald-Tribune.

The singer and her partner, Tyron Deneer, recorded much of Wednesday's incident, where they were presented with a court order to hand over their child for a checkup at a hospital, and posted it on Instagram, writing: 'THEY TOOK OUR BABY AGAIN!'

Family's legal battle: Syesha Mercado, 34, had her newborn daughter taken away by sheriff deputies in Florida on Wednesday during a traffic stop, five months after her 18-month old son, Amen'Ra (pictured), was placed in foster care

Mercado and Deener were driving in Sarasota, Florida with their newborn daughter when authorities pulled them over and insisted that they surrender the then 10-day-old child.

In the Instagram video, Deener can be seen sitting in the driver's seat, while Mercado was in the backseat with their baby.

After being informed of the court order to hand over their child for the welfare checkup, the pair both pled their case to be the ones to take the daughter to the doctor.

At one point, Mercado begged deputies not to take her newborn, explaining that she is being breastfed. After pumping breast milk into a bottle in the backseat of a vehicle into a bottle, the 34-year-old could be seen in the clip slowly walking her daughter over to deputies, begging for them not to take her.

Heartbreaking: The American Idol alum sobbed and pleaded with authorities during the roadside stop to take custody of her daughter in Sarasota, Florida

Mother's plea: This is my baby, my baby is just days old and you're taking my baby away from me,' the singer pleaded to sheriff department officers

Family matters: The 34-year-old mother sobbed as she pleaded her case during the stop

'How could you do this this? Do you not feel anything?' Mercado asked authorities with obvious raw emotion to her voice before she started to cry.

'You guys, I'm human. This is my baby, my baby is just days old and you're taking my baby away from me. You're taking my baby away from me. You have no hearts. This is so wrong,' she said while sobbing as she held her daughter in her arms in a pink and white blanket.

'You don't care... my baby is healthy and happy.'

During the video, sheriff's deputies explained that the newborn was being taken because the couple did not inform authorities that Mercado had given birth while she was still in the midst of her legal battle over custody of her son.

In response, Deener argued that they had requested all questions about them go through their attorney, which he maintained did not happen. The couple also shared that the baby had just gone for a health checkup the previous day and they had all the paperwork to prove it.

Child custody: Mercado's partner, Tyron Deneer, also pleaded to authorities to not take their child as he filmed much of the incident with a camera phone

Mother's anguish: Eventually, Mercado handed over her baby girl, who was wrapped in a blanket, to authorities

Roadside: Sheriff department officers had a court order to take the newborn into custody because the couple had a pending case involving their 18-month-old son

The video, which lasts for just over one hour, has prompted outrage from Mercado's supporters, who feel racism played a role in her case, along with other injustices. Mercado and her partner Tyron Deener are both Black.

The couple's legal battles over their children began in late February when they took their then one-year-old son, Amen'Ra, to Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital in St. Petersburg, Florida, to get him 'extra fluids' because he was struggling with the transition from breast milk to solid foods.

But by the end of the hospital stay, the little boy was taken from the couple and put into the care of the Manatee Child Protective Services. Mercado has since said armed officers 'forcefully removed me from my son' after she was accused of abuse and neglect.

'They ripped me away from my proudest creation in life, pure joy, my SUNhine,' the singer wrote in an Instagram post.

Their plea: During the exchange the couple said their daughter had just gone for a health checkup the previous day and they had all the paperwork to prove it

Sad situation: The couple eventually walked back to their parked vehicle without incident

Dispute: In a statement to NBC News on Friday, the Manatee County Sheriff's Office revealed it had received information from a hospital's child abuse line that their boy was 'severely malnourished,' which Mercado disputes

In a statement to NBC News on Friday, the Manatee County Sheriff's Office revealed it had received information from the hospital's child abuse line that a boy was 'severely malnourished,' which Mercado disputes.

'Amen'Ra was forcefully and legally kidnapped from us by CPS, who claim we refused a B12 shot that was a matter of life and death, which is an absolute lie. We never refused a B12 shot, and at no point was he on the verge of death,' Mercado wrote on a GoFundMe page that she created to help pay for legal fees.

At last check on Saturday evening, August 14, the 'Bring Rae Home' GoFundMe account had received $327,874 in donations.

Mercado insists her children are prime examples of racial discrimination in Manatee County, and that her son has since been placed with a white foster family without interviewing qualified relatives or friends for placement while authorities investigate.

Mercado appeared on season 7 of American Idol in 2008, and ended up coming in third behind runner-up David Archuleta and winner David Cook

Foster care: The singer's young son was placed into foster care in March after receiving information from a hospital's child abuse line that a boy was 'severely malnourished'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She gave birth to her first child, Brody, back in May.

And Georgia Kousoulou admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her post baby body, and that her first thought when jetting off on holiday was that her 'body isn't the same.'

The TOWIE star, 29, hoped to inspire her 1.4 million followers by normalising 'stretch marks and belly rolls' as she donned a yellow swimsuit and took the selfie in the mirror.

Postpartum: Georgia Kousoulou, 29, admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her body after giving birth

Self conscious: The TOWIE star penned a heartfelt message in an attempt to inspire her followers to 'normalise stretch marks and belly rolls'

She was glowing in the snap, as she posed with her leg extended and her hand on her hip.

Her blonde locks were swept back into a bun on top of her head, revealing her radiant visage.

Penning the heartfelt message, she said: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same, I can’t wear my usual high leg swimsuits because I can see my stretch marks on both sides' [sic]

Normal: In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, as she penned: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same'

She caught herself thinking these things and decided to don the costume anyway, writing: 'than I re looked at myself & looked down at my happy baby boy & thought WHY not? There just an extra accessory I have to bling up my swimsuits …' [sic]

Continuing on: 'Sometimes we just need to remind ourselves we are superwomen, we grew a HUMAN, we can do what the hell we like! Let’s normalise stretch marks & belly rolls [three sun emojis]'

Noting on the end of the message: 'p.s this swimsuit is very flattering from Zara ! I think it holds my belly in [crying laughing face] or it’s the pose' adding a red love heart on the end.

In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, which sat just below the one-piece.

The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June.

She shared candid photos of herself in a white crop top and grey sweatpants, referencing her stretch marks and c-section scar in the post's caption.

Candid post: The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June

Georgia admitted that while she 'cried' upon seeing her stretch marks after the birth, she now feels 'proud' at having grown a beauty healthy baby', and encouraged other mothers to not feel pressure in 'bouncing back' quickly.

'THE REALITY.. all I heard when I was pregnant was 'you'll bounce back, you're young" etc. It got in my head and I probably did think I would to an extent,' Georgia began.

'So you can imagine the first time I looked in the mirror eight weeks ago, I'm not going to lie.. I freaked out, my body wasn't my body I was used to no more. I had big stretch marks, I am wider and obviously a c-section scar, I remember just crying.'

Georgia went on to reveal how she's now feeling 'proud' at what her body has achieved, nearly two months after giving birth.

'NOW eight weeks on this is me, I've done no exercise and ate what I want, when I can. I now look at my body and I'm proud. I'm proud I have grown a beautiful healthy baby, I'm proud I have got through the first eight weeks,' she said.

She went on to say that while she would love to fit into her size 10 Zara clothing, she's giving herself 'minimum a year' to drop the pounds as she's focusing on herself and her baby.

From baby bump to baby Brody! The post comes after Georgia and her millionaire beau Tommy Mallet the first trailer for their new spin-off show showing new family life

Honest: Tommy is heard admitting 'this is pretty daunting' and that this 'it's an emotional rollercoaster' in the trailer

The reality star urged society to 'stop using these phrases' of bounce back for women, and encouraged other mothers to not feel any additional pressure.

'It's taken us nine months to grow a baby, why are we expecting our bumps to go straight away? Let's just encourage mum to look after themselves, their mental health and their babies.

'Let's stop adding more pressure on women, it's hard enough!' she continued.

Georgia and Tommy are now set to share their pregnancy and first weeks as parents with fans in a spin-off show.

In a first look trailer for the upcoming two-part special, called Georgia & Tommy Baby Steps, the couple are seen preparing to welcome their son in hospital and sweetly joking that the little one takes after his dad.

In the teaser, the couple are seen sitting on their sofa while Georgia is still pregnant with the clip then showing them with beloved dog Monkey and their baby son.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patrick Mahomes and Brittany Matthews' baby daughter Sterling is already a music connoisseur.

Brittany, 25, posted an adorable video of her five-month-old daughter strapped into her baby carrier on Saturday as she showed off her sense of rhythm.

The tot managed to bounce along perfectly in time to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty.

Letting loose: Patrick Mahomes' fiancée Brittany Matthews, 25, shared an adorable video on Saturday of her five-month-old daughter sterling bouncing along to a rap song.

Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design.

She also wore a large floppy bowed handbag while nestled in her Jolly Jumper. T

Sterling jumped up and down on a pink mat with her name printed on it while doing an admirable job of staying on the beat.

'@patrickmahomes made me do it,' Brittany joked in her caption while adding a tears of laughter emoji.

She's got the beat: Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design as she bobbed on tempo to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty in her Jolly Jumper

Visiting: On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm. They were visiting him at his training camp

She also posted a copy of the video to her Instagram Stories and captioned it: 'She. Is. The. Cutest.'

Brittany and Patrick announced that she was pregnant with their first child, a girl, back in September of last year, and baby Sterling was born on February 20 of this year.

On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm.

Brittany wore a black-and-white T-shirt with red short and white trainers, while Sterling had on a black-and-white dress with red Converse sneakers and a matching bow and Patrick was suited up in his Chiefs uniform.

His fiancée and daughter were making a visit to his training camp with the Chiefs.

'Sterling's First Camp!' he wrote, while Brittany captioned a similar post with, 'It's Game Day, and we could not be more excited for Season Starting!! Sterling is ready.'

The latest: The NFL star, 25, and Brittany are set to get married in 2022. They've dated since high school and got engaged on September 1, 2020, the day he received his first Super Bowl championship ring; seen in 2019 in Atlanta

Patrick and Brittany got engaged on September 1, 2020, the same day that he received his Super Bowl championship ring.

The sweethearts, who have been together since they were in high school, have already picked out a venue and a date for the upcoming nuptials.

Although they're keeping those details secret for now, Brittany shared in March on Instagram that they're planning on tying the knot in 2022.

Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony.

Among the gifts was a silk robe embroidered with her name and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900.

Jackson Mahomes, Patrick's younger brother, revealed that he had been sent flask and a bottle of Fireball whisky, as well as an expensive silver Rolex Submariner wristwatch.

Pricy: Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony

Luxurious: Among Sydni's gifts were a silky robe with her name embroidered on it and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They first met on the winter series of Love Island in 2019.

And Lucie Donlan, 23, and Luke Mabbott, 25, looked more loved-up than ever at Boardmasters Festival in Newquay on Sunday.

The pair put on a cosy display at the annual surf competition on the Cornish coast, with Lucie flashing her abs in a striped crop-top and low-waisted white jeans combo.

Amorous display: Lucie Donlan, 23, and Luke Mabbott, 25, looked more loved-up than ever at Boardmasters Festival in Newquay on Sunday

The petite blonde showed off her own toned surf physique in the cheeky top, which featured pastel stripes and a side-tie bow.

The former Love Islander stepped out in a pair of flattering mom jeans and matching white high-top trainers.

Lucie showcased her natural beauty by sporting a pared-down makeup look and accessorised with a delicate seashell necklace.

Affectionate: Her beau, 25, looked very affectionate as he wrapped his arm around his former co-star as he donned a charcoal grey hoodie and black shorts

Her beau looked very affectionate as he wrapped his arm around his former co-star as he donned a charcoal grey hoodie and black shorts.

Luke cut a cool figure as he sported a backwards light brown suede baseball cap and white Boohoo Man sports socks.

The 'Justin Bieber lookalike' headed to the festival in a pair of cream and beige Nike trainers, and accessorised with a thin silver chain.

The couple have enjoyed a fun-filled couple of days at Boardmasters Festival, which combines live music and surfing and skateboarding competitions in and around Newquay.

The former Islanders were pictured in the crowd alongside the likes of UK fashion model Emily Airton and professional boxer Brad Pauls.

Fun-filled: The former Islanders were pictured in the crowd alongside the likes of UK fashion model Emily Airton and professional boxer Brad Pauls

Their festival-visit comes as Lucie was recently forced to contact the police after receiving daily death threats from trolls online she revealed last month.

It's been two years since Lucie appeared on the ITV2 dating show, but the star admitted online abuse is worse now than it was in 2019.

Speaking to The Sun, she said: ' It’s made me really anxious. When I came off the show, I was so busy that I never really had time to look at my phone. But this year it felt much harder to escape the comments.'

Lucie revealed the daily death threats were from the same accounts each day and the comments made her feel nervous enough to contact the police.

Of the ordeal she said: 'I’m lucky, I’ve got great people around me. As well as my family and boyfriend, Maura [Higgins] is great to talk to because she’s so strong.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012.

But these days, it seems Evangelista, 54, only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear.

On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section.

Burying the hatchet: Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012. But these days, it seems Evangelista only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear

Sweet: On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista, 54 reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section

In the cute snap, Augustin, who is clad in a grey t-shirt and a black Anaheim Angels baseball cap, is grinning broadly as Salma peeks out behind him with a wide smile.

'Here comes the weekend!! Viva el fin de semana!!! #tgif #weekendvibes,' she wrote in the caption of the photo, which was taken on a boat.

The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Hayek gave birth to their daughter, Valentina Paloma in September 2007.

Exes: Linda and Pinault dated briefly in 2005 and 2006. Pictured in 2005

Falling in love: The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Seen in 2020

Friendly: The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde

The Mexican actress and the Kering CEO tied the knot in a lavish ceremony on Valentine's Day in 2008. The pair, who reportedly met at a party in Venice later renewed their vows in the romantic Italian city.

Francois-Henri shares a son, Francois, 23, and a daughter Matilde, 20, with his ex-wife Dorothée Lepère. The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde.

In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father.

Lovechild: In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father. Seen in 2005

Evangelista and Henri-Francois had dated for four months in 2005 and early 2006, a few months before he met Salma. In August 2011, Linda officially filed for child support, initially asking for $46,000 a month.

The staggering sum even shocked the judge, who said it would be 'the largest support order in the history of the Family Court.' In May 2012, a heavily publicized court battle ensued in which both parties revealed sordid details about their relationship.

Pinault said that he broke up with Evangelista upon learning she was pregnant and asserted that they had only spent seven days together during their short-lived romance. Linda's lawyer claimed that the billionaire asked her to terminate the pregnancy.

A few days into the trial, the two reached an out-of-court settlement for an undisclosed amount. At the time, they said in a statement, 'We are happy that we were able to reach an agreement for the benefit and well-being of our son, Augie.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Both Barcelona president Joan Laporta and former club captain Lionel Messi have now said their piece but there are still plenty of unanswered questions surrounding the seismic story of the summer.

The Argentine superstar was in tears at his emotional farewell press conference as he admitted he wanted to stay at the Nou Camp, with the forward now searching for the next chapter of his spectacular career.

PSG are pulling out all the stops to bring him to Paris, but Barcelona have thrown a spanner into the works by lodging a legal challenge to stop him heading to Paris as the fallout of his explosive exit continues.

Sportsmail looks at the biggest issues around Messi's departure after ending his 21-year spell with the Catalan giants.

Lionel Messi will shut the curtain on his 21-year Barcelona stay after failing to agree a new deal

There are still plenty of unanswered questions about the saga as he weighs up his next club

Can Barcelona derail Messi's move to PSG?

Good luck to French lawyer Juan Branco who wants to bring the case to the European Commission on behalf of a group of Barcelona supporters.

But the PSG juggernaut is unlikely to be off-roaded by claims that Barcelona’s Financial Fair Play numbers were better than PSG in the 2019-20 season.

Difficult to see it having the legal standing to get past the first hurdle.

Barcelona's case to stop PSG signing Messi is unlikely to make it past the first hurdle

But isn’t FFP a real issue for the French club?

They have made three different offers to Kylian Mbappe in a bid to get him to commit to the club beyond the end of this season.

The last of those would have put him on 36m euros net a season. So far he has rejected them all because he wants to join Real Madrid. PSG could now redirect that money to paying Messi and allow Mbappe to skip off into the sunset, now, for a fee, or more likely for nothing at the end of the season.

If they were to sign Messi AND then sign Mbappe on a new deal then perhaps the outrage across European football would be such that Uefa would have to do something but to date PSG have not really been slowed down by FFP.

PSG could sidestep FFP concerns by selling Kylian Mbappe (L), who wants to join Real Madrid

After hearing Laporta and Messi, can we now be clear about why the player is leaving?

We can be clear about why he’s leaving but what we can’t be clear about is why everyone thought he was staying until last Thursday. Messi’s dad Jorge flew into Barcelona thinking he was signing his son’s contract to stay at the club.

Messi sent a message to Sergio Aguero saying he would see him Friday for their first training session together. The league understood that he was staying. What’s not clear is exactly what happened to change everything.

Messi and father Jorge flew into Barcelona last week with the intention of signing a new deal

But we know it’s got something to do with La Liga announcing on Wednesday that there was a new deal in place with Investment Fund CVC that would bring a 2.7 billion windfall to Spanish football?

Exactly. Barcelona at first appear to have accepted this deal. And in return La Liga were set to register Messi on a five-year contract. That’s the pact that fell apart.

Barcelona changed their tune with president Joan Laporta saying that the CVC deal was unacceptable because in exchange for the windfall (which would have seen Barcelona get around £237m (€280m), 40m of which they would have been able to spend on players’ wages) the investment fund would be entitled to 10 percent of of La Liga TV revenue over the next 40 years.

And it seems La Liga also changed tack saying that Messi’s five-year contract was also not acceptable (because it was understood he would only be staying for two and making it a five year deal was a mechanism for getting around the salary cap rules and if La Liga let Barca do it then everyone would be at it).

LaLiga and Barcelona changed tack on Messi's lucrative deal after hitting financial obstacles

Messi has appeared cold with Laporta, who continually insisted that Messi would stay

But we don’t know why Barcelona changed their mind?

One possibility is that Real Madrid had rejected the CVC agreement and Barcelona were not prepared to agree to Messi’s new contract only for the CVC money not to come through because of a Madrid veto.

Another theory is that there were other demands on them – aside from giving up this 10 per cent of tv revenue – that were unacceptable.

Okay that’s enough numbers, let’s talk about feelings. How devastated is Messi? There were more tears than expected yesterday.

After two decades at the club it was always going to be traumatic walking away. But it was fascinating to watch in the press conference how he cheered up the more questions turned to the future.

At one point he said ‘as soon as a I get back to doing what I love doing’ and that’s the key more than anything else he loves football. He has only won three Champions Leagues at Barca (he doesn’t count Paris because he was in the stands) he clearly wants to change that and he’s probably gone to the right place to do it.

It was always going to be traumatic for Messi to leave but ultimately his biggest love is football

Is he upset with the Barcelona president?

It was interesting that he called him ‘Laporta’ yesterday and didn’t seem to show any affection towards him. Ultimately though he feels that the Barcelona president inherited a financial disaster and his only real crime was to paint a far more optimistic picture than was real.

Why did Laporta continually say he believed Messi would stay?

At first it was because he hadn’t seen the books. Then once he’d seen the true state of Barcelona's finances he became aware that La Liga had a something that would amount to a rescue package that would help him keep Messi. In the end the club felt it could not sign up to that package.

Will he resign?

No. The challenge now is to build the club post-Messi. Pedri needs to become the new poster-boy (once he’s had a rest) the club needs to continue cutting costs and finding new revenue streams.

Messi didn't show affection towards Laporta (L) but admits he inherited a financial disaster

The club will now have to rebuild and want midfielder Pedri to become the next poster boy

But it won’t be easy?

They couldn’t keep Messi because they had no money, but at the same time the best way to bring in new money was by keeping Messi. The club is worth an estimated 30 per cent less to sponsors without its talisman.

One last thing: Was it ever feasible for Messi to play for free?

Maybe financially he could have done it. It would have been a year. The money he earns from sponsorship would have still poured in, perhaps even increased because of the gesture. But the club never asked for such a gesture and he never suggested it either.

As he understood it, cutting his salary by 50 per cent had been enough to make things work. 'They club never asked for anymore,' he said yesterday. Would he have given more if they had?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United are reportedly set to unleash new signing Jadon Sancho from the start against Leeds.

The Red Devils host historic rivals Leeds at Old Trafford in the sides' first game of the Premier League season on Saturday August 14.

According to the Sun, Sancho is tipped to start for United despite only starting to train with the club at Carrington earlier this week.

Jadon Sancho is reportedly set to start for Manchester United against Leeds on Saturday

The new £73m signing from Borussia Dortmund only started training with the club on Monday

The 21-year-old signed from Borussia Dortmund in July in a £73million deal on a five-year contract, a year after United pulled out of a move when the German side demanded £110m for him.

England star Sancho impressed at this summer's European Championship competition but saw his spot-kick saved by Gianluigi Donnarumma in the final as Gareth Southgate's side lost against Italy on penalties.

After the tournament, Sancho and his international team-mates were given an extended break - during which he visited the Turks and Caicos Islands with Red Devils team-mate Marcus Rashford - but returned to training on Monday.

But the 21-year-old is understood to have kept himself in top shape and is ready to play

Despite not spending much time there, Sancho is understood to be physically and mentally prepared to get stuck into the action straight away, with Solskjaer happy to play him from the start against Leeds rather than bring him off the bench.

Rashford is currently out injured after undergoing shoulder surgery, and the Norwegian is set to play Sancho and Mason Greenwood flanking No 10 Bruno Fernandes, behind central striker Anthony Martial.

Sancho's team-mates Paul Pogba and Edinson Cavani are unlikely to be involved from the start after their exploits for France and Uruguay respectively.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dimitar Berbatov is excited about his old club Manchester United's chances this season, insisting Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side can lift the title in 2021-22.

United haven't lifted the Premier League since Sir Alex Ferguson's final game back in 2013, but finally look to have a very competitive squad for the new campaign.

The signings of Raphael Varane at centre-back and Jadon Sancho out wide, for a combined £115m, should fix two long-standing weak areas in the United XI and get them gunning for glory again.

Dimitar Berbatov thinks Manchester United can go one step better and win the title this season

Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane's arrivals provide a huge boost to United's title chances

Berbatov, who fired 56 goals for the Red Devils between 2009 and 2013 in his nonchalant style, has been delighted with their summer business.

'Manchester United are in a strong position to challenge for the title, especially after the signings they've made this summer,' the former striker told Betfair.

'I am very happy that they are bringing in Raphael Varane from Real Madrid. He is a World Cup and Champions League winner, he has a winning mentality and he has played with the best over the years.

'So, he is a great signing and I am looking forward to seeing how he is going to settle into the team and compliment Harry Maguire.

Berbatov has been pleased with United's transfer dealings and thinks they're 'in a good place'

Last season ended with two second places but United want to step back into the big time now

'Jadon Sancho is already good friends with the England players in United's squad, which is a great thing to have when you go into a new team. Hopefully, this is going to help him settle quickly.

'We already know about his quality, but there's still plenty of room for him to grow and hopefully at United, one of the biggest clubs in the world, he can fulfil his potential. I'm sure he is also going to push the other forwards to perform better too.'

United finished second last season and narrowly missed-out on Europa League glory in the final through a mammoth penalty shoot-out, and look poised to be even stronger this term.

Their squad has been turned into one of the Premier League's strongest through Varane and Sancho's arrivals, and Berbatov sees them as near-perfect.

United begin the season among the favourites, though Chelsea and Man City have bought big

'The United team is in a good place,' he continued.

'They have spent quite a lot of money already and I can't see them spending anymore.

'They could possibly look to strengthen in the right back position. Aaron Wan-Bissaka is definitely first choice but I would like to see him have a solid back up who will challenge and push him.

'Other than that, I think they are pretty complete as a team.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Juventus women have been forced to apologise after posting a picture of player who appeared to mock asian people by wearing a training cone on her head while squinting her eyes.

The post on the club's Twitter account - which has now been deleted but was left up for 20 minutes - provoked fury on social media after the female player in question appeared to use the training ground apparatus to imply a traditional rice hat.

In their initial post, the club had used an emoji of a squinting face followed by two hands pointing at it to mimic the same pose as the player in the photo.

Juventus have come under fire for an offensive picture that appeared to mock asian people

The club won Serie A last season and was one of the first to set up a women's side in Italy

In a statement on Twitter, Juventus women said they were 'always against racism and discrimination'.

'We sincerely apologise that our tweet, which was not meant to cause controversy or have any racial undertones, may have offended anyone,' the statement read. 'Juventus has always been against racism and discrimination. #DifferencesMakeTheDifference.'

Juventus won the women's Italian league last season and were one of the first teams to set up a women's side in Italy.

Fans have been taken aback by the post, with some describing it as 'crude racism' and 'sheer stupidity'.

One wrote: 'I'm not even mad at that racist tweet by the Juventus women. Just blown away by the sheer amount of stupidity at the thought of posting it. I mean, who thought THAT was a good idea? Am I wrong for being desensitized about racism towards Asians?'

Another said: 'Don't know who is on the social media team for Juventus women, but that is very, very silly. That tweet had to go through so many people but was still sent.'

Juventus said they were 'always against racism' as they took down their post after 20 minutes

And one user took issue with Juventus women's apology, pointing out that the club had failed to explain why the image was uploaded.

'This is the 'apology' from Juventus women, no explanation whatsoever as to why the picture was taken or posted in the first place.'

The women's outfit was founded in 2017 and has gone on to win the league title four times, as well as the Coppa Italia in 2019 and two Italian Super Cups.

The team are currently managed by former Arsenal women's boss Joe Montemurro.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish has returned to Aston Villa training amid Premier League champions Manchester City ramping up their efforts to sign him in a £100million deal.

Grealish's break after England's run to the final of Euro 2020 finished on Sunday night and he was back at Villa's Bodymoor Heath training complex on Monday morning to start rebuilding his fitness for the new season. He can be briefly spotted in a short video Villa uploaded to their social media accounts.

City are interested in signing both Grealish and his England team-mate Harry Kane, who in contrast was a no-show at Tottenham's training ground on Monday morning.

Jack Grealish (right) was back at Aston Villa training on Monday despite Manchester City links

Pep Guardiola has targeted Grealish to reinforce his attacking midfield options and City are prepared to meet Villa's £100m asking price for the 25-year-old.

Sportsmail reported last week that City were in discussions over how to structure the £100m bid, which would be a record fee for English football.

Grealish is also set to earn over £200,000-a-week should he complete the switch.

Villa, meanwhile, already appear to be making moves to cover for Grealish's seemingly impending departure.

Earlier in the transfer window, they completed a £40m club record move for Emi Buendia from Norwich.

They are also closing in on the £30m signing of Leon Bailey from Bayer Leverkusen, while they also hold interest in the Southampton midfielder James Ward-Prowse.

Grealish and England team-mate Harry Kane are both transfer targets for Manchester City

Kane was a no-show at Tottenham training on Monday as he tried to force through his exit

But for Kane and his potential City switch, the move appears to be at an impasse with the Spurs captain believing he has a gentleman's agreement to depart the London club this summer.

Tottenham are said to want an offer of at least £150m before they even consider parting ways with their star man, who has a contract that runs until 2024.

Reports over the weekend in The Mirror suggested that, should City complete their move for Grealish they would then end interest in signing Kane.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ben White made an immediate impact for new club Arsenal by making a goal saving block against London rivals Chelsea, in a pre-season friendly at the Emirates.

White's move from Brighton to the Gunners for £50million was confirmed last week, after the 23-year-old enjoyed a standout season with the Seagulls which earned him a place in England's Euro 2020 squad.

Arsenal's primary issue last season was in attack; only Everton scored fewer goals of team that finished in the top half. However there is little doubt their new signing will help them improve them defensively.

Arsenal goalkeeper Bernd Leno rushed out leaving Hakim Ziyech with the whole goal to aim at

New Arsenal defender Ben White threw himself at Ziyech's shot and blocked a certain goal

White came on as a substitute during the 2-1 defeat to Thomas Tuchel's side and superbly blocked a goal bound shot from Hakim Ziyech.

Arsenal goalkeeper Bernd Leno rushed out to meet the Blues forward after he'd been put through on goal by Christian Pulisic, but Ziyech easily skipped past him, leaving the Moroccan with a great opportunity to score.

Callum Chambers initially slowed him down which gave White the opportunity to make the block, however the new Gunners centre-back showed good a turn of pace to throw himself at Ziyech's shot.

The only white that matters in North london https://t.co/OApjs87I2v — Cephalosporins (@IVceftriaxone) August 1, 2021

White, signed from Brighton, impressed for the Gunners despite the 2-1 loss to rivals Chelsea

Chelsea won the game thanks to goals from Kai Havertz and Tammy Abraham either side of Granit Xhaka's header.

The Gunners will play north London rivals Tottenham in their final pre-season friendly on August 8.

They kick-off their Premier League campaign the following Friday against newly promoted Brentford.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi is still owed millions in wages by Barcelona after he left the cash-strapped club to complete a blockbuster move to Paris Saint-Germain.

Messi deferred part of his salary, along with the rest of the Barcelona squad, last season and the players are owed a combined £104million.

Messi trained with PSG for the first time on Thursday and could even be included in the squad for Saturday's visit of Strasbourg.

Barcelona must pay Lionel Messi millions from his deferred salary last season, it has emerged

The 34-year-old bid an emotional farewell to the club who are financially unable to sign him

The 34-year-old is said to have asked to be involved this weekend, despite admitting it would take several weeks to regain full fitness.

Messi is staying with his family in a hotel just off the Champs-Elysees after arriving on a free transfer this week. However, the Argentine has received an unexpected offer from his old La Liga foe Sergio Ramos, who joined PSG from Real Madrid this summer. Ramos has said Messi, his wife and three children can move into his new home in the short term if they would prefer — which would be as big a shock as Messi leaving Barcelona in the first place.

Meanwhile, Barcelona last night rejected a possible £238m windfall from La Liga because they do not like the conditions of the deal.

However, Barca still owe their squad millions after they accepted deferred salaries last year

Messi this week completed a switch to French giants Paris Saint-Germain on a free transfer

La Liga’s deal with the US investment fund CVC was worth £2.3billion with the money distributed between the clubs in Spain’s top two divisions.

Barcelona were due £238m — £36m of which they would have to spend on debt restructuring, £166m on the redevelopment of the Nou Camp and £36m on players.

But the deal means CVC are entitled to 10 per cent of TV money from Spanish football for the next 50 years and in a La Liga assembly yesterday Barcelona rejected the deal along with Real Madrid and Athletic Bilbao.

La Liga say the deal will still go ahead with the sum cut to £1.8bn and now shared between all teams bar those who have rejected it.

Real Madrid have vowed to fight the agreement with CVC in the courts.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@KL Rahul’s last three Tests in England have brought him 423 runs at an average of 105. He made 37 and 149 at The Oval in 2018, followed by 84 and 26 last week in Nottingham, and now 127 not out.

His opening partnership of 126 with Rohit Sharma was India’s highest in this country since 2007, when Wasim Jaffer and Dinesh Karthik, who is commentating on this series for Sky, began with 147 at Trent Bridge.

Only one other visiting pair of opening batsmen have added more in a Test in England after being put in: Australia’s Michael Slater and Mark Taylor put on 128 at Old Trafford in 1993.

Rohit Sharma and KL Rahul celebrate their 100 partnership on a successful day for India

India's Virat Kohli has now lost all eight of his Test tosses in England with just one game win

PUJARA’S UNDER PRESSURE

Cheteshwar Pujara’s dismissal for nine, caught low down at third slip by Jonny Bairstow off Jimmy Anderson, took his tally from his last 10 Test innings to 108 runs at 12. Despite his excellent overall record, he will be under pressure to make a score if India bat again in this game.

Virat Kohli has now lost all eight of his Test tosses in England, including the recent World Test Championship final against New Zealand. The previous seven games have produced five defeats, a draw and a win – at Trent Bridge in 2018.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jamie Carragher ripped into Arsenal for their defending for Brentford's second goal in a 2-0 opening day defeat to the Premier League new boys.

Sergi Canos gave Brentford the lead after 22 minutes before Christian Norgaard sealed the victory by beating the Gunners defenders to head home after 73 minutes.

Carragher who was on commentary for Sky Sports had plenty to say about Arsenal's defending for the second goal, describing the situation as 'men against boys'.

Brentford started their Premier League life with a 2-0 victory over Arsenal on the opening day

Jamie Carragher ripped into Arsenal on commentary after Christian Norgaard made it 2-0

He said on commentary after the goal: ' He (Thomas Frank) knows what he's doing. If you're playing Arsenal, get it in the box.

'How do you describe Arsenal's defending here? It's just Arsenal. Weak, bullied, men against boys again. New season same old story.

'They got done with the first one, then it bounced, two Brentford players, get out of the way, 2-0.

'It just comes in and Norgaard at the far post... the goalkeeper can't do anything, neither can Mari or Ben White, Calum Chambers is nowhere to be seen and it's 2-0.'

The Sky Sports pundit didn't stop there as he compared Arsenal to their north London rivals Tottenham.

He added: 'Spurs have it that people say it's 'Spursy'. I think it's about time Arsenal have something like that as well. Because this is just an Arsenal performance. Everyone knows what that means; an Arsenal performance.

Carragher described Norgaard's goal as though it was like watching 'men against boys'

Carragher added that Arsenal should have a phrase similar to that of Tottenham's 'Spursy'

'When we saw this fixture, we all thought the same thing: 'Arsenal are going to have a problem here' because of the energy and pace of this team, the atmosphere here.

'This happens far too often. Arteta will have seen enough.'

It was a disappointing start to the season for Arsenal as they lacked the ruthlessness up front to get themselves back into the game.

The start to the season doesn't get any easier with their next games coming against Chelsea at the Emirates before an away trip to play reigning champions Manchester City.

Mikel Arteta's team next play Chelsea at home before an away trip to Manchester City

Arsenal and Arteta have plenty to ponder before those two games. The Spaniard said: 'We are really disappointed the way we started the season. Were they soft goals? Yes.

'I don't want to use excuses. We had a team out there good enough to achieve a different result.

'We know we have to improve. We have big games coming up and we need a different performance to get a better result.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jadon Sancho has vowed to bring flair and a winning mentality to Manchester United - and believes he has already forged a connection with team-mate Bruno Fernandes after sealing his long-awaited move to Old Trafford.

The England winger cost United £73million after finally snaring him from Dortmund following negotiations that were dragged out over the course of a year, and now the player says he is 'buzzing' to pull on the shirt and add some firepower to the team.

The 21-year-old has only just started training with his new side after feauring for England at Euro 2020 on their route to the final, but has declared himself ready to go for the new campaign despite his lack of preparation.

Jadon Sancho has promised to bring flair and a winning mentality to Man United in an interview with club legend Rio Ferdinand

He is already eyeing up a partnership with Bruno Fernandes after linking up well in training

He spoke with United legend Rio Ferdinand ahead of the club's season opener against Leeds United at Old Trafford on Saturday in the next instalment of 'Rio Meets' for BT Sport, telling him he was relieved to finally get his move.

'It feels nice, definitely [to be a United player], I've been waiting a long time for this move I'm just glad it's over now and I can get ready to start the season against Leeds. I'm buzzing.'

When asked by Ferdinand what United fans can expect of him, he replied: 'Goals, assists, a bit of flair and definitely eager to win - that's one of my things I've always done. Trying to help the team, winning is my mentality. Hopefully I can win a few games for Man United if it's a close game. I'm looking forward to it.'

Ferdinand referenced players like Cristiano Ronaldo, who came to the club and made a big impact - and Sancho feels his hunger and desire to win will put United in good stead, and already sees a similar mentality from new team-mate Fernandes, who he has linked up well with in training.

Sancho has only recently started training with the club but has declared himself fit to play

'I can see that in a few of the players, with Bruno today we were on the same team and we linked up very well,' he continued.

'Me and him love winning so I'm glad me and Bruno have the same mindset because it's needed in a big team like this if you wanna win things you have to learn how to win in training and in matches so it's important.

'The whole team is a great squad. Speaking to Luke [Shaw] and Marcus [Rashford], they were telling me its a great bunch of lads. I watched a few games last season and the attack is very good. To be a part of that now is kind of crazy because I see what Bruno was doing, what Marcus was doing, Greenwood, Cavani... so to add more goals and assists is going to be exciting.'

Sancho's switch to United was one of the biggest transfer deals of the summer - that was until Lionel Messi announced his shock departure from Barcelona and signed for PSG on a free transfer.

Sancho is United's marquee signing of the summer and the player feels he is fit to play

Lionel Messi's move to PSG has served as motivation for Sancho to reach the top of his game

The Ligue 1 side now boast a star-studded line-up featuring the likes of Messi, Kylian Mbappe, Neymar and Sergio Ramos, but Sancho says the big move has only served as more motivation to improve as a player.

He believes he could one day reach the same level as Messi and is confident about the possibility of taking on PSG's top stars in the future.

'I use [Messi's move] for motivation,' he continued. 'PSG is a great side, they have great players like Mbappe and Messi.

'As a young player I'm thinking that means I've got to step up my game and show the world - I'm not at that level yet, but I can get to that level. It's good competition, every young player should thrive in big games like that - if we ever did face them I'd be buzzing, I'd be ready to go.

The 21-year-old said he was keen to prove his doubters wrong to become a success in Germany

Sancho has made his England homecoming after four years developing into one of the most exciting players during his time in Germany - having made the decision to leave Manchester City as a teenager in 2017.

He spoke to Ferdinand about the moment he opted to leave and how he was keen to prove his doubters wrong - while also declaring himself fit to face Leeds on Saturday.

'I feel ready today in training,' he said. 'I feel sharp and hopefully I can get introduced in the game on Saturday.'

He added: 'I remember making that decision [to leave Man City for Germany]. I was very scared, I left home from Watford to go to Manchester, then went abroad again. It was tough leaving my family behind knowing they can't come and see me.

Sancho featured for England at Euro 2020 but suffered agony after missing in shootout during the final against Italy as the Three Lions were beaten at Wembley

'It was playing on my mind in the first year then I was like, "I need to take my moment and keep my head down". A lot of people doubted the move because it was rare for a young player to go abroad.

'My main thing was to prove the doubters wrong and I've done that. I've done well ever since and I've just had to keep improving my game and keep elevating.'

Sancho will hope his career takes another upturn at Old Trafford after being included in the England squad for the Euros, although failing to become first choice under boss Gareth Southgate at the competition.

He started one game on England's route to the final, impressing during the 4-0 quarter-final win over Ukraine, but suffered heartbreak in the Wembley showpiece against Italy as he missed in the penalty shootout.

Should he keep up his performance levels from the Bundesliga then United could be a real force in the Premier League this season - last season he registered eight goals and 11 assists in the German top flight, following up from the previous campaign where he notched 17 goals and 16 assists.

BT Sport’s Premier League coverage kicks off with Manchester United v Leeds United live on BT Sport 1 from 11.30am on Saturday 14th August. For more info, visit btsport.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liverpool face losing Roberto Firmino, Fabinho and Alisson for key matches as another huge club-versus-country row beckons over the Premier League's South American stars.

It comes after FIFA revealed that Premier League clubs will no longer be able to hold on to their players even if they face quarantine on their return.

South American nations, including Brazil and Argentina, face a pair of triple-headers in the upcoming September and October international breaks, which has been extended to squeeze in extra games after previous matches were postponed due to a similar row in March when Jurgen Klopp said he would refuse to release his players.

Liverpool face losing Roberto Firmino (left) and Fabinho for key matches following the latest announcements from FIFA regarding clubs being unable to withhold their players

Brazil announced their squad for the September internationals, which included nine Premier League players, including the Liverpool trio of Roberto Firmino, Alisson and Fabinho as well as Manchester United midfielder Fred, Leeds winger Raphinha, Chelsea defender Thiago Silva, Man City duo Ederson and Gabriel Jesus and Everton striker Richarlison.

Even more Premier League players and clubs are set to be affected as the likes of Uruguay, Argentina and Colombia prepare to name their squads.

There were already concerns players would miss one round of fixtures due to their late return from the international break.

Brazil play Chile, Argentina and Peru in September with the final game kicking off at 1.30am UK time on Friday, September 11 – less than 48 hours before the start of the weekend's Premier League fixtures.

The ruling would also see Leeds left without their talisman Raphinha because of Brazil duty

However, they are likely to miss further games as they face a 10-day hotel quarantine for returning from a red-list country. Brazil and Argentina, among other South American nations, are on the red list.

In previous international breaks during the pandemic, FIFA introduced a temporary law that allowed clubs to refuse to release their players if they faced at least a five-day quarantine. That allowed Klopp to insist he would keep hold of his star trio. That will no longer apply.

'The temporary amendment was in place until April 2021 and is no longer in effect nor is it intended to be applied for September,' a FIFA spokesman told The Mail on Sunday.

'Since the outset of the pandemic, FIFA has continued to work in close cooperation with the confederations, member associations and respective authorities, monitoring the different restrictions and exemptions around the world.

Last season Jurgen Klopp spoke out against the travel and said his players would not leave

'The regulations have reflected this process, as best as is possible at the global level.

'FIFA is confident that the situation will continue as it was the case in June for qualifiers and final continental tournaments and that players will be able to travel to play with their national teams and return to play with their clubs.'

While the world's governing body may be confident, it is unclear how the Premier League players would be able to return without quarantine.

Sources at the Department of Culture, Media & Sport suggest that, as things stand, players will not be granted exemptions, just like those returning from the Lions tour have been forced to quarantine.

FIFA remain in talks with federations but if the restrictions remain in the October international break then those players also risk missing a round of fixtures that includes Liverpool's trip to Old Trafford, with the quarantine period likely to end just a day or so before the matches get under way.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Diego Costa has completed his free move to Brazilian side Atletico Mineiro, with the former Chelsea striker finally landing a new club nine months on from his abrupt Atletico Madrid exit.

Costa, 32, has been a free agent since Atletico Madrid terminated his contract six months before its expiration date last December, with the Spaniards citing 'personal reasons' for the move.

Following the termination of his contract, Costa was allowed to join any side as a free agent and was linked with several clubs, including Arsenal and Juventus.

Diego Costa has completed his free switch to Atletico Mineiro after his Atletico Madrid exit

Benfica tabled an offer of a two-year deal worth £5m earlier this year but an agreement was never reached.

Now, the Spanish striker has completed his switch to Belo Horizonte, with Goal reporting that he has signed a one-year deal worth £40,000-per-week to play for the Brazilian top flight leaders.

'From the world to Belo Horizonte: Diego Costa is now from Clube Atlético Mineiro,' the club posted to their 2.2million followers on Sunday.

The 32-year-old's contract in Spain was terminated for 'personal reasons' nine months ago

Arsenal coach Mikel Arteta and former Juventus boss Andrea Pirlo were interested in a move

Costa was born and raised in Brazil. He played two friendlies for the country in March 2013 but declared he wanted to play international football for Spain later that year, having been granted Spanish nationality.

During his three-year stint at Stamford Bridge he won two Premier League titles and scored 59 goals in 120 games.

He returned to Atletico Madrid in 2017 after falling out with former Blues boss Antonio Conte, who told him via text that he was no longer part of his plans.

However, he has joined Brazilian top flight leaders Atletico Mineiro on a one-year deal

Conte wrote: 'Hi Diego, I hope you are well. Thanks for the season we spent together. Good luck for the next year but you are not in my plan.'

Costa refused to return to training, accusing the club of treating him like a 'criminal' and claimed he was waiting in Brazil to be set free.

Costa will be available to Atletico Mineiro as soon as he is registered with the CBF and the top-flight Brazilian side will be hoping his sabbatical has put him in firing form. The lead the top flight by five points.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the corner of the South Stand, just before kick-off, the visiting fans broke into song. They had been waiting for this moment – but so, too, had the man who was subject of the chorus.

After 301 days, recovering from a ruptured cruciate ligament, Virgil van Dijk was back in the Premier League and they had come from Liverpool to – as the chorus goes – watch him defend and pass the ball, calm as you like.

That is what he did. There was nothing flash, nothing fancy but the sight of the Netherlands international in the heart of Liverpool’s team, barking out instructions and keeping things ticking over smoothly, was possibly the highlight of Jurgen Klopp’s day.

Virgil van Dijk played all 90 minutes as he returned to Premier League action on Saturday

Liverpool got off to a perfect start with a comfortable 3-0 victory away against Norwich

Van Dijk has been through the mill mentally since he was felled in last season’s Merseyside Derby by a flying Jordan Pickford. He has worked relentlessly, pushing himself to the limit, in order to get back and now it was a time for reflection.

‘Mentally it was tough,’ said Van Dijk, who completed the 90 minutes. ‘You are going from one day of being fully fit to the next day when you can’t walk, you are full of medication, full of pain – you can’t sleep. Everyone has their opinion and you read those things because you have nothing to do.

‘Last season, we were struggling with more injuries in key positions where we couldn’t play our game, really, the way we want to play our game: high-pressure, full of energy. When we had midfielders playing as centre-backs, it’s not easy at all.

Van Dijk believes Liverpool can challenge for the title if they can stay healthy this time around

‘In the end, the guys did a fantastic job to come third. Hopefully this season we can build on that and stay fit, hopefully. We don’t take that for granted. It’s amazing, to be honest. It was a tough game, for many reasons. Winning 3-0 sounds comfortable but, at times, we made it very difficult.’

It was tough but it was significantly less fraught than it might have been. Van Dijk – and Joel Matip – showed just much Liverpool missed having top class central defenders available, a point also emphasised by the sight of Joe Gomez, who has been missing last November, on the bench.

‘We’ll see what the season brings,’ said Van Dijk. ‘You have to enjoy it and I certainly will, having been out for so long. Being up against world-class strikers again, world-class teams… when you can’t predict who is going to be the winner at the end of the season, it’s amazing.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel challenged Timo Werner and Chelsea’s other goal-shy strikers to match Romelu Lukaku if they want to be part of his title chase.

The German coach aims to start his £98million signing in next weekend’s London derby at Arsenal. Lukaku missed his side’s emphatic opening-day victory as he is isolating following his move from Inter Milan.

And Tuchel has made it clear that Werner and Co are fighting for their places.

Romelu Lukaku has completed his transfer from Inter Milan to Chelsea for £98million

Thomas Tuchel is hopeful the move can spark some life into Chelsea's other struggling strikers

‘Why Lukaku? We had some trouble in scoring goals consistently with our attackers,’ he said.

‘I think Romelu gives us experience and personality. He is used to scoring, he is used to playing in big clubs and used to handling the pressure.’

Tuchel believes he can only improve on last season’s Champions League success by winning the Premier League.

Chelsea finished fourth last season, but were only the eighth highest scorers with 58 goals. Werner scored a mere six times after his £53m move from RB Leipzig.

The west Londoners got their season off to a perfect start with a 3-0 win over Crystal Palace

The Chelsea boss is expected to lead his club into a title challenge with a star-packed squad

The German led the attack in Saturday's win over Palace but again stumbled under the pressure of being the team’s main scorer. Wing-back Marcos Alonso, Christian Pulisic and defender Trevoh Chalobah were on target.

With Hakim Ziyech injured, Kai Havertz, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Tammy Abraham all had to make do with places on the bench.

Alonso is certainly playing his part as the highest goalscoring defender in the league, with 22 in his five years at Chelsea.

Tuchel hopes Lukaku’s arrival will help the forwards, saying: ‘He can take pressure off young players like Kai Havertz, Timo Werner, Christian Pulisic and that can be a huge boost for them. It is a good mix.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Champs Elysees, there is by chance a Covid-19 testing tent directly outside the Paris Saint-Germain club store.

On Saturday afternoon there was a queue of around sixty people waiting to enter one of them. At the other, a queue of barely six.

The arrival of Lionel Messi, it would seem, has proved as strong as any vaccine in relegating the worries of a global pandemic.

PSG nearly threw away a 3-0 lead but went on to take all three points against Strasbourg

Kylian Mbappe celebrates with Georginio Wijnaldum after scoring their second goal

Lionel Messi was in attendance for the game watching in the stands with teammate Neymar

Just five minutes walk from Paris’s busiest retail outlet is Le Royal Monceau Hotel, where Messi and his family are currently staying. Since the Argentine’s arrival in this city on Tuesday, supporters and TV crews have kept what has felt like a vigil at the palatial entrance of his £15k-a-night residence.

Messi and PSG has been the only story in town this week; his first steps on Parisian soil, his official unveiling, his first training session, all of it captured and relayed to a live TV audience.

As PSG boss Mauricio Pochettino observed, ‘It has left like Big Brother these past few days’.

On reflection, the furore in the centre of town was nothing compared to the frenzy that awaited at the Parc des Princes on Saturday night.

The main event, we knew in advance, would not be the football. That is why the narrow streets around the stadium were impassable more than two hours before kick-off. Imagine the polar opposite of social distancing and this was it.

Word had spread that Messi would not play - he is still short of match fitness - and would instead be presented ahead of the game.

Mauro Icardi, Mbappe and Julian Draxler gave PSG a 3-0 lead inside 30 minutes

Strasbourg were on their way to mount a comeback before they got a late red card

And so, with a roar that would prove far more intense than anything that greeted the subsequent goals, a full house of 48,000 welcomed Messi onto the pitch to a backdrop of fireworks, flags and flares.

There were four other summer signings already on stage - Sergio Ramos, Georginio Wijnaldum, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Achraf Hakimi - but the rock-star reception was reserved for Messi.

The 34-year-old is here, of course, because Barcelona cannot afford to keep him. Let us not pretend this is the fulfilment of a dream for the six-time Ballon d’Or winner.

Pablo Sarabia added a late fourth for the Parisians to seal a 4-2 win against Strasbourg

But while his reign in Spain has been curtailed against his wishes, to witness this instant worship, the coronation before he has even kicked a ball, is to realise that Messi should enjoy his new surrounds.

Put to one side the feeling that this move lacks romance - the club’s Qatari billions and a relatively uncompetitive league the motivating factors on that front - and there is a sense of excitement at seeing Messi here on the biggest nights.

It strips away some of the scepticism when you experience such a powerful interaction between crowd and player, and you could not escape a sense of wonderment among the locals at the sight of Messi on their turf.

They do, in fairness, know how to make an occasion of a football match in these parts, and this against lowly Strasbourg, who finished last season two points above the bottom three.

That gulf showed as PSG scored three times inside the opening 27 minutes. It was merciful for the visitors that Messi and Neymar were in the stands.

The other member of their three-star attacking constellation was on the pitch. Not that the home fans wanted Kylian Mbappe to be there - the whistles and boos that greeted his inclusion in the team and his first touch of the evening told you that much.

Sergio Ramos and Lionel Messi were introduced before the game on Saturday evening

The front page of L’Equipe on Saturday had asked the question ‘What now?’ for Mbappe, who has refused to sign a new contract amid talk he will quit the club when his deal expires next summer.

The answer was one goal and two assists and a man-of-the-match performance that served as a reminder of his extreme talent.

It would perhaps be wise were supporters to turn those jeers to cheers, for the pace and direct incision of the 22-year-old will be needed alongside the more meandering artistry of his elders.

Mauro Icardi, Julian Draxler and Pablo Sarabia were the other scorers for the home side, a trio of understudies who will revert to the shadows when the leading men are fit. That they cost a combined €120million tells of PSG’s riches.

So, too, did the fact that one of Strasbourg’s goals during a spirted second half was scored by a PSG cast-off, Kevin Gameiro. He is one month older than Messi and seeing out his playing days back at his first club.

There is no such sentiment attached to Messi’s move to Paris. But that does not mean it cannot be fun. This proved as much. Just wait until he actually plays.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@All fans will be barred from the Paralympics in Japan because of the coronavirus pandemic, just as they were from the recently-completed Tokyo Olympics, organisers said Monday.

There were a few exceptions made during the Olympics with some fans allowed in outlying areas away from Tokyo. This time, all fans will be barred except the possibility of some children attending a few unspecified events.

Organisers have also asked the public not to come out to view road events.

The decision was announced after a meeting with International Paralympic Committee president Andrew Parsons, organizing committee president Seiko Hashimoto, Tokyo Governor Yuriko Koike and Olympic Minister Tamayo Marukawa.

The Paralympics open on August 24 with about 4,400 athletes, a far smaller event than the Olympics with 11,000 athletes.

But the Paralympics come as new infections have accelerated in Tokyo, which may expose an athlete population that is more vulnerable to COVID-19.

The Tokyo 2020 Paralympics will be held without spectators, organisers have confirmed

Parsons, speaking at a news conference, said there was no room for complacency in the wake of the Olympics.

'In light of the current case numbers in Tokyo and wider Japan, everyone attending these games must be vigilant,' Parsons said.

New infections in Tokyo tripled during the 17 days of the Olympics, although medical experts said the surge was not directly linked the Tokyo Games. Rather, experts suggested an indirect effect as the public was distracted and lulled into a false sense of security that staging the Games offered.

With the situation growing worse, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga on Monday said a state of emergency in Tokyo and other areas will be extended until September 12. The state of emergency has been in force since July 12 and was to end later this month.

All fans will be barred from the Paralympics, just as they were from the Tokyo Olympics

The Paralympics come as new infections have accelerated in Tokyo and across the country

The Paralympics end on September 5.

'The surge in infections is reaching alarming record highs,' Suga said after meeting with other government ministers.

On Friday, Tokyo logged 5,773 cases, a new high. On Sunday, the Japanese capital reported 4,295 cases. The rise in infections has severely strained the medical system. Experts say the situation is getting out of control and some call it 'a disaster.'

Japan has attributed 15,400 deaths to COVID-19.

Dr. Haruo Ozaki, president of the Tokyo Medical Association, said in an interview with regional newspaper Tokyo Shimbun published Saturday that a significant number of people are still unvaccinated, and characterized the virus situation for the Paralympics as worse than it was during the Olympics.

No fans will be permitted to attend events due to Tokyo being in a state of emergency

Estimates suggest about 37 per cent of the Japanese population has been fully vaccinated.

Ozaki called having no fans 'a minimum necessity' and attributed the surge to the delta variant.

He called holding the Paralympics 'a political decision, but the judgment by the medial side is that it will be difficult.'

'The Olympics,' Ozaki added, 'is a festival and might have affected the people in ways to loosen up and served as an indirect cause of rising cases.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ilkay Gundogan's injury will be assessed by the club's doctors on Monday

Manchester City will assess the shoulder injury suffered by Ilkay Gundogan during their 1-0 defeat at Tottenham.

The 30-year-old midfielder left the pitch with strapping on his left arm following the loss in north London after a late collision.

City boss Pep Guardiola confirmed after the game that the Germany international would be checked by the club's doctors on Monday.

Ilkay Gundogan picked up a shoulder injury during Manchester City's 1-0 defeat to Tottenham

City boss Pep Guardiola confirmed Gundogan would be assessed by doctors on Monday

'It was something in his shoulder,' Guardiola said. 'We will see what happens tomorrow (Monday) with the doctor. It looks like something happened.'

City were sluggish in their Premier League opener at Tottenham and were undone by Son Heung-min's second-half goal, however it was a good time for Spurs to play the champions.

Kevin De Bruyne was only able to feature from the bench after sustaining an ankle injury during Euro 2020 and Kyle Walker, John Stones, Gabriel Jesus and Aymeric Laporte all had a limited amount of time on the training pitch after busy summer's playing for their countries.

Guardiola added: 'Kevin played a few minutes but Kevin didn't do one full session because of his ankle.

Son Heung-min scored the only goal of the game as Spurs beat City 1-0 on Sunday

'Kyle and John and Ayme came back really really well and Gabriel as well but the guys who have been here since the beginning for us deserve to play.

'In general they made a good pre-season, they made a good game in the second half but the reality is we concede few, not much but we lost the last games 1-0 and 1-0 so that's why we have to continue working and day-by-day, the players feel better.'

Raheem Sterling started the game and there were early signs of an promising partnership developing down City's left with Jack Grealish.

Japhet Tanganga kept Raheem Sterling and Jack Grealish (pictured) relatively quiet

The club's new £100million record signing started his first game, and the link-up between the two of them was encouraging in the early stages until Spurs defender Japhet Tanganga did an excellent job of nullifying the threat the posed.

However, it's clear there is more to come from the duo and Sterling is excited by the prospect of playing alongside Grealish at club level.

'I played with Jack a few times,' he said on the club's official website. 'It's a good partnership but it's still early days with me and him.

'We will learn each other's game more as the season goes on and hopefully build a better partnership for the rest of the campaign.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Graeme Souness has insisted Manchester City have to sign a 'proper centre forward' if they are to retain their Premier League title and claimed they 'got away' with not having one last season.

City were beaten 1-0 by Tottenham in the opening game of their title defence, with long-term transfer target Harry Kane absent from the Spurs squad as Son Heung-min netted the winner.

City want to sign the £150million striker and Kane is desperate to join Pep Guardiola's side. But Spurs chairman Daniel Levy has been adamant he will not allow the England captain to leave.

Graeme Souness has insisted Manchester City have to sign a 'proper centre forward'

Pep Guardiola (left) wants to sign Spurs striker Harry Kane (right), who was left out of the squad on Sunday

Jack Grealish made his debut following his £100m record transfer from Aston Villa but he was unable to inspire his new side to victory and Souness believes City will have to go into the transfer market again.

'I come back to it, City had 66 per cent of the ball, but I never felt like Spurs were hanging on,' Souness told Sky Sports.

'City need a goalscorer. It's not rocket science, they've not been linked with Harry Kane for no reason. They need a proper centre forward who will get them 20 goals a season.

City were beaten 1-0 by Tottenham in the first game of their Premier League title defence

'They got away with it last year. City are going to come up against this time and time again.

'City have won three leagues in the last four years. They've got a great squad, they've got great belief. But when you're relying on Gundogan, your midfield players, to get your goals you're on a wing and a prayer.'

Sportsmail's Micah Richards agreed that Guardiola's side were lacking a clinical edge in front of goal but believes Grealish will find his rhythm once Phil Foden and Kevin De Bruyne return.

He added: 'City were just missing that touch of class. They missed a potent killer in front of goal. I thought Ferran Torres did alright, but Spurs were excellent at times in nullifying the space.

'There were more half-chances than actual chances. Grealish wasn't at his best today, at times he had some really good link-up but you've got to give him time. City should be finishing the chances they get - if you don't win, just don't lose.

Son Heung-min scored the only goal of the game as Spurs won without their talisman

'[Gabriel] Jesus is a very good striker, but he's not at the level of Kane or [Sergio] Aguero. Torres was good today, on another day he could have had a couple of goals. If City buy a striker, it has to be Kane, [Erling] Haaland, that ilk.

'Grealish is finding his groove. When you have the £100m tag, it's going to stay with you forever. But once Foden and Kevin De Bruyne are back, he'll get into the groove.'

Kane was left out of Tottenham's squad after only returning to full senior training on Friday. It is understood that Kane was deemed as not yet ready to return to Premier League action.

Speaking of Kane's absence before the game, new boss Nuno Espirito Santo told Sky Sports: 'I think Harry needs to work. He worked today and he will keep on working until he can help the team.

Jack Grealish was unable to inspire his team to victory after his £100m move from Aston Villa

'Players who have had not to many sessions need more work. It's a different case for Bryan [Gil], he was at the Olympics, the same for [Cristian] Romero.

'It's important for them to feel the stadium, the hotel, the team meetings feel the hotel. It's all important.'

When further pressed on whether Kane would be on hand to watch the match from the stands, he replied: 'He worked in the morning, I don't know what he's going to do.'

It is understood that City retain a confidence that a deal can yet still be achieved, and are poised to table an official £120m bid in the coming days.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A very tiny percentage of people who receive the Johnson & Johnson vaccine develop a rare autoimmune disorder as a side effect, a new report finds.

On Tuesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said it has identified just 98 cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome out of about 12.6 million people.

That's a rate of under 0.001 percent, or about eight cases for every million people vaccinated with the one-dose vaccine.

Out of those 98 cases, 95 people were hospitalized, ten were admitted to an intensive care unit, and only one died.

The CDC says the benefits of vaccination against COVID-19 far outweigh the risks of this Guillain-Barré, which can cause nerve damage and temporary paralysis.

The CDC has identified 98 cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome, a rare autoimmune condition, tied to vaccination with the J&J vaccine. Pictured: A man gets vaccinated with J&J at an August 2021 clinic in Tulsa, Oklahoma

As of August 9, more than 195 million Americans have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.

With such large numbers of people vaccinated, the CDC's vaccine safety tracking system is able to identify very rare vaccine side effects - those that occur so infrequently, they were not identified during clinical trials.

These side effects include heart inflammation linked to the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines and Guillain-Barré syndrome, linked to the J&J vaccine.

Guillain-Barré syndrome is a rare autoimmune disorder. Complications in a patient's immune system lead to nerve damage and muscle weakness - causing the patient to become temporarily paralized.

The syndrome can cause permanent paralysis and death in rare cases.

As a result of these cases, the FDA added a warning label about Guillain-Barré syndrome to the J&J vaccine. Pictured: A health worker holds up a vial of J&J vaccine, July 2021

The CDC has identified 98 cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome linked to J&J vaccination as of June 2021, according to a report released on Tuesday.

Over 12.6 million Americans had been vaccinated with the J&J vaccine by that time - meaning the syndrome occurred at a rate under 0.001 percent.

For every million people vaccinated with the J&J vaccine, just eight have experienced Guillain-Barré syndrome.

In total, the CDC says that 100 cases of this syndrome were reported to the agency through its Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System.

However, two of those cases did not occur within 42 days of vaccination or otherwise have enough patient information available for the CDC to confirm that they were linked to vaccination.

The median age for these Guillain-Barré syndrome patients was 57, with a range of 24 to 76.

Men - especially older men - are more likely to experience this syndrome than women. Out of the 98 cases identified by the CDC, 61 were among men.

For men between the ages of 50 and 64, the rate of Guillain-Barré syndrome after J&J vaccination is 16 cases for every million people vaccinated - double the rate for the overall population.

Out of the 98 Guillain-Barré syndrome cases identified, 95 people were hospitalized as a result of this side effect.

Only ten patients were admitted to an intensive care unit and one has died.

These cases provide evidence for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)'s recent addition of a warning about Guillain-Barré syndrome to the J&J vaccine's label.

The warning was added on July 12. At the time, the FDA referenced reports of about 100 cases, which matches the data newly released by the CDC.

Overall, however, the CDC says that the benefits of vaccination with the J&J vaccine far outweighs the risks of this severe side effect.

The J&J vaccine is 90 percent effective in preventing severe Covid disease and death, and 66 percent effective in preventing symptomatic disease.

This outweighs both the risks of Guillain-Barré syndrome and a type of severe blood clotting, which impacts three people out of every million vaccinated with J&J.

'Per million doses of J&J Covid vaccine administered to males aged 50–64 years, 1,800 hospitalizations, 480 ICU admissions, and 140 deaths attributable to COVID-19 could be prevented,' the CDC wrote in its report.

This is compared to 14 to 17 Guillain-Barré syndrome cases and one to two blood clot cases.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Machine Gun Kelly surprised fans as he debuted a freshly shaved head on his Instagram, one day after getting matching tattoos with Travis Barker.

While the 31-year-old rapper was pictured rocking platinum blonde with sweeping fringe on Monday, his latest snap showed him without any hair.

As he teased a new single with Cole Bennett on Wednesday, he showed off his daring new look, which included a tattoo on the top of his bald head.

New look: Machine Gun Kelly surprised fans as he debuted a freshly shaved head on his Instagram, one day after getting matching inked with Travis Barker

Machine Gun Kelly revealed he ditched his bleached blonde hairstyle for a video that will be directed by Bennett.

'i shaved my head for this @_ColeBennett_ "papercuts" tomorrow 9pm,' he tweeted on Tuesday, with a screenshot of one of their FaceTime calls.

Just 24 hours prior, Machine Gun Kelly posted multiple photos with his edgy, long tresses, which covered most of his face, after getting inked with Barker, 45.

Big change: While the 31-year-old rapper was pictured rocking platinum blonde with sweeping fringe on Monday, his latest snap showed him without any hair

The rockers both got 'born with horns' etched on their arms, which is the name of Kelly's upcoming album, which Barker produced.

'We’re back for round two…,' Kelly captioned a video of them showing off their tats.

'Let’s f**kin goooo,' Kourtney Kardashian's drummer beau commented.

Tatted: Just 24 hours prior, Machine Gun Kelly posted multiple photos with his edgy, long tresses, which covered most of his face, after getting inked with Barker, 45

Matching: The rockers both got 'born with horns' etched on their arms, which is the name of Kelly's upcoming album, which Barker produced

Barker later shared two photos of them flashing their fresh ink as they stood in front of a white wall with the same caption.

In the images, Kelly wore an oversized tie-dye and black sweatpants, while Barker wore a black beanie and went shirtless.

Travis and MGK (real name: Colson Baker) previously worked together on MGK's 2020 pop-punk album Tickets To My Downfall which Travis co-produced.

'Let’s f**kin goooo,' Kourtney Kardashian's drummer beau commented

It was MGK's fifth studio album and marked a departure from his signature style. MGK rose to fame as a rapper in the 2010s but he has pivoted to rock music over the last two years.

His pal Travis was the perfect collaborator for his new sound, as Barker is known both for his punk-style work with Blink-182 and his own hip-hop drumming that he has focused on in recent years.

Barker's drums were featured on every track of Tickets To My Downfall, and he also showed off his multi-instrumental talents by recording piano, guitar and bass on some songs as well as co-writing almost all of the songs.

Creative collaborators: The two previously worked together on MGK's fifth studio album Tickets To My Downfall which Travis co-produced. Seen in 2020

According to GQ, MGK met Barker after a Blink-182 concert and the two would spend time together whenever Travis was in MGK's hometown of Cleveland.

The outlet reported, 'In 2019, Baker confided that he had an acoustic riff and hook he was struggling to build into a full song. Barker got to work and within days, I Think I'm OKAY, Baker's first true rock track, was finished. Later the two went to the studio to work on what eventually became Tickets to My Downfall.'

Travis, who referred to MGK as his 'best friend' during the GQ interview, recently performed with the singer-songwriter in Venice, California.

Hitting the skins: Travis, who referred to MGK as his 'best friend' during the GQ interview, recently performed with the singer-songwriter in Venice, California

Rock on! MGK shredded on a pink guitar from the elevated stage in June

The pair's rooftop concert in June was attended by their girlfriends, Kourtney Kardashian and Megan Fox. The reality star, 42, and the actress, 35, were spotted having a pleasant conversation as they watched their beaus rock out.

MGK met Megan in March of last year while filming the crime thriller Midnight In The Switchgrass in Puerto Rico, and they began dating later in the summer after she separated from her husband Brian Austin Green.

Travis has been a family friend of the Kardashian–Jenner clan for years, but it wasn't until January of this year that fans suspected he and Kourtney might be dating after he wrote several flirty comments on her Instagram posts.

Cute couple: Megan beamed while spending some time with MGK before the rooftop show

Having a blast: During the concert, Kourtney shared some cute photos of herself showing off her perfect pout while sitting just off to the side of the stage

Sources officially linked the two later in the month, and since then they've gone from just sharing hints of their relationship on social media to being unabashed about displaying their affections.

The relationship has led to tensions with Travis' ex-wife Shanna Moakler, who accused Kourtney and the Kardashians of 'destroying my family' to TMZ.

She complained of being alienated from her children, though Travis' daughter Alabama previously said on Instagram Live that she hadn't seen her mother in more than seven months, well before Kourtney and Travis are believed to have been dating.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hailey Bieber sent temperatures soaring in a skintight blue latex dress as she cosied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap.

The model, 24, flaunted her incredible figure in the sexy dress as she joined the dapper singer for the image, presumably ahead of their latest date night.

Justin took to Instagram to share several snaps from his evening with wife Hailey, including one of his own smart ensemble, consisting of a black pinstripe blazer.

All glammed up: Hailey Bieber sent temperatures soaring in a skintight blue latex dress as she cosied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap

Hailey, 24, looked incredible in a figure hugging baby blue dress, and she clutched designer Bottega Veneta's popular 'pouch leather clutch' of the same color.

Her pout was painted pink and her nails were the same color. She wore a gold necklace that complemented the gold hardware on the dress's straps.

Justin, who married model Hailey in September 2019, was dressed in a black pinstripe blazer with a silk, button down black shirt underneath. He brightened up the look with a colorful necklace.

Speechless: Justin took to Instagram to share several snaps from his evening with wife Hailey, including one of his own smart ensemble, consisting of a black pinstripe blazer

After posting the photo with his bride JB added two solo shots to his Instagram grid.

He posed with his hands in his pockets in front of a pillar at the Beverly Hills Hotel entrance that read 'The Beverly Hills.' He wore a bright yellow sweater, shades, and creased khakis.

The look was made complete with a fresh pair of white Air Force 1s.

Mellow yellow: Justin posed with his hands in his pockets in front of a pillar at the Beverly Hills Hotel entrance in a recent social media snap

The music artist had no words; none of the photos had captions, but that didn't stop his followers from liking the posts and leaving heaps of spirited comments.

Also posted today in the songwriter's stories was a promotion for Made in America's festival's tenth anniversary.

Justin is set to join the lineup as a feature artist at the Philadelphia event scheduled for September 3-5.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seal is dating a woman who used to work for him 15 years ago when he was wed to America's Got Talent star Heidi Klum.

The 58-year-old singer's new girlfriend is his former personal assistant Laura Strayer, according to a Tuesday report from PageSix.

The hitmaker and the blonde woman were seen holding hands and cuddling when in St Tropez, France for a summer vacation last week.

Lucky in love: Seal is dating former personal assistant Laura Strayer, according to a Tuesday report from PageSix; seen in France last week

Laura lived in Seal and Heidi's marital mansion in Los Angeles when she worked for the Kiss From A Rose crooner in 2006.

Laura used to work for him almost 20 years ago when he was wed to Heidi Klum

Heidi, 48, and Seal were wed from 2005 until 2014.

Strayer no longer works as a personal assistant and has a job in the 'music industry' the site added.

Oddly, Heidi also dated one of her staff members as well: after she split from Seal in 2012, she started dating her bodyguard Martin Kristen.

Seal was critical of Heidi's relationship with Martin saying publicly she had 'no class' for being with an employee.

A source told Page Six on Tuesday that Heidi now finds it odd that Seal is dating one of his former employees.

'I literally had no idea that Seal was dating Laura until I saw these photos,' a 'family source' told the site.

Back in the day: Laura lived in Seal and Heidi's marital home in Los Angeles when she worked for the Kiss From A Rose crooner in 2006. Laura used to work for him almost 20 years ago when he was wed to Heidi Klum Heidi, 48, and Seal were wed from 2005 until 2014

'Of course, we all want him to be happy — but it's definitely ironic that he's dating the help when he had such strong feelings about Heidi seeing Martin.'

While in France with Laura, Seal looked happy as he was being fed gelato from ice cream shop, Barbarac.

The pair looked to do a bit of shopping in town as she carried around a few different bags.

She is happy these days: Model Klum is wed to Tom Kaulitz; seen here at the LuisaViaRoma for Unicef event at La Certosa di San Giacomo on July 31 in Capri, Italy

He was first pictured with his new mystery blonde in February as they grabbed dinner at Nobu Malibu with what looked to be her daughter — who was also present on the trip.

In 2017 it was reported that he had split from his girlfriend Erica Packer, 43, after two years of dating.

During their relationship she had gushed over him. 'I'm very happy. It's an incredibly happy time in my life and he's a very beautiful and magical soul and I feel lucky to have met him.'

His ex Klum — with who he shares children: sons Henry, 15, Johan, 14, and daughter Lou, 11 — has also been enjoying a European vacation with her husband of two years Tom Kaulitz.

She also has Leni, 17, who Seal also legally adopted when she was five years old.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Big Bang Theory alum Kaley Cuoco enlisted a masked umbrella handler while filming her new rom-com Meet Cute in 95F-degree summer humidity in Manhattan on Thursday.

The 35-year-old SoCal native - who plays Sheila - was wearing a midi-length slip dress and flip-flop sandals as she head to the set to shoot a scene.

Kaley accessorized with mirrored sunglasses and pulled her ombre locks into a messy updo to keep it off her neck in the heat.

Diva move! Big Bang Theory alum Kaley Cuoco (L) enlisted a masked umbrella handler (R) while filming her new rom-com Meet Cute in 95F-degree summer humidity in Manhattan on Thursday

Later, Cuoco kept hydrated while clutching - not one but - two rechargeable handheld fans to stay cool.

Ice water was everywhere on set in the behind-the-scenes snap the new Smirnoff brand ambassador Instastoried with the caption: 'Shooting in a heatwave.'

The film's impossible premise centers on a couple magically returning to the past to 'heal their partner's past traumas and problems' in order to 'perfect' them, according to Deadline.

On Thursday, second assistant camera person AJ Strauman-Scott Instastoried a curious on-set snap of the camera captioned: 'Tanning bed time machine.'

Showing a little leg: The 35-year-old SoCal native - who plays Sheila - was wearing a midi-length slip dress and flip-flop sandals as she head to the set to shoot a scene

Glued to her phone: Kaley accessorized with mirrored sunglasses and pulled her ombre locks into a messy updo to keep it off her neck in the heat

Hands full: Later, Cuoco kept hydrated while clutching - not one but - two rechargeable handheld fans to stay cool

Ice water was everywhere on set in the behind-the-scenes snap the new Smirnoff brand ambassador Instastoried with the caption: 'Shooting in a heatwave'

Time travel: The film's impossible premise centers on a couple magically returning to the past to 'heal their partner's past traumas and problems' in order to 'perfect' them

Missing from Kaley's side was her onscreen leading man - SNL star Pete Davidson - who plays her boyfriend Gary in Meet Cute, which is helmed by DP-turned-director Alex Lehmann (Paddleton).

For her role as Cassie Bowden in The Flight Attendant, Cuoco will compete for the lead actress in a comedy series trophy at 73rd Primetime Emmy Awards, which air September 19 on CBS.

The Harley Quinn actress will face off against Shrill's Aidy Bryant, Mom's Allison Janney, Black-ish star Tracee Ellis Ross, and Hacks' Jean Smart.

The Flight Attendant also scored nods for comedy series, supporting actress (Rosie Perez), directing (Susanna Fogel), writing (Steve Yockey), and four other technical nods.

On Thursday, second assistant camera person AJ Strauman-Scott Instastoried a curious on-set snap of the camera captioned: 'Tanning bed time machine'

Castmate: Missing from Kaley's side was her onscreen leading man - SNL star Pete Davidson (pictured Wednesday) - who plays her boyfriend Gary in Meet Cute

Kaley also happens to be an executive producer on the series, which HBO Max has already renewed for a second season.

Meanwhile, the 27-year-old comedian and Jon Stewart will next co-host NYC Still Rising After 20 Years: A Comedy Celebration, which takes place September 12 at Madison Square Garden.

Performers include Dave Chappelle, Michael Che, Colin Jost, Jimmy Fallon, Amy Schumer, Wanda Sykes, John Mulaney, Colin Quinn, Tom Segura, Bill Burr, Dave Attell, and Ronny Chieng.

Pete's firefighting father tragically perished in the 9/11 terrorist attack and he was last seen running up the stairs of the Marriott World Trade Center.

'First timer over here!' For her role as Cassie Bowden in The Flight Attendant, Cuoco will compete for the lead actress in a comedy series trophy at 73rd Primetime Emmy Awards, which air September 19 on CBS
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Bachelorette alum Jef Holm on Monday received a temporary restraining order in Los Angeles from his former roommate Robby Hayes, claiming repeated instances of harassment.

In court documents reviewed by US Weekly, Holm, 37, claimed that he was once roommates with Hayes, 32, who has continued to linger around the residence they shared after he moved out.

'Robert used to live at my house but does not now,' the St. George, Utah native said in docs filed in Los Angeles Superior Court. 'He continues to enter the premises & harass me & I do not feel safe around him.'

The latest: The Bachelorette alum Jef Holm, 37, on Monday received a temporary restraining order from his former roommate Robby Hayes, 32, claiming repeated instances of harassment

Holm, who won the Bachelorette's eighth season, said that Hayes, a Jacksonville, Florida native, 'threatens [him] and still hasn’t stopped to this day.

'He claims he has belongings there and that's why he enters but he is not on the lease and is making me fearful.'

Holm told the court that in one instance last month, Hayes 'yelled at me and threatened me and entered [the home] without permission.

'I was alone in my home when he entered abruptly and aggressively started threatening me & I felt very unsafe,' he said, adding that Hayes has made repeated appearances at his abode.

Details: Holm, who won the Bachelorette's eighth season, said that Hayes, a Jacksonville, Florida native, 'threatens [him] and still hasn’t stopped to this day'

Out and about: Holm was snapped on the red carpet in LA in 2014

Holm, who was linked with Emily Maynard on the series in 2012, said that 'once a week,' Hayes 'enters the property and becomes hostile' with him.

The judge in the case ruled that Hayes, a native of Florida, must remain at least 100 yards away from Holm's residence, work and vehicle.

The judge in the case ruled that Hayes, a native of Florida, must remain at least 100 yards away from Holm's residence, work and vehicle

The case is due back in court later this month, as both sides will be able to present their arguments as to how much longer the temporary restraining order should be kept in effect.

Holm and Hayes initially met in 2017 at a party at a Venice Beach, California home Holm resided in, as they also resided with The Bachelorette alum Chase McNary, 32, according to the outlet.

The party was held in the wake of a Women Tell-All taping for former contestant Nick Viall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The former Love & Hip Hop: Miami star Prince was arrested Wednesday on domestic violence charges.

The ex-reality star, whose real name is Christopher Michael Harty, was taken into custody around 2 p.m. in Miami, The Sun reports.

In addition to domestic violence charges, Harty, 31, is facing charges for kidnapping and battery.

The rapper was reportedly also hit with less-serious charges including possession of drugs without a prescription and disorderly conduct.

Legal trouble: Former Love & Hip Hop: Miami star Prince (Christopher Michael Harty) was arrested Wednesday on domestic violence charges, The Sun reports

So far, he appears to still be in jail, as his bond has not been paid yet.

Prince was among the inaugural cast of Love & Hip Hop: Miami when the series premiered in 2018.

However, his tenure was limited, as he only appeared on the first two seasons of the series.

Serious charges: Harty was hit with domestic violence, kidnapping and battery charges, as well as possession of drugs without a prescription and disorderly conduct; pictured in 2019

The promoter filmed scenes for the third season, which premiered in early 2019, but he was edited out of the final footage, despite being featured in promotional materials leading up to the premiere.

He also has not been confirmed to return to the series for its delayed fourth season.

Harty has continued releasing music since being booted from the series, and he released his most recent single in June.

According to The Sun, the musician appeared in a since-deleted Instagram Stories video shortly before his arrest in which he appeared to wear the same earrings as were shown in his mugshot.

In recent days, Harty had been advertising a press conference on Wednesday night, though he would have been unable to attend as he was still jailed.

The Celebrity Boxing match against Tik Tok star HolyGod is set for October 2.

Reality star: Harty appeared on the first two seasons of Love & Hip Hop: Miami. He filmed scenes for season three but was edited out of the final broadcast; seen in 2018 in Atlanta

In May, TMZ reported that Prince was involved in a physical altercation with rapper Tory Lanez.

Harty told Police that he was seated at a table in a South Beach club when Lanez approached and punched him in the side of his face.

A representative for Lanez denied the assault and claimed he hadn't been anywhere near Harty at the time of the attack.

Last year, Lanez was charged with one count of felony assault with a semiautomatic firearm and one count of carrying a loaded, unregistered firearm in a vehicle after he allegedly shot Megan Thee Stallion in the foot.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's just been granted permission to extend his multi-million pound 10-bedroom house in London because his daughters won't leave home.

And Simon Le Bon appeared to have left the drama in the UK behind him on Thursday as he stepped out in the Italian sunshine in Portofino.

The Duran Duran singer, 62, looked beach ready in aqua blue swimming trunks and a pair of bright white Birkenstocks as he kicked back and relaxed in the coastal town.

Beach ready: Simon Le Bon, 62, stepped out in the Italian sunshine while on holiday in Portofino on Thursday in a pair of aqua blue swimming trunks and bright white Birkenstocks

Known for hit anthems such as Girls On Film and Hungry Like The Wolf, Simon was every inch the rockstar as he gave orders to boat crew in a pair of large square shades.

He paired his swim shorts with a dark purple polo shirt and accessorised with the statement glasses and a silver chain pendant necklace.

The musician swept his chestnut tresses into a spikey tousled look and clambered onto a speed boat to drive him to his yacht.

Simon appeared relaxed as he took in the sights of the quaint Italian fishing town despite reports of family drama back in England.

Out and about: Known for hit anthems such as Girls On Film and Hungry Like The Wolf, Simon was every inch the rock star as he gave orders to boat crew in a pair of large square shades

It was reported on Sunday that Simon and his model wife Yasmin have been given permission to extend their ten-bedroom, multi-million-pound London home by a third of its existing size – because they can't get their children to leave home.

Daughters Amber, 31, Saffron, 29, and Tallulah, 26, are refusing to move out of their family pad – but mum and dad don't seem to mind.

'Somehow we have created this home that no one wants to leave,' Yasmin, 56, told reporters.

'It's the opposite of what you're meant to do but I love having the children around.

'During lockdown we'd have lunch every day in the garden. It was great, though I'm sure the neighbours thought we were having parties,' she added.

On the move: The musician swept his chestnut tresses into a spikey tousled look and clambered onto a speed boat to drive him to his yacht

Close family: It was reported on Sunday that Simon is extending his multi-million-pound London home by a third of its existing size – because his daughters dont want to leave home (pictured with his daughters Yasmin and Amber in 2016)

Simon shot to fame as part of the new wave band Duran Duran, alongside keyboardist Nick Rhodes, bassist John Taylor, and drummer Roger Taylor.

The commercially successful line up previously included guitarist and Andy Taylor, who quit the band in 1986, and there have been many more band member changes over the years.

Duran Duran were considered one of the most successful band of the 1980s, and have seen their success cross over in the last three decades.

The group, who formed in Birmingham in 1978, have had 14 top 10 singles in the UK singles chart, 21 singles in the US Billboard Hot 100 and have sold more than 100 million records worldwide.

Heyday: Simon (second left) is part of the new wave band Duran Duran alongside keyboardist Nick Rhodes bassist John Taylor and drummer Roger Taylor ( Pictured in 1981)

The band are set to hit the stage again later this year, joining the likes of Tom Jones, Liam Gallagher and Snow Patrol on the lineup for the upcoming 2021 Isle Of Wight festival.

The music event, which is scheduled to take place this September, comes after the 2020 edition was cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic.

Other acts scheduled to perform include Sophie Ellis-Bextor, Kaiser Chiefs, David Guetta and The Script.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ferne McCann made an appearance at Westfield Shopping Centre in West London on Friday while taking part in ITV Hub's Drama vs Reality challenge.

The 30-year-old TOWIE star paired a dark blue crop top with faded jeans and sported a pair of fluffy hot pink slippers.

With her dark blonde tresses tied into bunches and a full face of makeup applied, the Brentwood-born beauty was certainly ready to take on the competition.

Beaming: Ferne McCann looked action-ready in a blue crop top and faded jeans as she took on ITV Hub's Drama vs Reality challenge at West London's Westfield on Friday

Hi-yah! The 30-year-old TOWIE star paired a dark blue crop top with faded jeans, and sported a pair of fluffy hot pink slippers

Fist-cuffing with drama stars in the retro-style arcade game for ITV Hub, the former I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here contestant took on animated characters including Anna Friel, Richie Campbell and Jason Watkins.

Stopping at nothing to win the fight for attention on behalf of Team Reality, Ferne called on all her special moves to beat her drama nemesis on the big screen.

As part of the 90s-inspired game, the Celebs Go Dating star battled through the levels while shoppers pointed and gawked.

Competitive: The former I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here contestant took on animated characters including Anna Friel, Richie Campbell and Jason Watkins

'Here's how you do it!' As part of the 90s-inspired game, Ferne battled through the levels while shoppers pointed and gawked

The Essex girl's competitive showdown comes after she revealed she still wants her happily ever after and is 'such a sucker for love' after splitting from her marketing manager beau Jack Padgett in June.

Ferne told The Sun: 'I am such a sucker for love - I love love so much, and of course I want to find my happy ever after.'

The blonde bombshell only had positive things to say about Jack, 27, describing the breakup as 'mature'.

Beauty: With her dark blonde tresses tied into bunches and a full face of makeup applied, the Brentwood-born beauty was certainly ready to take on the competition

Having a blast: Ferne stopped to pose for pictures after the fun-and-games came to an end

'But it's been such a mature, grown-up breakup - and no one did anything wrong. I've learned so much from this relationship and from Jack, and we had some beautiful times,' she said.

Ferne and Jack moved in together amid the winter lockdown shortly after they began dating, and admitted that taking the next step in their relationship was its downfall.

'But in the end, it also accelerated our breakup, because coming out of lockdown and the world opening back up meant suddenly our lives were very different and we were like passing ships,' she explained.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was alleged to have caused a rift between Alex Rodriguez and Jennifer Lopez.

And it's certainly not hard to see how Madison LeCroy could ruffle some feathers, after the Southern Charm star shared a sizzling leopard print bikini snap to her Instagram on Saturday.

The Bravo reality star was seen in the picture showing off her bust, after revealing that she'd undergone breast augmentation surgery in October 2019.

Her post comes just as A-Rod's ex-fiancée J-Lo unfollowed the former MLB superstar on Instagram, as well as wiping all their pictures together now she's moved on with Ben Affleck.

Wild thing! Southern Charm star Madison LeCroy shows off her stunning body in leopard print bikini... after allegedly causing rift between A-Rod and J-Lo

In May this year, Alex, 46, firmly denied 'factually incorrect' claims that he got in touch with Madison, 30, after his split from Jen, 52.

'I'm not sure who's looking to benefit from these types of rumors and false stories. They are factually incorrect. Alex is busy concentrating on his businesses and his family,' his representative Ron Berkowitz told DailyMail.com at the time.

However, Madison did previously reveal that she and Rodriguez had chatted online, but insisted that 'we DM’ed, but other than that there was nothing.'

She told Page Six later: 'He's never physically cheated on his fiancée with me.'

A source in Alex' camp told the New York Post at the time: 'He doesn't know this woman. Look, does this mean he didn't DM her and liked a photo or two? I guess not, but he doesn’t know her - and he definitely didn't hook up with her.'

Signs of trouble: Although A-Rod denied anything happened with Madison, it wasn't long before his engagement to J-Lo was called off, and she has since wiped him from social media

'No users found': A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex

Precise: Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page

Taking it in his stride: Meanwhile, A-Rod was seen out on Saturday in NYC looking unbothered, as the news that J-Lo unfollowed him surfaced

Smart: Alex made a very sharp appearance while fetching coffee on Saturday in New York

Still, the rumors coincided with the eventual split of A-Rod and J-Lo - and by the middle of April they had officially ended their romance, which began in 2017 and graduated into an engagement in 2019.

Jennifer then mid-2000s relationship with Ben, a relationship that caught the imagination of the public as 'Bennifer.'

Eagle-eyed fans of the Out Of Sight star first noticed on Saturday that A-Rod was completely out of her (virtual) life.

Turning up the heat: The reality show is known for showing off her flawless bikini body

Idyllic: The Southern Charm star has 526k followers on her Instagram page

Cheeky! The 30-year-old star is rumored to have caught the attention of A-Rod, though he denied anything happened between the pair

Pretty in pink: Madison, 30, shows off another great look on her social media pages

Fans first noticed that photos that featured the former couple were missing, including a set of photos that were taken near the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., in January.

The couple had traveled to the seat of government to celebrate the inauguration of President Joe Biden, and Jennifer sang America The Beautiful and This Land Is Your Land at the outdoor ceremony.

Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page.

A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex.

The Maid In Manhattan actress shares twins Emme and Max, 13, with her ex-husband Marc Anthony, while A-Rod has lookalike daughters Natasha, 16, and Ella, 13, from his marriage to Cynthia Scurtis.

Moving on: Jen, 52, is now back with ex Ben Affleck, 49, (Pictured in 2003)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matt Damon really wants Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez to stay together.

The Stillwater star is close friends with Ben, 48, and has said there's 'no-one' who wants to see Ben's romance with Jennifer go the distance more than him, as he really wants them both to be 'happy'.

When asked if he thought Ben and Jennifer would make it, he told The Carlos Watson Show: 'Oh man, no one's pulling harder than I am.

'No one's pulling harder than I am': Matt Damon has revealed he is rooting for his best friend Ben Affleck and his on-again girlfriend Jennifer Lopez (Damon pictured 2021)

'They're both great. I just want for their happiness. They seem pretty happy right now.'

Matt has previously spoken about his pal's relationship, as he told Extra last month he was 'so happy' for the couple amid their rekindled romance.

He said at the time: 'He's the best. He deserves every happiness in the world. I'm glad for both of them.'

Meanwhile, it was recently reported 52-year-old Jennifer – who previously dated Ben between 2002 and 2004 – is 'fully committed' to Ben, but they aren't planning on getting married.

'I just want for their happiness': Damon wants nothing but the best for his best friend and his on-again girlfriend (Ben Affleck and Jennifer pictured 2002)

A source told E! recently: 'They are fully committed to each other... They have been meshing their lives and families and don't feel the need to get engaged yet or even tie the knot.

'They have both been there and don't feel it's necessary. They are both very secure within their relationship and Ben worships her. It's truly meant to be and everyone around them thinks they are a perfect match.'

However, the pair are likely to move in together soon, and the couple have been spotted house hunting together in recent months.

Back on! The couple have recently reconciled, 17 years after calling off their engagement (pictured July 2021 in Los Angeles)

The couple were photographed this past week touring Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

An insider told ET Online last month that their 'friends wouldn't be surprised if they move in together and ultimately end up together. They're spending all of their free time together and making each other a priority.'

Ben has three children - Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine – with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner, whilst Jennifer has 13-year-old twins Emme and Max with her ex-husband Marc Anthony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Today's loosening of 'pingdemic' isolation rules is unlikely to cause Covid cases to spiral because the public will remain careful, one of the Government's scientific advisers has claimed.

Professor Stephen Reicher, a psychologist at the University of St Andrews and member of SAGE's behavioural sub-committee, said he was a 'relative optimist' about the relaxation and the next phase of Britain's coronavirus battle.

From today, millions of fully-jabbed people in England and Northern Ireland will not have to endure the misery of a 10-day isolation if they are 'pinged' by the NHS app or contacted by Test and Trace. It brings both nations in line with Scotland and Wales and marks one of the biggest steps on the road back to normality.

Asked about whether the move could spark a rise in infections, Professor Reicher told BBC Radio 4's Today show: 'After the reopening on July 19, many of us thought infections would go up massively to 50,000 or 100,000 a day. Perhaps they still will — but they didn't.

'One of the major reasons why they didn't was the good sense of the public — people remained cautious, people remained careful, so I have a fair amount of faith in the good sense and the caution of the public.'

But 'Professor Lockdown' Neil Ferguson, another one of No10's Covid scientists whose modelling has influenced draconian measures, warned it was still 'possible' cases could hit 100,000 a day this winter.

There are fears that infections could start to spiral again now that isolation rules are being relaxed, the country is moving into the colder months and schools are preparing to go back.

The Imperial College London epidemiologist admitted he was not certain about what will happen to cases in the coming months, claiming: 'I've learnt my lesson in terms of being over-eager at making those sorts of predictions.'

Professor Ferguson was heavily criticised for claiming it was 'almost inevitable' cases would rise above 100,000 — possibly as high as 200,000 — after Freedom Day in July. In reality, there are now just 28,000 cases every day, on average.

There are fears that infections could start to spiral again now that the isolation rules are being relaxed, the country moves into the colder months and schools are also due to go back

Professor Stephen Reicher (left), a psychologist at the University of St Andrews and member of SAGE's bevaioural sub-committee, said he was a 'relative optimist' about the relaxation and the next phase of Britain's coronavirus battle. But 'Professor Lockdown' Neil Ferguson, another one of No10's Covid scientists whose modelling has influenced draconian measures, warned it was still 'possible' cases could hit 100,000 a day this winter.

At the worst of the 'pingdemic', more than 1.5million people were isolating per week. That number has come down to more than 700,000 in recent weeks

How have the requirements changed? As of today, the double-jabbed and under-18s are no longer legally required to isolate for ten days if they come into close contact with someone who has Covid Instead, they will be 'advised' by the NHS Covid-19 app to take a free PCR test And if the PCR test comes back positive, they will have to quarantine at home for ten days The exemption applies to those who received their second dose at least 14 days before coming into contact with a positive case Fully vaccinated adults who were recently 'pinged' can leave isolation early today Anyone who can show they cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons is also eligible to escape from quarantine Advertisement

The SAGE modeller also warned of the potential of 'quite a large wave' in September and October when children return to school.

And he said hospital admissions of 1,000 a day, a fraction of levels seen during the darkest days of the pandemic, would 'stress' the fragile NHS, which already has 'very long backlogs'.

However, he admitted ministers wouldn't necessarily need a lockdown to stop the next wave. Professor Ferguson added: 'What it will stop with is the acquisition of immunity in the population, so it will naturally decline and that's the point where we start living with Covid where it becomes an endemic disease.'

Today's rule change also applies to under-18s, who will no longer need to isolate if they are identified as a close contact of a Covid patient.

The Health Secretary said the successful vaccine rollout has allowed the Government to ease rules that have forced millions to quarantine at home, devastating businesses and schools.

Scientists, including Professor Reicher, have warned that, as the double-vaccinated can still catch and pass on Covid, today's relaxation of the rules will inevitably lead to more infections.

But exactly how much of an effect this will have on the UK's situation is still not known.

Professor Ferguson was asked whether it was possible daily cases could rise to six figures in the winter — after the modeller wrongly forecasted 100,000 infections every day this summer.

He told the Today programme: 'It's possible. It's very hard to make those predictions at the minute. What we can be confident in is vaccination protecting people against the most severe disease.'

Asked what an 'acceptable' level of transmission would look like moving forward, the epidemiologist added: 'We have a parallel with influenza pandemics, and we get them very episodically and we end up living with that virus as seasonal flu.

'And so, I think we still could see quite substantial transmission in the autumn coming up to the winter but predicting further than that is very difficult.

'We don't know how much the virus will continue to change and evolve and that is probably the most important determinant of how much infection we get in the future. Of course, how much we can live with is a societal and political judgement as much as a medical one.'

Professor Reicher and others have warned that the Delta variant has 'changed the equitation' because of its ability to infect vaccinated people, who are also susceptible to spreading the virus — even though they are mostly immune from serious illness.

UK's vaccine mega-factory will combine Covid and flu jab into single shot Covid and flu vaccines will be mixed into one injection to save time and make future booster programmes more convenient at one of the UK's mega vaccine factories. Dr Matthew Duchars, chief executive officer of the Vaccine Manufacturing and Innovation Centre (VMIC), claimed the facility in Oxfordshire is looking into whether a single jab can be used to immunise against both viruses. Minister have not yet confirmed booster jabs will be given this autumn, with No10 waiting on advice from its expert panel before pressing ahead with plans. But Health Secretary Sajid Javid said last week that the UK 'will be able to start the booster programme' from next month, if the Government is given the green light. Up to 32million over-50s could be invited for top-up jabs, which may be dished out at the same time as the annual flu vaccine. Whitehall sources said the plan this autumn is to administer Covid and flu jabs at the same time in different arms. But Dr Duchars told the Telegraph that the VMIC was looking at combining the two for future roll-outs. He said: 'It will save a lot of time and it would be a lot more convenient to just give one shot, so it is something that we and vaccine developers and producers will be looking at. 'Let's say we do need to give a seasonal vaccine, and people need one shot for flu, and one shot for Covid and another for something else. 'If you can put them all into one, then that's obviously preferable.' Advertisement

Professor Reicher added: 'Vaccines are wonderful and if you read the government website about the changes in the rules, it's like a hymn of praise to the vaccine.

'And we should indeed be grateful – but they're not perfect and you're not invulnerable if you're double-vaccinated, there's still a fairly good chance you could get infected and infect others.

'Whereas, previously, there was a one in ten chance if you were infected you'd be hospitalised. It went down to about 2 per cent but it has recently risen a bit to about 3 per cent.

'But there's still a danger of hospitalisation, so if enough people get infected it can still be serious. So the first message you need to give people is: be careful, infections matter.'

While Professor Reicher said he had faith that the British public would remain diligent, he admitted he would have preferred if fully-jabbed people were still required to take a PCR test if they are pinged.

Currently, Government advice is for inoculated patients to book a swab if they are identified as a close contact but the recommendation is not legally binding.

Professor Reicher added: 'While it's true that you don't have to self-isolate, the other side of the equation is still there is very strong advice to get a PCR test to find out whether you're infected or not, and I think that's really important to stress because I think one of the issues here is clear messaging about what you should do.

'That is a problem. But at the same time, it's important in terms of the messaging that the public understands that it is strong advice. I wish it was stronger, I wish there was a requirement to get a PCR test. But at least there's strong advice and let's not forget that.'

The NHS app was launched in September last year and it tells users if their smartphones have been near someone who has tested positive for Covid. But as lockdown eased and the Delta variant spread, the app led to the chaos that was dubbed the pingdemic.

In the week to July 21, a record 689,313 people in England and Wales were told to isolate. The pingdemic caused such huge staff shortages – leading to empty shop shelves and cancelled trains – that the Government had to exempt key workers from the rules, including those in the food industry and working on public transport.

Under huge pressure, ministers then announced that the legal requirement to isolate would be removed for under-18s and adults who have had both doses of the Covid vaccine.

From today, double-jabbed app users identified as close contacts of someone with Covid will be advised to take a free NHS PCR test – and they must isolate if that comes back positive.

Hannah Essex, of the British Chambers of Commerce, said many businesses will be 'relieved' about the change to the rules.

But Dr Louise Soanes, of the charity Teenage Cancer Trust, said vulnerable youngsters are 'at greater risk of serious illness if they get the virus' and those who are double-vaccinated should still take precautions if they are pinged.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling has died in her Clapham home at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness.

Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street in 1966. She passed away on August 10.

Dilys has four half-siblings, including the late Dr Who actress Deborah Watling - who passed away in 2017 aged 69 - and Clacton MP Giles Watling, who confirmed her death in a statement on Friday.

Sad news: Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling died on August 10 at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness (pictured in 1977)

Giles told the Wandsworth Times: 'Dilys was a much-loved sister and was the eldest of the five of us.

'She led the way and was a real trailblazer for the rest of us.

'She took Broadway by storm in the late 1960s, playing the eponymous role of Georgy – and we were proud when she was nominated for a Tony Award.

'She also released a couple of singles, including Don't Say You Love Me, which made it into the charts in 1964.

Coronation Street: Dilys famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street (pictured on the soap in 1996)

Nominated: Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and passed away on August 10 (pictured on The Benny Hill show in 1975)

'She was eccentric in many ways, but was always incredibly generous, warm and loving.

'In her last few days, she recounted stories of her life that we thought she had long-since forgotten.

'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully.'

Half brother: Dilys' half-brother, Clacton MP Giles Watling, confirmed in a statement: 'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully' (pictured in 1992)

Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale.

She received a Tony Award nomination for her performance in Georgy on Broadway in 1970 and went on to appear in Sweeney Todd and musical Time in 1986.

Dilys also starred in The Morecambe & Wise Show, as Flossie, and appeared in Minder in 1994 (marking her last TV appearance) as well as an episode of The Bill in 1991.

Dilys was born in 1943 in Fulmer Chase, Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks.

Place of birth: Dilys was born in 1943 in Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks (Dilys pictured with her sister - the late actress Deborah Watling - in 1995)

Family: Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale (pictured in 2019)

Her father Ion was a Lancaster Bomber pilot and was killed in action during WW1 with her mother going on to marry actor Jack Watling.

Dilys attended St Mary's Convent School in Essex and later performed at the Bristol Old Vic.

The late star's film credits include the 1963 crime film Calculated Risk and 1967's horror Theatre of Death, which also starred Christopher Lee and Julian Glover.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivia Rodrigo added a splash of color when she arrived at the annual Day of Indulgence party on Sunday in Los Angeles' Brentwood neighborhood.

The 18-year-old actress and singer rocked a vibrant patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at the self-care celebration with a friend.

Olivia's sheer long-sleeve shirt featured shifting green and pink circles, and she contrasted it with a black mini skirt.

Self-care Sunday: Olivia Rodrigo, 18, rocked a colorful patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles on Sunday

The 5ft5in hitmaker matched her skirt with a cool pair of tall black platform boots.

She wore her brunette tresses parted down the middle and tied back in a low-slung bun.

She kept red-tinted slim sunglasses on hand to block out the sun, and she wore a surgical-style mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Olivia also accessorized with a fuzzy leopard-print handbag, and she was seen leaving the party with several bags of swag.

Her friend walked arm-in-arm with her as they arrived and then again as they departed the party.

She wore a pink blouse with black trim, plus a tan mini skirt, golden boots and a fuzzy bucket hat.

The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, a film and television producer, is a regular retreat for A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

In addition to the suitcases, the guests received a LeSportSac weekenders bag with items specially tailored for each individual guest.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Among the high-profile crowd were Jennifer Lopez and her daughter Emme, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks, Tessa Thompson, Leslie Mann and many others.

Free stuff for the wealthy: Olivia joined A-listers like Jennifer Lopez, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks and Tessa Thompson to get an incredible amount of free swag; seen in May in London

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Stepping on toes: Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole

Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole.

The Bizaardvark star released a cover image for her virtual concert Sour Prom which featured her dressed in a prom dress with a tiara on her head, a bouquet of flowers in her arms and mascara running down her face from crying.

Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different.

Similar: Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different

After the publicity image was released, Courtney posted Olivia's photo to her own Instagram, captioning it: 'spot the difference! #twinning!'

Olivia took the post as a compliment and replied: 'love u and live through this sooooo much.'

Courtney replied: 'Olivia — you're welcome. My favorite florist is in Notting Hill, London! Dm me for deets! I look forward to reading your note!'

Though seemingly polite, she seemed to imply that Olivia owed her some flowers for the photo.

She made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.'

'So bit of both. I dig manners.'

Not happy: Courtney made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.' 'So bit of both. I dig manners'; seen in 2020 in London

But in her cover interview for Variety, released last week, Olivia said she was honored just to be on Courtney's radar.

''I mean, to be honest I’m flattered that Courtney Love knows who I am,' she said.

She continued: 'She’s from a totally different generation, so I thought that was cool, but I think we’re both obviously really inspired by the film Carrie. I don’t know — I didn’t really give it too much thought.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is arguably one of the most famous dancing pros to ever come out of Dancing With The Stars.

And Julianne Hough proved just why as she put on a pin parade on her latest outing.

The 33-year-old television personality showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

Gorgeous: Julianne Hough showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage.

She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels.

Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap.

Out and about: The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage

In the details: She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels

Her blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as she wore a white protective face mask.

The women's-only party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

Rocking it: Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was star-studded event filled with A-listers.

And Laverne Cox certainly found a way to stand out.

The 49-year-old actress channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

On the prowl: Laverne Cox channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Orange Is The New Black star made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield.

She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage.

The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers.

Interesting: The 49-year-old actress made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield

Flaunting it: She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage

She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag.

Laverne's highlighted blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as they flowed over her shoulder.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

Fashion forward: She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag

In the details: The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrew Robertson will miss the start of the new season after scans revealed Liverpool's influential left-back had suffered ankle ligament damage.

Scotland's captain was injured during Sunday's 1-1 draw at Anfield with Basque side Athletic Club; though he was able to leave the pitch without the need for a stretcher, there were initial fears that he would be set for a prolonged absence.

Robertson underwent scans at a private hospital on Merseyside on Monday afternoon and there was relief that his right ankle will not require surgery.

Liverpool left-back Andy Robertson sustained an ankle injury against Athletic Bilbao

Jurgen Klopp will be without Robertson for their opening league game against Norwich

He does, however, need to work a protective cast and remains on crutches and there is no chance of being involved at Norwich on Saturday.

'I think we got lucky with that,' said Klopp. 'It could have been much worse. It will not be too long. I'm not sure if it will be before the international break or after it but, as I say, I think we got lucky.'

There is also a question on whether he will be fit for Anfield dates against Burnley and Chelsea, which follow the trip to Carrow Road; it also leaves him facing a race to be ready for Scotland's World Cup qualifiers in September but Robertson has issued an upbeat appraisal of the situation.

'Scan results suggest nothing too major but there is some ligament damage, which will need to mend,' Robertson said on Instagram.

Reds defender Kostas Tsimikas (right) could be set to deputise for the injured Robertson

'No point guessing on how long that will be other than to say I will be grafting every day so I can help the team sooner rather than later.'

Kostas Tsimikas, the Greece left-back, will replace Robertson and he had an enterprising night as Liverpool wrapped up their preparations for the new campaign with a comfortable 3-1 dismissal of Osasuna at Anfield.

He provided the assist for the first of Roberto Firmino's two goals with a pinpoint cross and showed plenty of energy down the wing; Takumi Minamino had opened the scoring in the 14th minute and also created one for Firmino, who captained the team.

Liverpool, meanwhile, are in negotiations with Lyon over the sale of Xherdan Shaqiri. They are looking to recoup most of the £13.5million they paid Stoke in 2018 but are still some distance away from agreeing a deal; Shaqiri was left out of last night's squad as talks continued.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's not just on the football pitch where goal-hungry Mohamed Salah is competitive - it's on the table tennis table too!

All the Liverpool players and staff took part in a tournament at their pre-season training camp in Evian this week, with the Egyptian coming out on top playing with media manager Matt McCann, against goalkeeper Caoimhin Kelleher in a game of doubles.

The club released the entertaining video of all the organised fun, with Virgil van Dijk, Andy Robertson and Joe Gomez particularly vocal on the sidelines!

Mohamed Salah was the Liverpool table tennis champion as the squad enjoyed a tournament

Virgil van Dijk was amongst those getting fully involved in the evening of light-hearted fun

What a tournament 🤣🏓 pic.twitter.com/j5jI22PwWz — Anfield Watch (@AnfieldWatch) August 7, 2021

An unlikely pairing also saw manager Jurgen Klopp pair up with Japanese forward Takumi Minamino as staff, backroom team and players combined.

The light-hearted event came as the Reds continued their preparations for the new Premier League season, which begins away at Norwich next Saturday.

Before that, they host Athletic Bilbao on Sunday and Osasuna on Monday in their final pre-season friendlies before the real action kicks off.

Playmaker Thiago Alcantara also took part in the tournament at the pre-season camp in Evian

Defenders Nat Phillips and Andy Robertson were also fully focused during the tournament

They took part in two friendlies against Bologna this week, with Diogo Jota, Sadio Mane and Takumi Minamino all on the scoresheet.

A big question ahead of the season's start is the fitness of Van Dijk and Gomez, who are returning from long-term injuries.

The Reds are looking to bounce back after relinquishing their Premier League crown to Manchester City last season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Southampton have completed the permanent signing of starlet Tino Livramento from Chelsea.

Sportsmail revealed on Sunday that Southampton were on the brink of a surprise swoop for promising teenage defender Livramento after talks led by Saints chief executive Martin Semmens accelerated over the weekend and the South Coast club jumped to the front of the queue for his signature.

Attacking, versatile full back Livramento passed a medical in London on Sunday night ahead of signing a five-year deal and finalising his switch on Monday.

Exciting young full back Tino Livramento has secured a move from Chelsea to Southampton

He can play on both wings and will be back-up for Kyle Walker-Peters and Romain Perraud

Ralph Hasenhuttl says he is 'one of the best young players in his position in the country'

Southampton agreed a deal worth around £5million with Chelsea to land Livramento.

The deal will also include sell-on and buy-back clauses for Chelsea, the latter understood to be significantly more than £25m.

Manager Ralph Hasenhuttl said: 'He is one of the best young players in his position in the country and there were a lot of clubs who were interested in signing him, but finally he chose to join us.

'I think he has made a very good choice, and this will be an excellent place for him to continue his development and hopefully reach his full potential.

'He is very much in line with the profile of player we want and I think he will adapt very well to our system and methods. To be around the first team of Chelsea at his age speaks about his ability.'

Brighton were thought to frontrunners for some time, but were reluctant to include the buy-back option.

Livramento was on the bench for the first team last season and has paid tribute to his old side

After 10 amazing years of playing for the only club that I¿ve supported since a child, I¿m taking the next big step in my career.Its been a difficult decision, but I feel it¿s the right one to make at this stage of my development. Thank you for everything @ChelseaFC ¿¿ pic.twitter.com/WJKBu9wp68 — tino livramento (@tino_livramento) August 2, 2021

Even though he is yet to make a senior appearance, signing Livramento is a significant coup for Southampton as he was Chelsea's Academy Player of the Year last term and is considered one of the most exciting youngsters in English football.

The England under-19 prospect was attracting plenty of interest as he entered the final year of his Chelsea contract and with talks failing to result in a new agreement.

In England, Manchester City, Liverpool, Arsenal, Aston Villa, Everton and Brighton were all keen to exploit the uncertainty over his future and made moves for Livramento. Abroad, AC Milan, RB Leipzig and Monaco were all keen.

The reluctance to agree a buy-back option cost Brighton dearly as they lost out to their rivals

The 18-year-old signed a five-year deal about discussing his career options with his dad

However, Southampton, had also been working in the background on a deal to sign Livramento and been successful in their attempts to persuade him they could offer the best route to first-team football.

Livramento said: 'I've been discussing with my dad about what we thought was best for my future. We felt like this was the right time for it to happen and for me to move on.

'To have interest from a few top clubs, to choose Southampton was sort of a no-brainer.

Last season's Academy Player of the Year becomes the latest big prospect to leave the Blues

Teenage centre back Dynel Simeu also left the London club and made the move to the Saints

'They are a solid Premier League club and the manager was quite a big factor as to why I wanted to come here and why I wanted to play for Southampton.'

Hasenhuttl is delighted with the imminent capture of Livramento who will fill a position in his squad the Southampton boss was keen to sort out this summer.

Hasenhuttl was in the market for a versatile back-up full back and has managed to land one of the most promising youngsters in the country to solve his search.

Fikayo Tomori made his loan move to AC Milan permanent after impressing at the Italian club

Livramento can play as a full back or wing back on both sides of the pitch. With Kyle Walker-Peters and new boy Romain Perraud as Southampton's more experienced, first-choice options, Livramento will provide cover and competition for both.

Livramento joined Chelsea as an under-9 and was highly thought of as he worked his way through their youth set-up to the brink of the first team, making the subs' bench for their games against Arsenal and Manchester City at the end of last season.

He will now continue his career at Southampton, along with fellow defender Dynel Simeu who made the same move from Chelsea last week.

Marc Guehi has been made a big-money move to Crystal Palace after starring for Swansea

Myles Peart-Harris has joined Premier League new boys Brentford and Lewis Bate is at Leeds

The two players have been among a number of academy prospects who have opted to leave Chelsea this summer.

Fikayo Tomori completed a £25m move to AC Milan and Marc Guehi was allowed to join Crystal Palace for £18m.

Midfielder Lewis Bate was snapped up by Leeds for around £1.5m and Myles Peart-Harris left Chelsea for Brentford.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It wasn't to be for Helen Glover at the Tokyo Olympics - but she was able to soften the blow of failing to land a medal in the coxless pairs thanks to the embrace of her children as she touched down in the UK.

The British rower came fourth alongside Polly Swann in the women's event, unable to find the turn of pace to claim a bronze as losing out to New Zealand, the Russian Olympic Committee and Canada.

But she put that disappointment behind her - for a brief spell anyway - as a video showed her three children gleefully running towards her as she came through the arrivals gate at the airport following her return from Japan.

In an emotional video, Glover is seen walking through with her luggage on a trolley, before moving it aside and yelling: 'It's mummy!', before hugging the first child that came towards her - with the other two following in behind.

She had posted the video on her Twitter account with the caption: 'This feeling', followed by an emoji with love hearts and the hashtag #runningcuddles and #homesweethome.

Team GB rower Helen Glover posted an emotional video of her children embracing her after arriving home from the Tokyo Olympics

She put her disappointment after coming fourth in the coxless pairs behind her as the youngsters came running towards her

Glover, who became the first British rower to compete at the Olympics after giving birth, shouted: 'It's mummy!' as she shared a special moment

Glover (back) just missed out on a third Olympic gold medal in as many Games as she and partner Polly Swann suffered agony

Glover is the first British rower to compete at an Olympics after becoming a mother, and she paid tribute to her children for inspiring her after coming fourth in the event.

She said: 'Whether the children remember it or not they were there from the very first strokes of this journey, and in my mind to the very last strokes.

'What I'd like them to absorb from this would be to take chances with no fear of failure, and draw excitement from the results, yes, but mostly from the journey.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kai Rooney continued his development at the Manchester United academy by going on an away trip with the Red Devils for the first time.

The 11-year-old son of United and England's all-time record goalscorer Wayne Rooney is trying to follow in his father's footsteps and make the Old Trafford first-team, and was playing for the club's Under-11s side last season.

Rooney Junior is a young and up-and-coming striker like his father before him and his mother, Coleen Rooney, posted an image of Kai in full Manchester United kit and packed for an away day with the club.

Kai Rooney has gone on his first away trip with the Manchester United academy this week

Kai is the son of former Manchester United and England captain Wayne Rooney (above)

The mother of four wished her eldest son good fortune on his travels as she uploaded the photo on social media, writing: 'Good luck to my son Kai on his first away trip with Manchester United.'

The snap from Coleen sees the youngster sporting the Phil Foden hairstyle in tribute to the England's star's dramatic look just before the Euro 2020 tournament - even though Foden plays for United's arch-rivals Manchester City.

Coleen, who also shared that snap on Instagram, wrote: 'Gave in to the Phil Foden hair!! All tournament they have asked for it, So once the school holidays started I said why not!!'

Kai has been sporting the Phil Foden hairstyle in recent months, even though the England star (right) plays for Manchester City

Kai - Rooney's eldest son - caused another comical stir among the Manchester United faithful earlier this summer when he was seen wearing a hoodie of arch-rivals City whilst holding a puppy.

Responding to the picture of Kai, Rio Ferdinand , who played for United from 2002 to 2014 before retiring the following year, said: 'What's he doing in that top????'

Kai did please the United fans last season, however, by scoring a hat-trick and providing three more assists in a 6-3 victory over Stoke City's Under-11s last season.

Kai also wore a Manchester City hoodie in a recent image uploaded by his mother Coleen

He has been at the Manchester United academy since December 2020, with his famous football father posing with his son and Coleen when he was signing his terms.

Rooney uploaded the family image on Instagram with the caption: 'Proud day. Kai signing for @manchesterunited. Keep up the hard work son.'

England's all-time record goalscorer, 38, - now in charge of Derby Count - first joined United from Everton in 2004.

Kai has been at the Man United academy since December 2020 and played with U11s last year

He is the eldest son on England legend Wayne (right) who scored 253 times for United

The former England striker had a glittering 13-year career at Old Trafford, scoring 253 times in 559 appearances and breaking Sir Bobby Charlton's long-standing goal record in January 2017.

During his remarkable career at Old Trafford, Rooney won five Premier League titles, three League Cups, one FA Cup, one Europa League and one Champions League.

Rooney left for boyhood club Everton in 2017 before joining MLS outfit DC United prior to moving to Derby.

The former England and United captain is still adored by the United faithful thanks to his incredible service to the club during their glory years under legendary manager Sir Alex Ferguson.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The 2021-2022 Premier League season kicks-off on Friday night with a whole host of teams having bolstered their squads over the summer.

At the top of the table, Manchester City grabbed the biggest headline with the record-breaking £100million signing of Jack Grealish. Though Manchester United boast a squad including new arrivals Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane, while Chelsea's already glittering squad hope striker Romelu Lukaku will take them to Premier League glory when he officially signs.

Will he pip Harry Kane to the Golden Boot? Which sides will finish in the Champions League places? And at the bottom, will the new Championship arrivals Watford, Norwich and Brentford immediately go back down, or will other more established Premier League sides be under threat?

Sportsmail's writers have hopped off the fence to pick the sides and players they think will win, lose, score and impress in what is sure to be another entertaining season of football.

Manchester City will hope to defend the Premier League title they comfortably won last season

Romelu Lukaku is set to returns to Chelsea and is a strong contender for the Golden Boot

TOM COLLOMOSSE

Title

Manchester City. For many years we have criticised the French, German and Italian leagues for being uncompetitive, with the destiny of the title apparently assured before a ball has even been kicked. Is there really much difference in England now? City have won three of the last four titles and have now started stripping their closest rivals of their best players, as they hope to sign Harry Kane from Tottenham to add to their capture of Jack Grealish from Aston Villa.

Top four

Chelsea, Leicester, Manchester United. The imminent arrival of Romelu Lukaku should make Chelsea a surefire top-four bet, while Leicester ought to keep improving under Brendan Rodgers and United's addition of Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane makes them impossible to ignore in the Champions League shake-up.

Relegation

Norwich, Watford, Crystal Palace. A close look at all three of these squads suggests there is much work to do before the transfer window closes to make them competitive.

Manchester City grabbed headlines with the record-breaking £100m signing of Jack Grealish

Golden Boot

Lukaku. Strangely underrated in England, Lukaku has nevertheless improved during his time at Inter Milan and with plenty of creativity around him, he should return to the Premier League with a bang.

Player of the year

Kevin De Bruyne. Who else? Comfortably the best attacking player in the country and even if he misses the opening period of the season through injury, expect him to do enough on his return to make the award a formality.

Young player of the year

Harvey Barnes. Injury robbed the Leicester wide man of a place in their FA Cup Final team and he will be doubly determined to show he is one of the best in his role this term, as well as to win back his England spot.

Harvey Barnes was excellent last season before injury, and will be determined this campaign

CHRIS WHEELER

Title

Chelsea. If Manchester City sign Harry Kane, it may be a different story. But Thomas Tuchel's impact on Chelsea was plain to see after his arrival in January, and the Champions League winners can beat City to the Premier League as well after a summer of preparation under their German coach.

Top four

Chelsea, Man City, Man Utd, Liverpool. It's hard to look beyond Chelsea and City for the top two positions. United will be stronger again and it would be foolish to write off Jurgen Klopp's Liverpool. Any other club breaking into the top-four feels unlikely.

Relegation

Brentford, Norwich, Southampton. All three of the promoted clubs could struggle but Watford may have the better chance of survival due to their greater experience of the Premier League. Southampton finished fifth bottom last season and will miss Danny Ings' goals this time.

Thomas Tuchel's impact on Chelsea has been huge and he could make them champions again

Golden Boot

Romelu Lukaku. All bets are off if Kane moves to City, but it is shaping up to be a difficult season for the England captain if he stays at Tottenham. Meanwhile his closest rival last season, Liverpool's Mohamed Salah, could be missing for up to a month at the Africa Cup of Nations. On that basis, Lukaku could be the man to beat. Chelsea's impending new signing still has his doubters in the Premier League and will be determined to prove a point.

Player of the year

N'Golo Kante. Putting all the eggs in the Chelsea basket here, but if Tuchel's side are to win the title it will need another big season from their little Frenchman. Kante is more than capable of rising to the challenge and reclaiming the award he won in 2017.

Young player of the year

Mason Greenwood. Man United's rising star had a strong finish to a slightly quieter second season in the first-team at Old Trafford, and will be ready to go again after missing the Euros. Close friend Phil Foden is still young enough to retain his award, but expect 19-year-old Greenwood to put in a strong challenge.

Mason Greenwood (left) is Man United's rising star and will be rested after missing the Euros

ADRIAN KAJUMBA

Title

Manchester City. Won the league comfortably last season and, at time of writing, remain the team to beat having added £100m Jack Grealish to their squad. However, if Manchester United sign a defensive midfielder Ole Gunnar Solskjaer will have all the tools to win the league and should be under pressure and expected to do that. Also, if Chelsea do sign Lukaku they will also be more than capable of being champions too.

Top four

Manchester City, Manchester United, Chelsea, Liverpool. Different order but same four as last season. While Liverpool haven't strengthened that much yet this summer the return primarily of Virgil Van Dijk will make a difference. Leicester have made some good additions to improve depth of their squad but loss of Wesley Fofana a big one.

Relegation

Norwich, Burnley, Watford. Like a lot of additions Norwich have made and would not be surprised if they stay up but have to pick three teams and worry about them defensively, as was the case in their previous Premier League campaign. Feel there are a few teams that could start the season uncertain about how their campaigns may pan out including Wolves, Newcastle, Southampton, Brighton and Crystal Palace.

N'Golo Kante will be critical to any Premier League title challenge from Chelsea this season

Golden Boot

Romelu Lukaku. Chelsea create chances, Romelu Lukaku takes them. This should be the perfect partnership.

Player of the year

N'Golo Kante. Showed signs of rediscovering the form he showed before injury and positional tweaks disrupted his flow. If he can stay fit he will be central to any success Chelsea achieve this season.

Young player of the year

Jadon Sancho. Manchester United's big signing has finally arrived after a long chase. Backing him to show why Solskjaer was so desperate to have him and only him as a marquee wide-man signing.

Jadon Sancho will have to prove exactly why Ole Gunnar Solskjaer was desperate to have him

ROB DRAPER

Title

Chelsea. The obvious thing to say would be Man City, especially if they sign Kane. But I think the Tuchel effect is clear and potentially decisive. There are no real weaknesses and Lukaku will score the goals that went missing last season. Tuchel is fresh, motivated and settled. He'll at least give Guardiola a close run and I think he could pip him.

Top four

Chelsea, Man City, Liverpool, Man United. Boring and obvious. But Leicester notwithstanding, it generally pays to be boring and obvious when it comes to top four predictions I guess the real story here is that, improved though United are, I don't think they'll seriously challenge for the title come the spring. And I think Liverpool will struggle to regain the imperious form of 2019 and 2020.

Relegation

Watford, Brentford, Crystal Palace. In reality I could be very wrong on Brentford. Such a well-run club could easily surprise us. But history says it often takes a relegation followed by a bounce back to get the measure of the Premier League when you're new to it all. Watford should have mastered this trick by now. And recruitment tends to be good. But at present it's hard to see the durability in the squad.

Marc Guehi and Connot Gallagher look good business for Palace and Patrick Vieira is a serous individual. But there is so much change in the playing squad, with senior pros gone and the ultimate solid manager replaced by an inexperienced one, that it's hard not to see trouble ahead.

It's foolish to go against Harry Kane for top scorer, who will be even better if he goes to City

Golden Boot

Harry Kane. It's just foolish to back against Kane. Even more so if he ends up at Manchester City.

Player of the Year

Jack Grealish. Put simply, it's his time. So many knowledgeable football people believe in him, not least Pep Guardiola. He has been given the stage to seize greatness.

Young Player of the Year

Mason Greenwood. Hardly a surprise, but given more starts and more opportunities, his star will shine even brighter.

Norwich and Watford will have a huge challenge to ensure they don't go straight back down

DOMINIC KING

Title

Chelsea. They have spent over the last 12 months with the intention of dominating again and winning the Champions League can propel them forward again.

Top four

Manchester City, Liverpool, Manchester United. As much Leicester are an emerging force, it's difficult to see the status quo being broken.

Relegation

Watford, Norwich, Crystal Palace. I never like making this prediction and am always happy to be proven wrong on it but something concerns me about Palace.

Liverpool forward Mohamed Salah will likely be in the conversation again for the Golden Boot

Golden Boot

As it stands, Mohamed Salah. If Harry Kane ends up at Manchester City, the odds will be back in his favour.

Player of the year

N'Golo Kante. I've tipped Chelsea to win the league and Kante will be the driving force behind the charge. If he sparkles, his team will too.

Young player of the year

Phil Foden. He's outstanding and if he replicates last season's form, this award will be a formality.

Patrick Vieira is an exciting appointment for Crystal Palace but has a tough season ahead

JOE BERNSTEIN

Title

Liverpool. Van Dijk is back, Thiago will be more influential second time around and imagine Trent Alexander-Arnold's motivation after missing the Euros.

Top four

Liverpool, Man City, Arsenal, Man Utd. Arsenal are my surprise entry. They've waited for a Ben White for years and it'll give a foundation for attacking talents to flourish.

Relegation

Watford, Newcastle, Crystal Palace. I fancy Daniel Farke at Norwich to have learned from his last Premier League campaign and that leaves Newcastle and Palace vulnerable, because Steve Bruce has no new blood so far and Palace have lost a host of tried and trusted.

Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is a lethal finisher and could have a Golden Boot-winning season

Golden Boot

Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. He's got one last hurrah in him and we know if he's given service he's a lethal finisher.

Player of the year

Virgil Van Dijk. Maybe the enforced break will have done him good in the long run. Hasn't rushed his recovery which bodes well.

Young player of the year

Phil Foden. Didn't light up the Euros as much as his hair. Injured at the moment but I think he'll come roaring back for when it matters.

Phil Foden didn't really light up the Euros, but will likely be a class act once again for Man City

JACK GAUGHAN

Title

Manchester City. This is shaping up as one of the most hotly contested title races for some time, with Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United primed for a tilt. Manchester City finished 12 points clear last year, have strengthened – and could yet strengthen further – so have to be considered favourites.

Top four

Man City, Chelsea, Liverpool, Man United. Liverpool will come again with Virgil van Dijk back in the fold, while both United and Chelsea have invested wisely in key areas. There seems to be a growing distance between the top four and the rest.

Relegation

Watford, Southampton, Norwich. Always tougher to call towards the bottom end of the division. Southampton's season may hinge, rather unfairly, on the signing of Adam Armstrong from Blackburn. Brentford to finish above Norwich given their added goal threat. Burnley are again starting the season a bit short.

Virgil van Dijk's return for Liverpool could have a huge effect on the Reds' back four once again

Golden Boot

Romelu Lukaku. Statement signing for Chelsea, Lukaku has it all and with a point to prove. He'll be afforded so many chances in such an exciting team. Just pips Harry Kane, although if his move to City comes through then perhaps the dial moves.

Player of the year

Virgil van Dijk. Much will depend on who lifts the title of course but the transformative effect Van Dijk is expected to have on Liverpool's back four after such a long time away from the game will make people stand up and take notice.

Young player of the year

Phil Foden. The best young player in the league. So crucial to the way in which City play. Will start the league late through injury but that will not deter him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United supporters have lauded hat-trick hero Bruno Fernandes as the best player in the world after the midfield maestro starred in their 5-1 opening-day thrashing of Leeds at Old Trafford.

Portugal playmaker Fernandes made a dream start to the new campaign, hitting a treble to torment the visitors and leave celebrating supporters boasting that United are certainties for the Premier League title this season.

Leeds had few answers as formidable Fernandes found the form that saw him dazzle the Premier League last term, although Marcelo Bielsa's side were briefly level after Luke Ayling replied to the 31st-minute opener from the man they could not resist.

Brilliant Bruno Fernandes (centre) took home the match ball as Man United hammered Leeds

United fans were in no mood for playing down Fernandes' outstanding midfield performance

'Just give us the title already', thundered one viewer, envisaging a Fernandes-inspired United emphatically closing a final gap last season of 12 points on their title-winning city rivals.

'Bigger than Manchester City,' added another, claiming that Fernandes will eclipse the likes of Jack Grealish, who is expected to shine at City following his arrival from Aston Villa for £100m.

Critics who tease Fernandes over the penalties that have beefed up his Premier League record – 13 of his 29 league goals have come from the spot – had few arguments after all three of his efforts were scored in open play.

There were a couple of uncertain moments as Leeds unsuccessfully contested that Fernandes' second had not crossed the line and VAR checked the goal that sealed his hat-trick.

United fans inside a packed Old Trafford were thrilled – and social media exploded with praise

A match into the new campaign, some supporters already believe United are set for the title

Others believe that Fernandes' hat-trick showed he is the best ever to have played for United

Ex-United and England star Rio Ferdinand noted that Fernandes and Paul Pogba were on fire

Majestic Fernandes was not to be denied, though, as his admirers gushed that he is the 'greatest United player ever' and noted that he also outshone a terrific performance by engine room partner Paul Pogba.

The France superstar provided a remarkable four assists, setting up Fernandes' first two goals and teeing up Mason Greenwood and Fred as United strolled to a memorable victory.

'Bruno times Pogba show at Old Trafford,' observed former United defender Rio Ferdinand, hailing the atmosphere as a full house returned to the stadium for the first time since the pandemic began.

The goals were Fernandes' first for the club since he scored in a 4-2 defeat against Liverpool on May 13.

Leeds will be sick of the sight of the former Sporting magician, who netted twice against them in a 6-2 win on the same turf in December – the last occasion on which Fernandes scored more than once in a Premier League match.

Fernandes has now equalled the number hat-tricks scored by another inspirational Portuguese in United's hall of fame, Cristiano Ronaldo.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barcelona have put Premier League clubs on alert about a potential loan deal for Philippe Coutinho that would see them pay half of his vast wages, according to reports.

The Catalan heavyweights are desperate to ease the financial restrictions that forced the departure of club icon Lionel Messi last week, and shifting Coutinho, who is thought to earn £200,000 a week, would considerably improve their bargaining power.

Former Liverpool playmaker Coutinho has also been offered to Serie A side Lazio, according to Gazzetta, which says that the Brazil star is reluctant to join the Italians because they will not feature in this season's Champions League.

Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp could be tempted by a cut-price move for Philippe Coutinho

Coutinho lit up the Premier League before ending five years at Liverpool in a £145m transfer

The outlet claims that troubled Barca are trying to tempt the English contenders in the competition by offering to pay half of Coutinho's wages in a season-long loan move.

That could entice Liverpool, for whom Coutinho was the Fans' and Players' Player of the Season in successive seasons between 2014 and 2016.

At 29, the former PFA Team of the Year maestro is still in his prime, showing flashes of the brilliance he dazzled Anfield with when he moved to Bayern Munich for a season in 2019/20.

Coutinho tormented a clearly distraught Messi and many of his other teammates at his parent club by scoring twice and providing an assist after coming on as a second-half substitute in Bayern's 8-2 routing of Barca in the Champions League semi-finals that season.

The on-loan star helped Bayern Munich to beat Barca on their way to Champions League glory

The 2019 Copa America winner returned to the Camp Nou when Ronald Koeman became boss that summer, only to suffer a serious knee injury in December that kept him out for the remainder of the campaign.

Koeman has finally been able to confirm the registration of new signings Memphis Depay and Eric Garcia after agreeing another paycut with Gerard Pique ahead of their La Liga opener at home to Real Sociedad on Sunday.

Wideman Jordi Alba and Sergio Busquets, one of the club's captains, are in talks over lowering their wages following the shock of Messi moved to Paris Saint-Germain because his boyhood side could not meet Spanish spending rules.

New president Joan Laporta is attempting to reduce gross debts that have been widely publicised to be approaching a billion euros.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal fans expressed their fury online after a highly underwhelming performance in their 2-0 opening night defeat against Brentford on Friday.

Thomas Frank's newly promoted side were heavy underdogs but came out on top thanks to goals from Sergi Canos and Christian Norgaard.

Arsenal enjoyed much of the possession but once again defensive frailties saw them concede in both halves against the Bees, despite a debut for £50million centre back Ben White.

Arsenal (pictured) were stunned by newly promoted Brentford on Friday night, losing 2-0

New £50million centre back Ben White (middle) was unable to solve the defensive problems

Fans took to social media to air their anger with boss Mikel Arteta and the poor performance

And angry supporters took to social media to vent their frustrations about the performance and result in what was the club's first Premier League game of the new campaign.

One questioned the refund policy on season tickets and another stated the Gunners' hopes of qualifying for the Champions League by finishing in the top four are already over.

A third simply said: 'Absolute embarrassment. Atrocious,' while a fourth joked that fans would now be complaining to owner Stan Kroenke in the wake of the disappointing defeat.

One questioned the refund policy for season tickets and another said the top-four race is over

Some Chelsea fans also waded into the debate and were quick to mock their London rivals after the loss.

One said: 'If I were an arsenal fan, and I nailed my season ticket to a tree, I'd be more worried for someone stealing the nail.'

Another urged them to boycott Arsenal games, cancel season tickets and avoid buying merchandise until Arteta and Kroenke were sacked.

Chelsea fans also waded into the debate (pictured) and were quick to mock their London rivals

Arsenal and Arteta have plenty to ponder before two tricky games against Chelsea and Manchester City. The Spaniard said: 'We are really disappointed the way we started the season. Were they soft goals? Yes.

'I don't want to use excuses. We had a team out there good enough to achieve a different result.

'We know we have to improve. We have big games coming up and we need a different performance to get a better result.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phil Jones turned a deaf ear to Raphael Varane's request for his No 4 shirt, reports claim, as the Old Trafford outcast was pushed further down the pecking order by the star's Manchester United move.

Varane was unveiled to his expectant new Red Devils fans ahead of kick-off on Saturday, as Bruno Fernandes and Co got the old ground rocking with a 5-1 thrashing of Leeds.

The £42m Frenchman enjoyed the perfect introduction to Manchester and is aiming to replace Victor Lindelof alongside Harry Maguire in the coming games. He is set to wear the No 19 shirt when that debut arrives.

Raphael Varane will wear No 19 when he makes his debut for Manchester United this season

Varane requested to wear No 4 at Old Trafford but Phil Jones still wants to hold the number

Varane asked United for No 4 – which he also wears for France – as their negotiations reached the late stages, but Jones flat-out refused, according to MEN.

Jones has held the No 4, formerly worn by Steve Bruce, since arriving from Blackburn in 2011, but the 29-year-old hasn't played for United in more than 18 months.

The centre-back endured a horrific 2018-19 season and was frozen-out by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer. The club still haven't managed to drum-up interest in the player for a sale this summer, with his contract expiring in 2023.

Varane will likely inherit Jones' shirt when United eventually managed to shift the fallen star Sir Alex Ferguson once said 'could be our greatest player ever.'

Jones hasn't played for the club in more than 18 months and United want rid of the defender

Varane wore No 5 for Real Madrid, while club icon Sergio Ramos held No at the Spanish club

The French defender wears No 4 for his nation, having a disappointing summer at Euro 2020

The World Cup winner also wore 19 on his back during his first season with Real Madrid in 2011 as a young talent, having joined from Lens despite interest from United boss Ferguson.

He donned No 2 from 2012 to 2016 before finally settling on five. The No 4 shirt was reserved for Bernabeu icon Sergio Ramos during Varane's stint in Spain, and he hoped to finally wear it in England.

Varane will have been impressed by his new club on Saturday, as he watched a searing 5-1 victory inspired by Bruno Fernandes and Paul Pogba.

The Portuguese star struck a hat-trick while Varane's international team-mate Pogba racked-up four assists as Old Trafford welcomed back a full house of supporters.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An Arkansas hospital system is so desperate to fill open positions it is offering signing bonuses of up to $25,000.

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS), has 360 health care vacancies, with 200 specifically being for nurses, reported CNN.

The hospital system is short 50 percent of its nursing workforce.

As COVID-19 begins to ramp up again in the southeastern state with cases increasing by almost 900 percent through the latter half of July, the hospital - and its staff - are now overwhelmed.

Morale among the health care workers is low, and some are even walking out on the job due to intense pressure.

University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (pictured) is offering new hires signing bonuses of up to $25,000 amid a COVID surge in Arkansas

'Teams are stretched thin. People are frustrated. People are very tired,' Dr Cam Patterson, UAMS chancellor, told CNN.

'We are down a significant number of positions here, because we just don't have enough nurses that we can recruit to come here and help us to take care of patients.'

Working in a hospital for the past 17 months has been tough on health care workers.

Swells of cases creates a huge workload for everyone in the facility.

Physicians are also seeing a lot of death, and due to pandemic restrictions, nurses often have to comfort patients in their final moments in lieu of their families.

This can take a toll on a persons mental health.

'I've had moments where I've sat in my car and cried before I came to work, before I came in,' Takela Gardner, a nurse at UAMS in Little Rock, told CNN.

'I've.. literally just sat there and cried because I didn't know what I was coming into.'

The $25,000 bonus is available to nurses with at least one year of experience in critical care, Leslie Taylor, the hospital system's vice chancellor or marketing and communications told the DailyMail.com

The nurse also must be willing to work in a 24/7 Covid and ICU unit.

It has been raised from $12,500, which the hospital first offered in March.

The money will be paid out over three years, and a nurse must stay for the time period in order to keep the money.

If a nurse leaves the job before the three year time period is up, they must return any part of the bonus they have been paid.

Nurses can also receive $18,000 for referring another nurse to the hospital - also to be paid over three years.

Nurses who recently started will also receive a $10,000 retention bonus.

Arkansas's COVID-19 situation took off in mid-July, with the state suffering one of the worst summer outbreaks in the country.

Cases increased nearly ten-fold, from around 200 cases per day in mid-July to almost 2,000 on August 1.

The state seems to be on the right side of the surge, with cases now falling once again, down to 1,627 per day on August 5, according to Johns Hopkins University.

COVID cases increased 10-fold in Arkansas last month as the state suffered one of the nation's largest outbreaks

The situation is still dire, though. The state reported on Thursday that it was left with only 25 available ICU beds.

'There's times when we get into the ER and there's just not a bed, so we'll just have to hold the patient on our bed against the wall, waiting on something to clear up so that they can get them off,' Greg Thompson, executive director for Metropolitan Emergency Medical Services, told CNN.

'Normally we should be able to get out of the hospital in less than 30 minutes. But sometimes we're seeing some extremes of an hour to three hours.'

Arkansas is also one of 14 states with less that half of the population having received at least one shot of a COVID-19 vaccine - with only 48 percent having gotten a shot - though vaccine in-take in the state has increased since the July surge.

Employees at UAMS told CNN that a majority of the patients they are seeing are unvaccinated, and it is frustrating.

'It does become infuriating. I don't know if I can necessarily be angry at the patient themselves, or to the general public,' said Dr. Marc Phan, a UAMS emergency room physician, to CNN.

'I think we just need to not necessarily ignore that side of it, but embrace them, try to bring them in, and try to tell them the importance of the vaccine and how it can change their life.'

In April, Arkansas Governor Asa Hutchinson signed a law that prohibited mask mandates in the state.

He admitted earlier this week that he regrets signing the law amid the states Covid situation.

Hutchinson has even called for a special legislative session to amend the law and bring masks back to the state.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Oscar-winning actress Hilary Swank has settled her lawsuit against the trustees of the SAG-AFTRA Health Plan for refusing to cover her ovarian cyst treatments.

The Boys Don't Cry and Million Dollar Baby star, 47, had filed suit against the actors union in federal court in Los Angeles in September 2020.

Neither party has publicly revealed details of the settlement which was submitted to the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California on August 6, Bloomberg Law reported Monday.

Reached a deal: Double Oscar-winning actress Hilary Swank has settled her lawsuit against the trustees of the SAG-AFTRA Health Plan for refusing to cover her ovarian cyst treatments

In filing her lawsuit last year, Swank sought to force the union to resume coverage of her treatment for recurrent malignant ovarian cysts that have afflicted her for more than 11 years.

She said in her lawsuit that she submitted claims starting in 2009 to the plan's precursor, SAG Health Plan, for treatment of ovarian cysts.

The trustees initially denied, but later agreed to cover treatment, according to her lawsuit.

'However, in 2015, the Trustees reversed course and stopped allowing Swank’s claims for treatment of ovarian cysts. It also just so happened that around the same time as when the Trustees no longer agreed to allow Swank’s claims, Swank was undergoing procedures to preserve her ability to conceive in the future,' the lawsuit said.

Legal action: In filing suit, Swank, 47, sought to force the actors union to resume coverage of her treatment for malignant ovarian cysts that have afflicted her for more than 11 years

'Seizing upon Swank’s choice to keep her options open, the Trustees pointed to an exclusion in the Plan for ''infertility treatment,'' relying on the notion that the only purpose of preserving the health of an ovary is to procreate,' the court papers said.

The lawsuit argued that the issue 'addresses the shockingly antiquated question of whether the sole purpose of a woman, and specifically her ovaries, is to procreate. When faced with a claim for insurance benefits for the medically necessary treatment of ovarian cysts and endometriosis, the Trustees answered ''yes,'' determining that there could be no possible reason to treat those conditions other than for the purpose of trying to conceive'.

Swank's insurance industry attorney Kirk Pasich, of Los Angeles-based Pasich LLP, opened the lawsuit with a quote from Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale, which is about women forced to reproduce.

'As all historians know, the past is a great darkness, and filled with echoes,' read the quote.

Couple: Swank and entrepreneur Philip Schneider married in August 2018. The star was previously married to actor Chad Lowe from 1997 to 2007

The lawsuit said that plan trustees 'repeatedly said that there was no medically necessary reason to treat or monitor ovarian cysts other than for ''infertility treatment''.'

Swank in the lawsuit was seeking a court declaration that the health care plan trustees are required to pay for the requested treatment.

The lawsuit provided a timeline of her treatment starting with her diagnosis in 2008 with ovarian cysts.

'Due to persistent ovarian cysts, Swank’s left ovary was destroyed and removed during emergency surgery in 2008. Since then, she has experienced recurrent cyst formation in her remaining ovary,' the lawsuit said.

No coverage: The actress, pictured in November 2018, appealed the decision to revoke her coverage but it was denied after a consultant determined her treatments were for the purpose of monitoring and treating infertility

She also was suffering from endometriosis resulting in 'pain and digestive issues,' according to court papers.

'Because of ovarian cysts and endometriosis, Swank suffers from extreme and debilitating degrees of acid reflux, pelvic pain throughout her lower abdomen, bloating, cramping, and fatigue, among other symptoms. Swank has and continues to receive treatment for ovarian cysts, including monitoring their growth and treating the cysts and endometrial tissue with ultrasounds, bloodwork, aspirations, and surgery as needed,' the lawsuit stated.

Swank appealed the decision to revoke her coverage, according to the lawsuit, but it was denied after a consultant determined her treatments were for the purpose of monitoring and treating infertility.

She then requested an external review of the decision to deny coverage in April, before filing her case after 'having exhausted her administrative appeals, the lawsuit said.

Swank won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of trans man Brandon Teena in the 1999 biopic Boys Don't Cry.

She earned her second Oscar for Best Actress for playing aspiring boxer Maggie Fitzgerald in the 2004 drama Million Dollar Baby.

Breakout role: Swank won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of transgender Brandon Teena in the 1999 biopic Boys Don't Cry (pictured with Chloe Sevigny)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer Aniston wished her ex-husband Justin Theroux a happy 50th birthday via Instagram stories on Tuesday.

In two back-to-back posts the Friends star showed the actor love. In the first one Justin sits on a forest green chair, dressed in a suit and tie with a raised eyebrow and his dog at his side.

Jen wrote 'Happy birthday JT!' with a celebrating emoji.

Still friends: Jennifer Aniston wished her ex-husband Justin Theroux a happy birthday via Instagram stories on Tuesday

They were an it couple for a while: Theroux and Aniston attend the Series Mania Festival opening night at Le Grand Rex in 2017 in Paris, France

In the second story post the actress chose a shirtless photo of her former flame wearing a Nike visor and a gold nameplate ring.

The 52-year-old star captioned the image: 'Truly one of a kind. LOVE YOU!'

Jen and Justin were married from 2015 until they announced their split in February 2018 with a statement saying they had made the decision at the end of the previous year.

Rockin' out: The 52-year-old star captioned the image: 'Truly one of a kind. LOVE YOU!'

The Morning Show actress is known for staying friendly with her exes.

The Leftovers star told Esquire, 'We can not be together and still bring each other joy and friendship. It would be a loss if we weren’t in contact, for me personally.'

Nearly a year ago she and ex Brad Pitt made headlines when they were chummy during a Zoom table read of Fast Times at Ridgemont High.

Hunky: JT was seen at a Hudson Valley, New York gas station on Sunday, pumping gas into his black sedan while sporting a 70s-style thick mustache and a Selena shirt

JT was seen at a Hudson Valley, New York gas station on Sunday, pumping gas into his black sedan while sporting a 70s-style thick mustache.

Theroux is in the Hudson Valley while currently filming a new HBO Max series titled The White House Plumbers.

Last week, it was reported that filming on the series was halted after an altercation arose between the director of the show, David Mandel, and a member of the crew.

Giving back: In an Instagram post the InStyle cover star said half her proceeds from the Friends merchandise collection would be donated to Americares

It was recently announced that Friends dropped a line of merchandise for the legendary show.

In an Instagram post the InStyle cover star said half her proceeds from the collection would be donated to Americares.

Quoting a line from the beloved show, Jennifer started her caption with, 'For the record… we were SO not on a break.'

Clapping back: The blonde beauty recently defended her decision to cut friends from her circle who have 'refused' to get their COVID-19 vaccine

The blonde beauty recently defended her decision to cut friends from her circle who have 'refused' to get their COVID-19 vaccine.

The Hollywood icon explained that she has no time for anti-vaxxers or those who 'just don't listen to the facts' when it comes to science.

The Friends star said she feels the swath of American's who aren't getting their COVID jabs are basing their stance on 'fear or propaganda.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lucy Fallon put on a stylish display when she stepped out for a facial in Manchester on Tuesday.

Treating herself to a spot of pampering, the Coronation Street star, 25, teamed a pair of jeans with a chic oversized black blazer.

The blonde beauty wore her hair loose and opted for comfort in a pair of bright pink trainers.

Stylish: Lucy Fallon, 25, put on a stylish display when she stepped out for a facial in Manchester on Tuesday

Effortlessly colour coordinating, Lucy made sure to match her shoes with her handbag, which boasted a bubblegum pink, leopard print strap.

The star kept the sunshine at bay behind a pair of black cat-eye sunglasses and layered her tailored jacket over a graphic print white T-shirt.

Lucy appeared in high spirits as she strolled through the city's streets and beamed from ear to ear for photographers.

It comes after the star went Instagram official with her new beau footballer Ryan Ledson, 23, in May.

Chic: Treating herself to a spot of pampering, the Coronation Street star teamed a pair of jeans with a chic oversized black blazer

Lucy shared a snap of herself and Ryan enjoying frozen cocktails in the sunshine.

Ryan revealed in his own social media post shared later the same day, that they were holidaying in tourist hotspot Vilamoura in Portugal.

Holding up her bright orange beverage for the camera, Lucy tagged her boyfriend - who was sporting sunglasses and a big smile - in the photo.

Lucy and Ryan have been leaving flirtatious comments on each other's social media posts for a while, according to The Sun, however, their holiday posts marked the first time they have confirmed their romance.

Official: It comes after the star went Instagram official with her new beau footballer Ryan Ledson, 23, in May

The new romance comes after Lucy called things off with her ex-partner Tom Leech for good in January.

Lucy first split with her boyfriend of three years last August, before she began filming ITV's Don't Rock The Boat, after lockdown 'drove them apart'.

But insiders close to the actress later revealed they secretly reunited in September last year to give their relationship one last try.

However, according to a report, Lucy soon kicked the insurance manager out of the house they shared in Blackpool for the final time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kathy Griffin had filmed scenes for the fifth season of the HBO Max series Search Party prior to her recent lung surgery amid her cancer battle.

The 60-year-old comedian on the series will play the role of conspiracy theorist Liquorice Montague opposite the character Chantal (played by Clare McNulty) on the dark comedic series, Variety reported on Wednesday.

She shared a link to the story on Twitter Wednesday, writing, 'SURPRISE! This is what I’ve been secret posting about! So excited!!!'

The latest: Kathy Griffin, 60, had filmed scenes for the fifth season of the HBO Max series Search Party prior to her recent lung surgery amid her cancer battle. She was snapped in LA last year

Sarah-Violet Bliss and Charles Rogers, the showrunners of the series, said in a joint statement that 'working with Kathy was a huge life moment for us.

'She brought so much warmth, humanity, and professionalism to set and delivered a performance that will delight the world.'

The show, which stars Alia Shawkat, Meredith Hagner, John Reynolds and John Early, will also feature Jeff Goldblum in its fifth season.

A source told the NY Post of Griffin: 'She loved the experience working on the show and it was a great creative outlet before undergoing her lung cancer surgery. She is still in recovery but getting better every day.'

She shared a link to the story on Twitter Wednesday, writing, 'SURPRISE! This is what I’ve been secret posting about! So excited!!!'

The 60-year-old comedian on the series will play the role of conspiracy theorist Liquorice Montague on the dark comedic series

The Emmy-winning comic has kept fans in the loop on her stage one lung cancer via social media

The Emmy-winning comic has made headlines as of late amid her revelation earlier this month that she is battling stage one lung cancer, and had to undergo a surgery in which part of her lung was removed.

The Oak Park, Illinois native, who has never smoked cigarettes, took to Instagram Tuesday to update fans on her ongoing recovery.

Griffin, snapped in 2019, 'loved the experience working on the show and it was a great creative outlet before undergoing her lung cancer surgery' a source told the NY Post

'When you're a comedian - and I've been dealing with this for years - the doctors always want to be comedians too,' Griffin said in a clip on the social media site. 'So he goes like this, "You know, the thing about having a lobe removed from your lung is it's really not that big of a deal" - in the meantime, I feel like I could fall over any minute.'

She added, 'He goes, "You know, people don't realize we find the cancer and then we go in and, basically, we pop the lobe like a balloon and we take it out of a little incision on your side."'

Griffin noted she has 'like 17 incisions' as result of the critical operation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Boris Becker looked like he had caught the sun on Thursday as his stunning swimsuit-clad girlfriend Lilian De Carvalho generously applied sun cream to his rather rouge-looking face in Formentera.

The couple, who have been dating since last summer, appeared in the throes of love as they chartered a boat for a day out to sea - and packed in plenty of fun-filled water activities.

Boris, 53, couldn't keep his eyes of Lilian, believed to be in her 40s, who looked incredible in a daring red high-rise swimsuit, as she tenderly coated his face in SPF.

Sunburnt? Boris Becker looked like he had caught the sun as his stunning swimsuit-clad girlfriend Lilian De Carvalho generously applied sun cream to his rather rouge-looking face in Formentera on Thursday

Political risk analyst Lilian showed off her cleavage in the one-piece which plunged to the navel and featured a criss cross halterneck design.

The high-rise design accentuated her long legs and peachy derriere as she made the most of the sunny climes on the boat's deck.

She wore her long raven tresses in braids and complemented her natural beauty with a minimal make-up look.

Sizzling display: Political risk analyst Lilian showed off her cleavage in the one-piece which plunged to the navel and featured a criss cross halterneck design

Smitten: The couple, who have been dating since last summer, appeared in the throes of love as they chartered a boat for a day out to sea, and packed in plenty of fun-filled water activities

Boris, meanwhile, donned a pair of blue board shorts and couldn't wait to get out to sea.

The Wimbledon champ showed off his athletic side as he jumped into the water before wrapping his arms around Lilian as they splashed around on a paddle board.

The lovebirds were later seen walking along the coast. Lilian covered up in a green kaftan while Boris donned a polo neck and black shorts.

The couple were joined by a host of friends for the action-packed day out and were seen laughing with them as they took out a small boat to the yacht.

Racy: The high-rise design accentuated her long legs and peachy derriere as she made the most of the sunny climes on the boat's deck

There he goes! Boris, meanwhile, donned a pair of blue board shorts and couldn't wait to get out to sea

Making a splash: The Wimbledon champ showed off his athletic side as he jumped into the water before wrapping his arms around Lilian as they splashed around on a paddle board

Sealed with a kiss: Although now being in Spain, the loved-up couple, who have been linked since June 2020, have also spent time together in London as well as being seen in Dubai back in January during the third UK lockdown

Although now being in Spain, the loved-up couple, who have been linked since June 2020, have also spent time together in London as well as being seen in Dubai back in January during the third UK lockdown.

London-based Lilian is a political risk analyst and has three degrees, including a masters in African studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, and speaks five languages.

The holiday comes after Boris' ex-wife Lilly, 45, spoke out about their 2018 split after nine years of marriage. The couple share their son Amadeus, 11.

Jump: Boris couldn't wait to get into the sea and made an almighty leap

Clever: London-based Lilian is a political risk analyst and has three degrees, including a masters in African studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, and speaks five languages

Stunning: Lilian wore her long raven tresses in braids and complemented her natural beauty with a minimal make-up look

Group: The couple were joined by a host of friends for the action-packed day out and were seen laughing with them as they took out a small boat to the yacht

In a new interview with Hello!, Lilly revealed how she and Boris 'truly tried' to make their relationship work, and how, three years after their split, she is ready to find love again.

Reflecting on her marriage breakdown, the Dutch model said: 'Sadly, Boris and I cannot make it work – that is the reality, we have truly tried.

'I am not full of regrets as he gave me so many wonderful memories and also our incredible son. For that alone I will be truly grateful – you learn and move on. Take the chapter and use it.'

Stroll: The lovebirds were later seen walking along the coast. Lilian covered up in a green kaftan

Covering up: Boris donned a polo neck and black shorts which gave his sunburnt chest some relief

Getaway: Boris was later spotted in a white Puma polo

Sunny smiles: The sportsman also put on a black cap, the pair looking in high spirits as they continued to enjoy their holiday

Shades: Lilian rocked a pair of chic black sunglasses, with Boris also donning some shades

Lilly added that she would like to find love again. 'I am emotionally ready, so it's just trying to find the right one. Don't we all long for that fairytale ending?', she revealed.

The model also spoke proudly about their son Amadeus as she revealed he 'definitely has his father's genes' and is 'very interested in running and tennis'.

The former Wimbledon champion split from model Lilly in 2018 after a 13-year relationship and nine years of marriage, and it is understood that they are still in the 'final stages' of divorcing.

In May 2019, the pair reached an agreement after becoming embroiled in a family court dispute over their son.

PDA: Lilian put an arm around her beau as they were surrounded by luxe boats

Lilly reflected on 2018 after parting ways from her husband of nine years during an interview with Günther Jauch on Germany's RTL.

She admitted the couple will never rekindle their relationship, insisting: 'It's really over between us. 2018 was the worst time of my 42 years. He so grossly disappointed me.'

Speaking on the negative effects of being in the limelight, she went on: 'What makes it so bad is that everything is happening in public now. But I married a public man, maybe it's part of it.'

'Unfortunately, [a reunion would] not work anymore. Too much has happened. I do not want to, he does not, and that's fine. It's really over between us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An Arkansas doctor has shared videos of patients battling COVID-19 in her hospital's intensive care unit (ICU) as the country faces its fourth wave of the pandemic.

Dr Sonal Bhakta, chief medical officer at Mercy Hospital Northwest Arkansas, filmed two men from 'very different walks of life' who are each hooked up to ventilators.

Neither of the men had been vaccinated before contracting the virus.

Bhakta told DailyMail.com that she wanted to show the reality of what it means to fall severely ill with COVID-19.

'It's heartbreaking. It's heartbreaking for our nurses, our respiratory therapists, our physicians,' she said.

'We see that this is preventable. And it breaks our hearts that people aren't understanding that vaccines make this preventable.'

Dr Sonal Bhakta, chief medical officer at Mercy Hospital Northwest Arkansas, shared videos of two unvaccinated COVID-19 patients in the ICU, including a 40-year-old father who is the founder and president of a non-profit organization (above)

The other patient is a 51-year-old father-of-two and a law enforcement officer (left). Bhakta (right ) said she shared the videos so people can understand the dangers of not being vaccinated

In Arkansas, COVID-19 cases have skyrocketed over the last month from an average of 990 per day to 2,218 per day, a 124 percent jump, a DailyMail.com analysis of data from Johns Hopkins shows.

Over the same time period, hospitalizations have risen from 488 patients to 1,227 - the second-highest figure recorded since the pandemic began - a 99 percent spike, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

A regional report about the virus in Northwest Arkansas, where Mercy is located, showed there are 166 patients hospitalized with COVID-19, nearly double the 95 recorded on July 25.

The average age is 42 years old and 91 percent of all patients are unvaccinated.

'We've had a large influx of Covid patients and we're still climbing numbers in the area in hospitalizations,' Bhakta told DailyMail.com.

'They're younger, they're sicker and they're requiring the ventilator more often...It's creating a lot of desperate situations, a lot of critical staffing issues.'

The surge inspired Bhakta to begin filming what it's like to treat these patients in ICUs who come from a wide range of backgrounds.

'It's hard to understand the reality of the situation unless you see it and live it, 'se she said.

'They are parents, they have kids at home [and they] many not be able to go back home. I feel like some people don't understand that concept. That's one of the aspects I wanted to display.'

In the video, filmed on August 5, it begins with Bhakta outside the room of 51-year-old patient on a ventilator who is a father of two and a law enforcement officer.

The unnamed man had not been vaccinated but his wife has gotten her first dose by the time of filming and was planning to get her second shot.

'Unfortunately he is very critically ill at this time...He is on high ventilator settings as well as dialysis. Only 51,' Bhakta says in the clip.

In Arkansas, COVID-19 cases have risen 124% in a month from an average of 990 per day to 2,218 per day, according to Johns Hopkins

The video then switches to another COVID-19 patient on a ventilator, a 40-year-old father to an 11-year-old daughter, who was also not vaccinated.

Bhakta says the man is the founder and president of a non-profit organization who loves attending races, helping others and spending time with his family and friends.

'He married his childhood sweetheart, and their anniversary is today,' she says in the video.

'He is in critically ill condition requiring very high [ventilator] settings.'

As of Friday morning, both men are still hospitalized and on ventilators.

Hospitals across the U.S. have been urging Americans to get vaccinated to relieve the pressure facing ICUs.

Bhakta hope the clip shows the dangers of being unvaccinated and that it's not just older people who are falling severely ill.

'Please get the vaccine. The vaccine is safe. Please do it for others,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They both gained a high profile after appearing on Love Island.

And Francesca Allen, 25, and Georgia Steel, 23, showcased their unique styles on a night out in London on Friday, as they prepared to dine at Asian eatery Sexy Fish.

The 25-year-old travel and fashion advocate flaunted her washboard abs in a ruched black crop top, with Georgia, a former performing arts student, showcasing her toned pins in a leather ensemble.

Night out: Love Island's Francesca Allen (left) exhibited her washboard abs and Georgia Steel (right) put on a leggy display for an evening at Sexy Fish on Friday

Francesca, who appeared on the fifth series of Love Island two years ago, coordinated the ruched crop top with black trousers, which had red and white striped detailing and an ankle slit.

Keeping her makeup natural and her long locks flicked behind her shoulders, the reality star added a touch of colour to her look by carrying a miniature emerald bag.

Francesca wore a dainty gold necklace and small hoops, opting for comfort with a pair of platformed white trainers.

Toned: Francesca, who appeared on the fifth series of Love Island two years ago, co-ordinated the ruched crop top with black trousers, which had red and white striped detailing

Georgia, who graced the Love Island villa the year prior to her pal, coiffed her chestnut tresses in tight waves.

Her chic look consisted of an oversized cream leather blazer worn with shorts and a hint of a white tee.

The television star wasn't afraid to step out in an impressive pair of studded white heels which emphasised her toned pins.

Good friends: Georgia's chic look consisted of an oversized cream leather blazer worn with shorts and a hint of a white tee

Strutting their stuff: The girls looked ready for a night of good food and company as they linked arms walking down the street

Chic: Francesca opted for platformed white trainers, with Georgia wearing an impressive pair of studded white heels

Reality stars: The girls gained a high profile after appearing on Love Island, Francesca in 2019 and Georgia the year before

The girls looked ready for a night of good food and company as they linked arms walking down the street.

Francesca gave her almost 500,000 Instagram followers a peek of their evening via her story.

Snapping a content-looking Georgia enjoying her meal, Francesca penned: 'My girl I missed you!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After making headlines over his strong stance against anti-maskers and anti-vaxxers this week, former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger has penned a new piece for The Atlantic.

The 74-year-old got serious about owing his success to the United States after moving there as an immigrant from Austria and said that it is the duty of U.S. citizens to set aside 'selfish interests' amid the pandemic.

Arnold had previously said that those who refused to wear masks over 'freedom' were 'schmucks' - and while he maintains his position - he penned that the wording might have been 'a little much.'

Speaking out: After making headlines over his strong stance against anti-maskers and anti-vaxxers this week, former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger has penned a new piece for The Atlantic

Taking to Instagram, the actor directed his followers to check out his new article: 'I wrote about freedom and duty and what we owe to the American heroes who sacrificed so much throughout our history.'

His piece was a response to comments he made in a video earlier this week he called anti-maskers 'schmucks' and told Americans who are concerned about Covid-19 regulations encroaching on their rights: 'Screw your freedom.'

'I'll admit, calling people schmucks and saying 'Screw your freedom' was a little much, even if I stand by the sentiment,' he wrote in his latest piece. 'But there is nothing that I'm more passionate about than keeping America great, and it's the only subject that can make me lose my temper.'

In his article, which read in part as a love letter to the USA, Arnold was open about how much he owes to the country he calls home.

Honesty: The 74-year-old got serious about owing his success to the United States after moving there as an immigrant from Austria and said that it is the duty of U.S. citizens to set aside 'selfish interests' amid the pandemic

'I often tell people not to call me self-made; I prefer to call myself American-made,' he said.

While he admitted to not being 'an academic', the Terminator star offered up a 'civics lesson' to those who feel like it's their right not to wear a mask.

'Many people told me that the Constitution gives them rights, but not responsibilities. They feel no duty to protect their fellow citizens,' he said.

Governator: Arnold had previously said that those who refused to wear masks over 'freedom' were 'schmucks' - and while he maintains his position - he penned that the wording might have been 'a little much' (pictured at his inauguration)

'I can't help but wonder how much better off we'd be if Americans took a step back from politics and spent a minute thinking about how lucky we are to call this country home,' he mused.

'Instead of tweeting, we could think about what we owe to the patriots who came before us and those who will follow us. I am not an academic, but I can tell you that selfishness and dereliction of duty did not make this country great.

'The Constitution aimed to 'promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty for ourselves and our posterity.' It's right there in our founding document. We need to think beyond our selfish interests,' Arnold penned.

In order to connect with readers, the former politician quoted everyone from John Adams, to George Washington, to John F. Kennedy to the 2004 cartoon feature film Team America.

'When people call this fascism, I can’t stand it,' he said of those who refuse to wear masks. 'Just a few generations ago, this country stood up to real fascism. (And yes, I know that my father was on the wrong side of that conflict.)

'And we didn’t win just because of our love of freedom. We won because Americans came together and did their duty.

'Many people told me that the Constitution gives them rights, but not responsibilities. They feel no duty to protect their fellow citizens,' he said. 'I can't help but wonder how much better off we'd be if Americans took a step back from politics and spent a minute thinking about how lucky we are to call this country home.'

'Americans accepted the rationing of food and gasoline to win that war,' he said in part, adding later: 'Americans lived through four years of brutal sacrifice, and we’re going to throw fits about putting a mask over our mouth and nose?'

During his YouTube appearance earlier in the week, the star compared mask wearing and vaccines to obeying traffic lights on the roads to keep other people safe.

'There is a virus here, it kills people, and the only way we prevent it is get vaccinated, get masks, do social distancing, washing your hands all the time, and not just to think about 'well my freedom is being kind of disturbed here.' No, screw your freedom,' he went on during a heated moment.

'We put the traffic light at the intersection so someone doesn't kill someone else by accident… you cannot say, 'no one is going tell me that I'm going to stop here at this traffic light here, I'm going to go right through it', yeah, then you kill someone else and then it is your doing,' Schwarzenegger said.

'Americans accepted the rationing of food and gasoline to win that war,' he said in part, adding later: 'Americans lived through four years of brutal sacrifice, and we’re going to throw fits about putting a mask over our mouth and nose?'

The Hollywood legend has been a vocal proponent of Covid-19 safety measures and earlier this year shared an Instagram post of himself getting the vaccine.

In this week's video the Austrian-born actor warned of the rise of fascism in America, by comparing the pro-Trump mob that stormed the Capitol to Adolf Hitler's Brownshirt thugs in the streets of 1930s Germany.

He warned about the dangers of 'lying to the nation' and said it had to be stopped at all costs.

Schwarzenegger said it was important to follow the rules of the experts when it came to the pandemic but that there 'is misinformation out there' which means people are disregarding basics like hand washing and cleaning surfaces.

He said that people like Dr. Anthony Fauci had been 'studying this stuff their entire lives' and needed to be respected and listened to by Americans.

'Yeah, you have the freedom to wear no mask. But you know something, you're a schmuck for not wearing a mask because you're supposed to protect the fellow members around you,' Arnie said.

'I don't want to villainize anyone here,' he continued, 'but I just wanted to tell everyone, let's work together and let's stop fighting because there is a virus, and it's better to get vaccinated [and] to wear a mask.'

The Last Action Hero star practices what he preaches and is frequently seen around Los Angeles wearing a facemask.

He also armed himself against the coronavirus and was vaccinated.

The governator even shared a video of himself getting his first jab of the two dose vaccine at a drive-thru clinic in the spring.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liberty Poole will tell the girls about Jake Cornish's declaration of love in Sunday night's episode of Love Island.

But the girls will be left unsure if the revelation is genuine, and bring this up with the 21-year-old Nando's waitress.

The conversation starts with Liberty telling the girls while they sit round the fire pit: 'You guys are going to be so proud of me. I literally went upstairs and I said how I felt and I didn’t take no s**t and I stood my ground.'

Confusion: Liberty Poole, 21, will tell the girls about Jake Cornish's, declaration of love in Sunday night's episode of Love Island, but the girls question whether it is the truth

She continues: 'He then said "You know what Lib? You make me feel ways that I didn’t feel before. You make me nervous" And then he goes "I do love you." He said those words to me and I feel so happy.'

But Chloe Burrows, 25, is left unconvinced and flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what Jake, 24, thinks Liberty wants to hear, after they have spent a few days in a rocky patch.

Chloe says: 'You’re going to hate me. Do you not think he’s telling you what you want to hear?'

Truthful? The conversation starts with Liberty telling the girls while they sit round the fire pit: 'You guys are going to be so proud of me.' Before telling her pals of Jake saying 'I love you'

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official, but Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looks round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye Winter tentatively replies: 'I don’t know baby.'

Questions: Chloe Burrows, 25, flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what he thinks Liberty wants to hear, after they have spent a few days in a rocky patch

Declaration: Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake finally drop the L-bomb to Liberty

Not convinced: After a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'

Liberty seems a little confused, and seeks advice from her friends, asking them: 'Do you think I’m being an idiot?'

Chloe says: 'I don’t think he would say something if he didn’t mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

News of Jake’s declaration and the girls’ feelings toward it swiftly travel around the Villa.

It isn’t long before Jake learns of the girls’ reaction has to convince them and Liberty that his feelings are genuine.

Romantic meal: Elsewhere in the Villa, the boys are set to cook up a storm for their partners

Elsewhere in the Villa, the boys are set to cook up a storm for their partners.

Teddy Soares, 26, receives a text saying: 'Boys. It’s time to cook up a storm as you serve up a couples dinner! #pastalavistababy #thecarb-dashians'

While the girls get glammed up for the evening, the boys begin preparations for a romantic three-course dinner.

Chefs for the evening: While the girls get glammed up for the evening, the boys begin preparations for a romantic three-course dinner

Funny: Liam Reardon, 21, brings over his and Millie Court's starter of asparagus. Millie, 24, asks: 'Is this an aphrodisiac?' He replies: 'Aphrodisiac? What’s that?'

The couples all look in high spirits as they enjoy their meals.

Liam Reardon, 21, brings over his and Millie Court's starter of asparagus. Millie, 24, asks: 'Is this an aphrodisiac?'

The Welsh hunk then seems confused when he replies: 'Aphrodisiac? What’s that?'

Over at Priya Gopaldas, 23, and Brett Staniland's, 27, table talk turns to previous relationships. Priya says: 'Have you ever been in love?'

Serious chat: Over at Priya Gopaldas, 23, and Brett Staniland's, 27, table talk turns to previous relationships. Priya says: 'Have you ever been in love?'

Cheeky: When it is time for the main course, Chloe asks Toby: 'I love garlic bread! Do you want to do some snogging after garlic bread?'

Brett says: 'No. I’ve never said ‘I love you’ to anyone. Do you feel like there is something wrong with me now?'

Priya jokes: 'Yes, I feel like you’re a bit of a robot!'

When it is time for the main course, Chloe asks Toby Aromolaran: 'I love garlic bread! Do you want to do some snogging after garlic bread?'

Coupled up: Faye appears less than impressed with tonight’s main course. Faye says: 'I hate pasta!' To which Teddy says: 'What if I feed it to you?'

Cute: The Islanders seemin high spirits as Liberty fed her boyfriend Jake some food

Toby, 22, jokingly replies to her cheeky remark: 'I don’t mind'

But Faye appears less than impressed with tonight’s main course. Faye says: 'I hate pasta!' To which Teddy replies: 'What if I feed it to you?'

Meanwhile, Liberty and Jake seem in good spirits as she feeds him a forkful of her food.

Just when the couples were about to enjoy their dessert, Toby receives a text which reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.

Drama: Just when the couple were about to enjoy their dessert, Toby receives a text

'Those who receive the most votes risk being dumped from the island.

'You must now decide in your couples who you are going to choose and submit your decision by text. You must not discuss your decision with anyone else. #judgementday #gowithyourgut'

The couples begin their difficult deliberations and it isn’t long before it’s time for them to submit their decision via text.

LOVE ISLAND, SUNDAY NIGHT AT 9PM ON ITV2 AND ITV HUB

Oh no: The text reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.' The couples begin their difficult deliberations and it isn’t long before it’s time for them to submit their decision via text

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He dropped a brand new track with Dua Lipa on Friday.

And Sir Elton John, 74, couldn't resist giving his French fans a taste of his new song Cold Heart - PNAU Remix on Saturday.

The superstar took to the DJ booth at the La Guérite restaurant in Cannes to delight beach-goers with a sing-song of his latest single during his holiday.

Impromptu performance: Sir Elton John, 74, couldn't resist giving his French fans a taste of his new song Cold Heart - PNAU Remix on Saturday at La Guérite restaurant in Cannes

The icon took to Instagram to share a video of his spontaneous live performance of Cold Heart, which merges lyrics from his 1989 single Sacrifice while Dua adds lyrics from the classic 1972 hit Rocket Man.

Sir Elton John was captured heading up to the sound system in a white shirt with a vest-style cream, blue and red sailor pattern, as he asked his camera man 'we're live, well how are you gonna play it?'

The seasoned performer then took charge of the mic and proceeded to sing his heart out, encouraging his newly recruited audience to 'dance at the table and wave your hands and your handkerchiefs'.

Sing-song: The superstar took to the DJ booth to delight beach-goers with a sing-song of his latest single during his holiday

Decked out: Sir Elton John was captured heading up to the sound system in a white shirt with a vest-style cream, blue and red sailor pattern, as he asked his camera man 'we're live, well how are you gonna play it?'

Very soon a crowd formed around the legend while he sung, earning a series of cheers from the audience whilst they filmed the unlikely event.

Taking to Instagram earlier this week, the pianist penned: 'I am so excited to finally be able to tell you all that I have a new single with Dua Lipa ‘Cold Heart (PNAU Remix)’ coming out this Friday!

'Dua, I adore you, and it has been an incredible experience making this together. I can’t wait for you all to hear it!'

New release: Taking to Instagram earlier this week, the pianist penned, 'I am so excited to finally be able to tell you all that I have a new single with Dua Lipa ‘Cold Heart (PNAU Remix)’ coming out this Friday!'

The One Kiss songstress replied: 'I love you!!!! I’m so excited ❤️❤️❤️❤️'.

In Elton's most recent promotional post, he gushed: 'This track is the culmination of a beautiful friendship with you Dua and I’m so happy we can now share it - I hope you all love it!'

His impromptu performance comes as Sir Elton John and Lady Gaga, 35, are allegedly joining forces once again for a remade version of Sine From Above, which was released last year.

The new version is said to be a 'hardcore drum and bass track' set to 'shock' fans.

The original was released on the Just Dance hitmaker's sixth studio album, Chromatica.

Music legends: His impromptu performance comes as Sir Elton John and Lady Gaga, 35, are allegedly joining forces once again for a remade version of Sine From Above, which was released last year

A source told The Sun: 'His collaboration with Gaga took everyone by surprise but the remix will leave them speechless.'

'It’s about as far away from Rocket Man and Candle In The Wind as you can get. It’s gone from a pop dance track to extreme hardcore drum and bass.'

MailOnline has contacted a representative for Elton for comment.

The Star Is Born actress also teamed up with the singer back in 2010, when she made her Grammy debut.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Griff proudly wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event on Sunday.

Olympic champion diver Tom, 27, gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final.

And the singer, 20, was sure to show her support as she donned his handmade garment over a yellow dress and posed up a storm at The SSE Wembley Arena.

Amazing! Griff wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event at Wembley on Sunday

Nice touch: The singer, 20, proudly flaunted the impressive garment on the red carpet (left) which was carefully created by the diver, 27, during his time in Tokyo (right)

Griff looked sensational for the celebratory evening, ensuring to work all her angles and show off the cardigan as she posed for the cameras.

The beauty beamed a smile as she looked over her shoulders, displaying the perfectly knitted Team GB on the back.

Continuing with the Tokyo theme, the star's bright yellow dress featured further references to the sporting event.

She completed her look with a selection of jewellery including several necklaces and a touch of sparkling eyeshadow.

Showing it off! Griff pointed to the impressive jumper and put on an animated display as she posed on the red carpet

Proud: The singer styled the handmade garment with a yellow Tokyo dress and fluffy shoes styled with white socks

Speaking about why he knitted the impressive garment, gold medallist Tom posted on his Made With Love knitting page, wrote: 'When I got to Tokyo, I wanted to make something that would remind me of the Olympics to look back on in the future.

'I designed a pattern for the colour work that would signify everything about these games!

'On the back I went for a classic @teamgb logo, the shoulders have a flag and GBR on them. For the front I wanted to keep it simple and I tried my best to embroider TOKYO in Japanese! What do you think?!' he wrote.

The diver, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40.

He said: 'Since my knitting page is gaining momentum, I wanted to take the opportunity to try and raise some money for the @thebraintumourcharity in memory of my Dad! Any donations would be greatly appreciated.'

Multitalented: Keen knitter Tom showed off his finished Team GB cardigan at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics last week

He'd be so proud: The star, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40 (pictured 2010)

Putting his skills to full use, Tom has also knitted an emotional keepsake to forever remind him of his first gold medal at Tokyo 2020 - a customised gold medal pouch.

The British sportsman broke down in tears as he and diving partner Matty Lee triumphed in the 10m synchronized platform event - his first gold medal in four Olympic games.

Tom has previously spoken about the cathartic effect knitting has on his mindset during competitions.

He said: 'When we went to Japan for the test event I actually took my knitting with me and was doing it during my competition because sometimes there's 45 minutes in between each dive so I'd sit there and knit and just take my mind off the competition completely. I'm obsessed!'

Daley activity: Tom has gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final on Tuesday

And smile! Boris Johnson was also seen at the event on Sunday, posing for some selfies with the Olympians

Chic: Singer Anne-Marie posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal

Performance: Nile Rodgers and Laura Mvula rocked the stage as they provided entertainment during the fun-fulled evening

The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the Team GB homecoming event.

Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round.

'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley.

Congratulations: Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round

Winners: The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the TEAM GB homecoming event

Gold medallists: 'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley

Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony and delivered a speech.

Getting in amongst the Team GB spirit, the Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians.

Boris also posed for some selfies, in one snap holding an Olympic medal.

Big appearance: Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony

PM duties: Boris delivered a speech at the homecoming event as well as snapping selfies with the athletes

Team GB spirit: The Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians

Showing support: Chevon Clarke was among the Olympians who snatched up a chance to be photographed with the PM

Photos galore: The 57-year-old held an Olympic medal in one of the snaps taken by an Olympian on their phone

Political figure: Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer also arrived to show his support for the UK's athletes on Sunday

Anne Marie wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair, hosted by the National Lottery, where is set to perform later in the evening.

The chic star paired her dress with Prads shoes as she posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal.

Stylish: Anne-Marie, 30, looked glamorous as she arrived at the homecoming event in London in a white dress with puff sleeves

Looking good: The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she the statement look with a sweep of nude lipstick

Gorgeous: The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do as she posed with weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell, 27

The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do, as she posed with 27-year-old weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell.

The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she complemented the statement look with a slick of nude lipstick.

By way of accessories, she kept it simple by wearing multiple hoops in her ears, and a gold chain with a coin pendant hanging on it.

The minidress showed off her toned pins, and revealed a tattoo the singer has on her left knee which reads: 'Confidence,' in cursive lettering.

Gracing the stage: The Alarm hitmaker looked proud to be on the stage and beamed a smile as she stood infront of the flag

Cute: She wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair where is set to perform at the star-studded event later in the evening

Showstopper: Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet

Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet.

She is amongst many artists to perform at the event, including Rag'n'bone Man, Nile Rodgers, Laura Mvula, and Yungblud who will perform alongside the best of Britain's dance and theatre artists.

Yungblud will sing David Bowie's iconic hit anthem Heroes alongside a dance circus performance from Motionhouse.

Ivor Novello winner Laura Mvula will pair up with the esteemed contemporary dance company Rambert to perform a solo set.

Songstress: The star looked glowing for her performance, sporting a slick of pink blusher and matching glossy lipstick

Popstar: Anne Marie's hit singles include 2002, Ciao Adios and Our Song, which she undoubtedly treated the audience to a rendition of

Set: The stage design was stunning, with beautiful flowers all around Anne-Marie as she performed her hit tunes

The moving 90 minute concert to welcome home Team GB athletes will be hosted by Radio One presenters Greg James and Clara Amfo and also feature music from Bastille and Nile Rodgers with his band Chic.

KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style on the red carpet wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Singer Griff was also in attendance wearing the cardigan Tom Daley knitted poolside, paired with a yellow slip dress with her hair slicked back into a bubble pony tail.

Smart: Nile Rogers cut a dapper figure for the event in a white suit and black tie as well as a matching hat

Bright: The recording artist teamed her eye-catching ensemble with semi-sheer neon yellow shoes

Backing dancers: Laura was joined by the Rambert School of Ballet and Contemporary Dance for her impressive set

Dazzling: Mica Paris performed with Chickenshed, with the singer belting out some tunes for the star-studded audience

Showstopping: Nile and Mica, who sizzled in a black dress, looked sensational on the red carpet before they took to the stage

Speaking ahead of the event, Greg James said: 'As always with the Olympics, I've become an expert in events I only think about every four years.

'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again.

'It's been a long time coming – it's going to be a brilliant night. Anyway, must go, I'm off to practice shot put,' he joked.

Excited: Presenter Greg James (left) said 'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again' before singer KSI (right) took to the stage

Proud: Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!'

Achievements: Clara also added: 'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

Success story: Married couple Jason and Laura Kenny are Britain's most successful male and female Olympians

Job well done: Alice Kinsella and Amelie Morgan were in high spirits as everyone celebrated Team GB

Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!

'I am so honoured to be hosting Team GB Homecoming Concert with Greg, on what promises to be a brilliant show full of celebration and love!

'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

The celebration will re-unite Team GB with their friends, family and fans for the first time since Tokyo 2020, which closed with an emotional ceremony on Sunday.

Team GB finished the Games with the same number of medals as at London 2012 but were beaten by the USA, China and Japan for the top spots.

Fashion forward: KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Switching it up: The singer changed his look when he graced the stage, donning a fashionable cream suit

Superstar: Rag 'n' Bone Man was also amongst the stars who took to the stage at the ceremony and performed some hits

Incredible voice: The successful star's latest album, Life By Misadventure, was released in May

Jason Kenny's record breaking gold medal moved GB up to 64 medals on Sunday, while Lauren Price victory in the middleweight final allowed them to replicate history.

As a result, Team GB finished fourth in the Tokyo medals table with 22 gold, 21 silver and 22 bronze medals for a total of 65.

It made Tokyo their second-most successful Olympics overseas after the contingent won 67 medals in the Rio de Janeiro Games five years ago.

Talent: Gold medal winning diver Tom Daley, 27, was all smiles as he posed at the homecoming event. Tom's knitting went viral on Tik Tok, Twitter and Instagram throughout the games

Pride: Athletes arrived at the event wearing their Team GB kit including gymnast Joe Fraser, 22

Britain's chef de mission Mark England hailed the team's achievement as the greatest in their Olympic history, saying: 'Following Beijing we had no idea that British athletes would deliver 65 medals in London.

'We knew we were in great shape for Rio but it had never been done before, matching and then surpassing London's number of medals.

'I just think that finishing this Games with two gold medals, and for this team to deliver 65 medals, is absolutely extraordinary.

Team: Cyclist Matt Walls, 33, was in attendance for the big night of celebrations and musical performances

Medal winner: Gymnast Bryony Page, 30, wore her bronze and silver medals with pride while Bradly Sinden donned his silver

Prize winner: The cyclist Ryan Owens, 25, wore his silver medal for the star studded event

'Not only has the team made history but it has probably made history on the back of the most complex and most challenging and difficult environment that we will face certainly in my lifetime.

'It has been against all the odds and I think it is the greatest achievement in British Olympic history. It has been the miracle of Tokyo and it has been wonderful to be here.'

Team GB looked in high spirits as they arrived for the event wearing their kit, and some wore their medals.

Good times: Swimmer Tom Dean, 21, looked proud as he posed for the camera with his arms behind his back

Proud: 26-year-old Jack Laugher wore his bronze medal round his neck and beamed a smile for some pics

Medallist: Cyclist Josie Knight, 24, arrived at the event and proudly showed off her medal for the cameras

Team: Gymnasts, Jessica Gadirova, 16, Alice Kinsella, 20, Amelie Morgan, 18 and Jennifer Gadirova, also 16, posed for a group shot at the affair

Power couple: Cyclists, Laura Kenny, 29, and Jason Kenny, 33, were in attendance and also donning their Olympics kit

Happy: Gold medal winning gymnast Max Whitlock, 28, wore red white and blue with pride at the event

Amazing: Rower Helen Glover, 35, arrived at the event in her GB kit and posed up a storm on the red carpet
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Saint-Germain president Nasser Al-Khelaifi came out fighting during Lionel Messi’s unveiling as he insisted no Financial Fair Play rules had been violated — and told Kylian Mbappe he now has ‘no choice’ but to stay at the club.

Messi’s contract is said to be worth around £30million a year and the addition of the 34-year-old, despite it being on a free transfer, has attracted suspicion over FFP.

But Al-Khelaifi said: ‘Regarding the financial aspect, I will make it clear — we know the rules of FFP and we will always follow the regulations.

Paris Saint-Germain president Nasser Al-Khelaifi welcomes Lionel Messi to the club after he agreed a staggering £1million-a-week deal

PSG's Qatari owners insist that UEFA's Financial Fair Play rules will not be breached by the signing of Messi and that his enormous commercial potential will offset his salary

‘Before we do anything, we check with commercial, financial and legal people. We have the capacity.

'If we sign Leo, it’s because we can, otherwise we would not have done it.

‘What Leo brings to the club is huge, which you can see just outside (the stadium, where thousands of fans had gathered). He is a big asset.

‘I hope Leo will not ask for a raise of salary, but what we have is fantastic.’

Messi took part in a press conference before being unveiled to the PSG fans and ultras

Messi (right) revealed former Barcelona winger Neymar (left) played a big role in his arrival

Mbappe, meanwhile, has stalled on signing a new contract at Parc des Princes, with his deal set to expire next summer.

But with Messi signed on a two-year deal, Al-Khelaifi added: ‘Now there is no choice for Kylian but to stay here in Paris.

‘He wants to win, he wants to win trophies, he said it in public.

"He wanted a competitive side and we have the most competitive side in the world. So there is no excuse for him now. He can’t do anything but stay.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City will press ahead with a fresh round of contract renewals after John Stones committed to a new five-year deal on Tuesday.

Stones continued his stunning revival with the Premier League champions — after he battled to win back a place in Pep Guardiola’s team — by agreeing terms worth up to £250,000 a week until 2026.

City are set to start discussions with other players, with the likes of Phil Foden and Ederson primed for negotiations over new long-term contract extensions.

Man City will push ahead with a round of contract talks with Ederson (left) and Phil Foden

City have tied down defender John Stones to a new five year deal worth £250,000 per week

Sportsmail reported recently that club bosses were keen to sit down with Raheem Sterling and his advisors again to thrash out the forward’s future. Sterling, who fell out of favour with Guardiola towards the end of last season, still has two years remaining at the Etihad Stadium.

The upturn in Stones’ form was one of the stories of City’s third title win under Guardiola yet the England international admitted there remain areas in which he feels he must improve.

‘I have set the bar now for myself and I still feel that there is room to improve on the non-football aspect off the pitch and definitely on the pitch as well,’ the defender said.

‘I feel like this is home and I absolutely love the place. Working with the manager is a dream — he has taught me so much about the game and I feel like I learn something new every single day.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A goggles catastrophe denied the United States a medal in the mixed medley swimming relay in a moment of incredible misfortune for 17-year-old Lydia Jacoby.

Jacoby's goggles fell from her eyes just after she dived into the pool for the second leg breast stroke with her team tied in first place and the mishap proved costly as they finished in fifth, three seconds behind winners Great Britain, who set a new world record in the event.

The US had got off to a good start after Ryan Murphy's backstroke leg left them tied in the lead with Italy but when Jacoby dived in, wearing only one cap rather than the usual two, her googles slipped down to her mouth.

Lydia Jacoby had to swim with her goggles by her mouth after they slipped when she dived in

Jacoby battled on in the relay but had trouble seeing the wall when it came to doing turns

The mishap meant she struggled to see the wall, causing real trouble when it came to her turns.

An impaired Jacoby valiantly battled through her two laps, but the U.S. fell to sixth. The Americans were in eighth when Tori Huske turned it over to Caeleb Dressel, the fastest swimmer in the world, for the closing freestyle leg.

He had far too much of a deficit to make up, only pulling the Americans up to fifth at the finish.

'I was definitely panicking,' said Jacoby. 'My turn was where it was most rough because I couldn't see the wall.'

Seventeen-year-old Jacoby said she was 'definitely panicking' after the goggles mishap

Dressel, who was aiming for six gold medals in Tokyo, said his team's result was 'unacceptable'.

'We didn't execute well. Fifth-place is unacceptable for USA Swimming, and we're very aware of that. Our standard is gold,' he said.

But he added: 'I think everyone swam as well as they could have in the moment.'

The other countries either went with two men on the first two legs and two women on the last two or women on the opening and closing legs with two men swimming the middle legs.

The British team boasted 100 breaststroke champion Adam Peaty, who moved them from sixth to fourth. Anna Hopkin swam the anchor leg, knowing that Dressel was lurking in the choppy water.

'He's so fast, it is a bit intimidating,' she said.

Caeleb Dressel (in pool, right) dived in last for Team USA and had no chance of catching up

Dressel, who was going for six gold medals in Tokyo, said finishing fifth was 'unacceptable'

No need to worry, though.

Dressel was over 8 seconds off the lead when he took over.

'The guys ahead of me got me such a good lead,' Hopkin said. 'He wasn't catching me.'

The U.S. finish doomed Dressel's chance to win six golds in Tokyo. He earlier led off the winning 4x100 free relay, and won the 100 free and 100 butterfly. He goes for two more golds in the 50 free and 4x100 medley relay on Sunday, the final day of swimming.

For the second time in the Olympics, the U.S. failed to earn a medal in a relay that it entered, after a fourth-place finish in the men's 4x200 free relay in Tokyo.

'Next year at worlds, we'll give it another go and put the pieces together again,' Dressel said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eric Bailly was in the thick of the action in Ivory Coast's Olympic quarter-final clash with Spain for the right and wrong reasons -- but mostly the wrong.

The Manchester United defender gave his side a shock lead in the 10th minute by bundling the ball in from a corner although Dani Olmo levelled for Spain.

Ivory Coast then looked set to pull off an extraordinary win when Max Gradel gave them the lead late on but Spain equalised a minute later following a shocking piece of defending from Bailly.

Eric Bailly had an eventful afternoon in Ivory Coast's Olympic quarter-final game with Spain

The Manchester United defender gave away a penalty in extra-time for handball after his gaffe allowed Rafa Mir to score an equaliser in the last seconds of regulation time

All the United defender had to do was head the ball away from danger when it dropped towards him while unchallenged in the area but despite being under no pressure at all his miscalculated his jump.

The ball bounced off the back of his head and into the path of Rafa Mir, who cashed in on the gift to score and force extra-time.

Not seeing out the win was a huge blow to Ivory Coast and they looked lost in extra-time, while Bailly's afternoon got even worse.

It all started so well for Bailly when he gave the Ivory Coast a 10th minute lead from a corner

Ivory Coast were on course for a famous win when Max Gradel gave them the lead late on

When defending a corner he throw his arm up and handled the ball while trying to challenge Pau Torres for a header and the incident was reviewed by VAR, leading to Spain being awarded a penalty.

Spain forward Mikel Oyarzabal netted in the 98th minute and Mir rounded off the victory for Luis de la Fuente's side with two more goals to complete his hat-trick.

Spain, whose side contains six players who also played in the senior team's run to the semi-finals of Euro 2020, will meet hosts Japan in Tuesday's semi-final.

But Spain levelled when Mir (pictured) pounced after terrible defending from Bailly
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@‘I know you're upset now, but I wish you all the best. You're a champion, brother. Keep your head up, don't keep it low. You've got an amazing story and you'll come back again.’

Those were the words of Joshua Buatsi, who consoled a devastated Daniel Dos Santos back in May, having stopped him with a vicious right hand to extend his knockout streak to nine on the spin only moments beforehand.

Eddie Hearn once described Buatsi as the ‘nicest, most dangerous person you could ever meet’. It’s a statement the 28-year-old swats away with quintessential humility, but if there was ever a single moment that encapsulates him as a fighter and a person, it came under the lights at the Manchester Arena.

Joshua Buatsi (L) claimed a stoppage victory over a devastated Daniel Dos Santos (R) in May

The 28-year-old consoled his teary opponent both in the ring and after in the dressing room

It was just ‘business’ for Buatsi, who insists he had no interest in celebrating in front of a beaten opponent. ‘As a fighter, a competitor and a person I understood the disappointment he felt in that moment,’ he recalls in an exclusive interview with Sportsmail. ‘It wasn’t for me to start jumping around and celebrating when he was in that state.’

That’s Buatsi in a nutshell – a ruthless operator in the ring, and a gent outside of it. And on Saturday night, the quiet, measured knockout artist will once again ‘flick the switch’, as he says, and put on a performance as he headlines the third and final Matchroom Fight Camp show against, on paper anyway, his most difficult opponent to date, Ricards Bolotniks.

We’ll come back to him later.

If Buatsi hadn’t found boxing aged 15, there’s every chance he’d be flying to you to an ‘amber plus’ destination of your choice this summer. Yes, before he formed an instant love for the sport, Buatsi’s desire was to become a pilot.

It’s perhaps an unusual dream for a future elite-level boxer, and Buatsi – who came to London from Ghana with his older sister at the age of nine to ‘get a better education and a better life’ – admits that his parents had ‘big question marks’ when he became obsessed with the sport.

But Buatsi, who assures his parents are now proud of everything he’s accomplished, is no ordinary fighter. You might remember that he claimed a bronze medal at the Rio Olympic Games, which was a phenomenal result that exceeded all prior expectations, and one that largely catapulted him to where he is today.

Buatsi (right) exceeded all prior expectation as he won a bronze medal at the Rio Olympics

He fell short against Adilbek Niyazymbetov, who went on to claim the silver medal

But what you might not know is that Buatsi was balancing his Olympic dreams with university deadlines, as he worked towards a 2.1 in Sports Science. And what you also might not know, is that having already carved out a career for himself in securing his bronze, Buatsi, some would say needlessly, returned for his third and final year to complete his studies.

‘Firstly, we owed student finance money’, Buatsi said with a laugh when explaining why he felt the need to return. ‘But mainly it was because my parents always stressed that education is important. I grew up with that instilled in my mind. I couldn’t just quit on my degree when I’d got to my third year.

‘Boxing is never 100 per cent, injuries can happen and nothing is guaranteed. But I also learned a lot of personal skills, a lot of people skills, preparing presentations, learning how to research - they were all important to me and I’m glad I did them.

‘I wanted to finish up, and say “you know what, I’ve been at university while competing at a very high level. If I can do it, other people can do it as well”.’

Remarkably, Buatsi still keeps in touch with many of his teachers, dating back to his school days, and even visited the Sports Science department at his university, St Mary’s, to show them his bronze medal.

‘I was missing lectures, getting extensions and I needed reasons for that to happen,’ he said. ‘I was booking in countless meetings with my lecturers, coming in when uni was closed – all sorts. Even when in camp, instead of coming home and going to sleep, I’d be up doing work just to make it happen. So in the end I’m happy I was able to get an Olympic medal and a 2.1.

‘It was nice to show my lecturers that yes, I kept using boxing as an excuse, but I’ve actually got something to show that I’ve got a talent, a unique ability and that I can compete at the highest level.’

Buatsi talks of his pride after watching Team GB claim a record six medals at this summer’s Tokyo Olympics, having shared camps and worked alongside many of the squad throughout his career.

But having made his name at the Rio Games five years ago, Buatsi – going into his second fight under new coach Virgil Hunter – now faces another hurdle as he looks to progress towards a world title.

Standing in his way, as mentioned previously, is Latvian Bolotniks, who although having five defeats on his 24-fight record, is on a seven-fight winning streak, beating Brits Steven Ward and Tyson Fury's cousin Hosea Burton along the way, before winning the Golden Contract light-heavyweight tournament with a stoppage victory over Serge Michel in December last year.

Buatsi, who reveals he has wanted to work alongside Hunter since the age of 16, says his relationship with his new coach has blossomed further throughout his second training camp with the American, and believes Bolotniks will prove no match in the end.

‘We’ve developed more understanding in training,’ Buatsi said of working with Hunter. ‘There’s a lot more fluidity in the work that we do. It’s very straightforward, we both understand what each other are saying. Even the first camp we had was really good, so it’s just getting better and better now, which makes me optimistic about the future.

‘Bolotniks is a good fighter; he’s top 10 in all of the rankings. I’m expecting the best version of him to come, but as always, I’m prepared and willing to do whatever it takes to win. I’m expecting a good fight, but I’ve trained very hard and I’m confident I’ll get the win.

‘He’s in good form, but I can’t take that too seriously, as I don’t think he’s boxed anyone like me before.’

Ricards Bolotniks won the Golden Contract light-heavyweight tournament last year

In the build-up to the fight, Bolotnik revealed he's been exclusively focusing on Buatsi for the last six months, and that he's planning to turn the bout intro a street fight. But does that faze the level-headed Buatsi? Of course not.

‘I laugh at that,' Buatsi says in response to Bolotnik's claims. 'If it’s a street fight, I’ll be there. If it’s a boxing match, I’ll be there. Every round I’m going to be there, that’s my mentality.

‘I don’t know if he thinks he’s some sort of knockout artist, but I’ll be there every round, and I fully know it’s not going to go his way.’

In a seriously competitive light-heavyweight division, with the belts currently occupied by Artur Beterbiev (IBF and WBC), Dmitry Bivol (WBA) and Joe Smith Jr (WBO), Buatsi is expected to reach the very top.

And importantly, he’s expected to reach the very top soon. Upon beating Dos Santos just three months ago, coach Hunter insisted his fighter was 14 months from a world title shot, while Hearn said he was looking to ‘bridge the gap’ and make a step towards world level in his next fight.

‘I feel it’s a realistic timeframe,’ Buatsi said. ‘I always tell people that things change, but it’s realistic for sure.

‘But no (I don’t care who it’s against), a belt is a belt. Get the belt, move on, fight whoever you need to in order to unify, look at your options and go from there.’

A domestic clash between Buatsi and Anthony Yarde (L) has been in the pipeline for some time, with the latter set to return to the ring this month after his shock defeat to Lyndon Arthur

As well as the belts, Buatsi has a number of potential domestic clashes out of there, primarily in Anthony Yarde - who is due to fight Alex Theran later in the month, following his shock defeat to Lyndon Arthur last year – and Callum Johnson, who made a successful return after a two-year absence against Emil Markic in April.

‘They’re fights that should be easy to make, we’re all in the same country, but there’s promotional issues which I don’t even think about,’ Buatsi explains. ‘My primary aim is to get the win on Saturday, and if these fights happen then they do. But I’m not waiting for anyone, I’ll be writing my own story.’

Indeed, Buatsi is doing a phenomenal job at writing an impressive story in his career to date. And if things go as expected, Saturday night will be only another short but sweet chapter. But for Buatsi, when things are all said and done, it's not his actions inside the ring he wants at the forefront of his legacy.

'For me, I want people to say, "when I really needed something, Josh was there for me. I reached out to Josh, or he reached out to me and we were able to do something".

'Because when you need people, you really need people. Boxing is boxing – we all want to win championships. But for me there’s a lot more valuable things I can do outside the ring than inside of it.'

Yes, Eddie, seems you were right after all.

Watch Saturday night's action at Fight Camp live on DAZN for just £1.99
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Crystal Palace have financed potentially their boldest summers in the transfer market by making a wealthy American entrepreneur the club's fourth co-owner.

The arrival of John Textor allows Palace to reduce their debt by £50million. But an additional £40million raised through Textor and existing shareholders also allows them to reshape the squad in a summer which has put them at a crossroads.

Knowledge that the new investment was coming has already allowed Palace to spend £23.3m on Marc Guehi and nearly £17.5million on Joachim Andersen – both central defenders - this summer.

Crystal Palace have spent heavily after making entrepreneur John Textor their fourth co-owner

Defender Marc Guehi (pictured) arrived for £23.3m with the club aware of the new investment

Palace have also added exciting midfielder Michael Olise for around £8m from Reading plus goalkeeper Remi Matthews on a free and midfielder Connor Gallagher on loan from Chelsea.

And they remain in the market for further signings with a striker and winger thought to be among their targets in the remainder of the window.

After joining on the Palace board, Textor said: 'I have looked at many opportunities across European football in which to invest so I could follow my passion for football and have a meaningful stake in a club.

'Over the past six months of discussions, I have also developed a real affinity to Crystal Palace F.C, its history, the staff and, of course, most importantly the supporters who create an incredible atmosphere at every game – one I cannot wait to witness again when supporters return to fill Selhurst Park this season.

'I very much look forward to working with the Chairman and the other partners.'

Patrick Vieira has been able to reshape a squad previously at a crossroads for the new season

Sportsmail revealed in June how new manager Patrick Vieira could have up to £80m to spend this summer.

Palace have not been banking on revenue raised from the sale of Wilfried Zaha, who is still at Selhurst Park with the curtain raiser at Chelsea just three days away.

They are realistic about Zaha's ambition but they would love him to stay and there is some hope that their investment this summer might actually make that idea more appealing.

Textor was initially thought to have wanted to buy Palace outright. But the club's three existing owners – Steve Parish, Josh Harris and David Blitzer – were keen to explore how he might help them spend a higher percentage of the club's income and spread the financial risk involved more widely.

Harris and Blitzer are both thought to remain committed to working with chairman Parish at Selhurst Park.

Textor's investment has allowed the club to complete work on the academy. The reduction of debt will also make it easier to find finance to develop Selhurst Park – a key part of Parish's vision for his boyhood club, which he rescued from financial oblivion 11 years ago.

Palace's three owners, including Steve Parish (above), wanted to spread out the financial risk

This is a very different form of investment than the leveraged model seen at Burnley, where new owner Alan Pace borrowed £80milllion from an American technology billionaire to take control. Interest payments at Turf Moor will eat into revenues.

Though Palace's appointment of Vieira as manager is widely seen as proof of a commitment to youth, there is an acceptance at the club that results are more important than anything.

It has been a challenging summer, with around ten players out of contract as the new manager arrives. Andros Townsend, Patrick van Aanholt, Mamadou Sakho, James MCarthy and Gary Cahill have all left.

Textor was founder of hologram company Facebank and bought out fubo TV, a US-based sports streaming business, when it was in trouble.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham have joined the race to sign Watford winger Ismaila Sarr after facing uncertainty with their planned swoop for Inter Milan's Lautaro Martinez.

Sportsmail revealed last week that Spurs had agreed a £60million fee with cash-strapped Inter for the Argentina forward, although the player's agent later said his client wanted to remain at the Serie A champions.

And Eurosport has reported that Spurs are looking at Senegal international Sarr as an alternative, although Watford are keen for their star player to stay and help their bid to stay up on their return to the Premier League.

Tottenham have joined the race to sign Watford star winger Ismaila Sarr, according to a report

Spurs are interested in Sarr as they are unsure of sealing a deal for Lautaro Martinez (pictured)

Sarr joined Watford from Rennes in 2019 for around £30million and had a strong first season on an individual level, even as the club were relegated back to the Championship.

He scored in a 2-1 win over Manchester United then bagged a double in a storming 3-0 win over runaway league leaders Liverpool, netting five times in total.

He was far more prolific in the Championship and scored 15 league goals to help fire Watford straight back to the top-flight.

The Hornets, naturally, are keen to help hold of their star man for the return and the Eurosport report said they have declared he is not for sale, and would only be open to offers over £50m.

The in-demand forward netted 15 times to help the Hornets secure an instant top flight return

Manchester United and Liverpool have also shown interest in Sarr.

United were revealed to be close to signing the Senegal international for £40million last year while representatives from Jurgen Klopp's side met the player's agent last year.

There is still a chance of Spurs signing Martinez, though, as the Eurosport report added that the 23-year-old was keen to leave Inter following their financial problems, which have led to Romelu Lukaku joining Chelsea and star rightback Achraf Hakimi heading to Paris Saint-Germain.

The report added that Arsenal are also interested in the Argentina striker, and are ready to offer him wages of £275,000 per week.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham and Arsenal's pursuit of Inter Milan striker Lautaro Martinez looks to be all but over after his agent again insisted that he wants to stay at his current club.

Sportsmail reported last weekend that Spurs agreed a £60million deal with the Serie A side for their star frontman, in the hope of playing him alongside Harry Kane.

It is also understood that Arsenal hold a strong interest in Martinez, but both north London rivals have been dealt a severe blow by the player's refusal to leave.

Tottenham and Arsenal have been dealt a blow with Lautaro Martinez wanting to stay at Inter

According to representative Alejandro Camano, Martinez will even hold talks next week over extending his contract at the San Siro.

Sport Italia reporter Gianluigi Longari revealed the stance from the 23-year-old's camp to TYC Sports.

Reporting Camano's quote on Twitter, Longari said: 'He doesn't want to leave Inter.

Martinez (centre) had helped fire Inter to the Serie A title last season and is reluctant to leave

'Scheduled next week [is] a meeting for talking about a contract extension.'

The latest update adds another twist in the transfer saga which will likely see Martinez remain in Italy, despite clubs in the Premier League pushing to land him.

Sportsmail understands that Tottenham were able to strike a deal with Inter for Martinez before Chelsea swooped in for Romelu Lukaku, complicating matters.

Spurs were hopeful they would be able to pull off the big-money transfer and secure his signature ahead of Arsenal, with sources adamant he would play with Kane, rather than arrive as a replacement.

Nuno Espirito Santo (left) at Tottenham and Arsenal's Mikel Artata (right) both wanted Martinez

But the mood from Camano and Martinez has long since been one of defiance, partly because of his sparkling connection with Inter supporters.

'Lautaro is an Inter player and is happy in Italy. His decision is to stay,' Camano also said.

'The relationship with Inter is perfect. Lautaro Martinez is calm. Yes, it is true that there were offers, but today he is fine and we will sit down to talk about the future.'

When asked about the terms of his new contract, he added: 'The renewal? Lautaro is from Inter, he will never enter into conflict with the club. Never, this is reality.'

Martinez has featured in pre-season for Inter and will hold talks over a contract extension soon

Martinez played an integral role in leading Inter to the top-flight title in Italy last season, having scored 17 goals in 38 league appearances.

He would almost certainly boost Tottenham and Arsenal's hopes of European football, too, after netting 31 goals in all competitions in total.

With Spurs seemingly missing out on their target, they have now reportedly joined the race to sign Watford winger Ismaila Sarr.

Eurosport claimed that the club have earmarked flying forward Sarr as a potential alternative, although Watford are keen for the player to stay.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England goalkeeper Sam Johnstone is poised to return to the West Brom team against Luton on Saturday despite his contract stalemate.

Johnstone, who has one year left on his current deal, was named on the bench for the Championship opener at Bournemouth last weekend, with David Button starting the 2-2 draw.

But Sportsmail understands Johnstone, who made his international debut when England beat Romania 1-0 in a friendly before Euro 2020, is set to regain his spot for Albion's first home game of the campaign.

West Brom hope to keep Sam Johnstone, who impressed in their Premier League relegation

The 28-year-old was one of the positive stories of a difficult 2020-21 season for Albion, which saw them relegated from the Premier League.

He drew strong interest from West Ham over the summer but no deal was agreed.

West Brom are desperate to avoid losing Johnstone on a free transfer next summer and are keen to discuss a new deal, which may even include a manageable release clause to guarantee Albion a transfer fee if – as expected – Johnstone leaves next summer.

Manager Valerien Ismael kept Johnstone as an unused substitute in the draw at Bournemouth

He would be an attractive option as a Bosman signing.

New boss Valerien Ismael has already seen Albion's other star of last season, playmaker Matheus Pereira, leave for Saudi club Al-Hilal.

Nonetheless, Albion will be among the favourites to win immediate promotion to the top flight after signing proven Championship players Alex Mowatt, Adam Reach and Matt Clarke.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@UEFA are reportedly set to to reveal proposals next month which would see Financial Fair Play rules replaced by a salary cap and luxury tax by next year.

The current FFP system which was introduced 11 years ago, state that clubs must break even over a three year period.

Under the planned system as reported by the Times, clubs participating in European competitions would be limited to spending a fixed percentage of their revenue - said to possibly be around 70 per cent - on salaries.

UEFA (president Alex Ceferin pictured centre) are planning to bring in a salary cap and luxury tax for any teams that breach it

UEFA are set to introduce the proposals at a conference on the future of European football

Any clubs found to breach the cap would have to pay a luxury tax in which the 'equivalent or more' of any overspend would go into a pot to be then redistributed to other clubs in the competition.

The proposals are set to be unveiled a conference on the future of European football that UEFA is hosting in Switzerland next month.

UEFA's meeting will involve figures from national associations, leagues, clubs, players and agents.

The salary cap would allow wealthy owners to spend beyond their club's income but only if they are willing to pay the luxury tax if they go over.

The news comes just days after Paris Saint-Germain announced the signing of their latest world superstar in Lionel Messi following his shock departure from Barcelona.

Messi signed a two-year deal in which he is set to earn a whopping £1m-a-week at the French giants.

He joins other big name stars including Kylian Mbappe and Neymar at the Parc des Princes.

In the future, if a big name signing like Messi was to push a club over the salary-cap threshold, they would have to pay a substantial amount extra to bring that player in.

Lionel Messi joined Paris Saint-Germain on a contract worth £1million-a-week

Repeat offenders would also face possible sporting sanctions in the proposals, which could be anything up to a possible disqualification from European competition as UEFA looks to provide a deterrent to stop clubs overspending.

It's said the luxury tax would be on a sliding scale where exceeding the cap by up to 20 per cent could mean clubs pay the equivalent amount of the overspend, but for anything over that it could be 1.5 or two times the amount.

The proposals adopt a similar system already seen in the United States in both Major League Baseball and basketball's NBA.

The proposals adopt a system used in the United States in both the NBA and MLB

UEFA's meeting will also discuss how to fend off the threat of any future breakaway European Super League.

The Premier League's 'top-six' as well as six other major European clubs including Real Madrid, Barcelona and Juventus, announced plans for a super league back in April.

The ESL’s plans collapsed when nine of the 12 founder clubs, including the six English ones, pulled out only 48 hours after it was launched due to public anger.

Though the remaining trio of Real Madrid, Barcelona and Juventus are still involved in court proceedings against Uefa and still hope to push through the plans.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The majority of Spanish league clubs approved a deal with an investment fund worth up to 2.7 billion euros (£2.3 billion) on Thursday – despite opposition from Real Madrid and Barcelona.

The league said 38 of the 42 clubs from the first and second divisions in Spain voted in favor of the deal with private equity firm CVC, which is intended to boost the clubs' finances and help the league cut into the Premier League's global dominance.

The league and CVC gave the four clubs who voted against the deal the option to opt out, meaning they would not benefit from the new funds and would not relinquish a percentage of their future revenues. Athletic Bilbao also opposed the agreement. The fourth club that voted against the deal was not disclosed.

La Liga President Javier Tebas has had the backing of 38 out of 42 clubs over a new investment

Barcelona chief Joan Laporta (left) and Real Madrid supremo Florentino Perez oppose the bid

Madrid and Barcelona said that although the deal would inject a significant influx of cash in the next three years, the agreement would hurt the clubs' income from broadcast rights in the long term as they would be tied to it for the next 50 years.

Madrid and Barcelona had already said they planned to take legal action against the league and CVC if the deal was approved in the general assembly.

Madrid noted that both the Italian and German leagues refused the deal with CVC because they felt it undervalued their leagues.

The Spanish league was valued at 24.2 billion euros in the deal with CVC, which used to own Formula One and has been involved in other endeavours related to sports. The valuation would not change if Barcelona and Madrid opted out, the league said.

Athletic Bilbao also voted against the potentially lucrative Liga link-up with equity firm CVC

As part of the agreement, CVC would have a share of about 10 percent of the league's revenues and a stake of 10 percent in a new commercial entity.

The clubs would receive 90 percent of the money paid by CVC, with 70 percent aimed at long-term investments. Some of the money would also go toward paying off debts and increasing their spending limits on players and coaches.

The league said CVC will not have control of the management of the competition, or the sale of its broadcasting rights.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@UEFA are close to finalising a £6billion rescue package to help European football recover from the financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic.

As reported by Bloomberg, UEFA have devised a three-pronged strategy to help clubs who had to deal with a lack of supporters in stadiums in addition to falling broadcast revenue.

To combat the issue UEFA are proposing a funding facility of £1.7billion to £5.1billion.

UEFA are close to finalising a rescue a £6billion rescue package to help European football recover from the financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic.

In addition, there will be an emergency pot of money reserved to deal with future crises, while there will also be new rules on financial fair play.

Clubs will be able to access funds at lower borrowing rates, while they will also be able to restructure existing debt over longer periods of five to seven years.

UEFA are planning a salary cap to stop the likes of Chelsea and Manchester City having an unfair advantage

UEFA are also planning a salary cap as they look to prevent the likes of Manchester City and Chelsea from having an unfair advantage over other clubs.

The current Financial Fair Play system, which was introduced 11 years ago, states that clubs have to break even over a three-year period.

However, under the planned new system, clubs participating in European competitions would be limited to spending a fixed percentage of their revenue - around 70 per cent - on salaries.

Clubs that breach the cap would have to pay a luxury tax, with the equivalent or more of any overspend to then to be redistributed to other clubs in the competition.

Although fans have now returned to stadium at many grounds, clubs are still feeling the financial impact of the pandemic.

Barcelona, who lost Lionel Messi, are among the clubs that are currently struggling financially

In July Deloitte reported that revenue in European football fell by 13 per cent to £21.4million.

Barcelona, who were unable to keep Lionel Messi as he joined Paris Saint-Germain, are among the clubs that are struggling financially.

LaLiga clubs agreed to a proposal from private equity firm CVC Partners, which is set to provide the division with a financial boost of £1.78billion.

Barcelona and Real Madrid were strongly opposed to to plan owing to concerns regarding what it will mean for future broadcast revenue.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Metz sensation Pape Matar Sarr is being lined up by a host of the Premier League's big guns.

Chelsea, Manchester United and Manchester City are all tracking the Senegal international, who is regarded as one of the brightest young talents in France.

He burst onto the scene last season with Metz, and after just one reserve team game was promoted to the senior side in November and quickly made himself a first team regular.

Pape Matar Sarr (above) is being lined up by Chelsea, Manchester United and Manchester City

The all-action midfielder made 22 appearances in Ligue 1 last season, scoring three times.

Sarr's emergence has brought him onto the radar of a host of clubs across Europe.

Chelsea, United and City all see Sarr as a potential star in the making and are readying moves for the teenager.

The Metz midfielder, 18, is widely regarded as one of the most promising talents in France

Thomas Tuchel (L) and Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's sides are both interested in the player

The trio are prepared to buy Sarr and loan him back to Metz for the season in a bid to entice the Ligue 1 club to do business before the close of the transfer window.

The 18-year-old can play anywhere across midfield and has all the qualities to fit into the Premier League.

Teenager Sarr, who made his international debut in March, signed a five-year contract last September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manufacturers of Japanese flags intrigued by a sudden spike in Scottish sales need look no further than Celtic Park for an answer.

Dozens of them now fill the stalls around the stadium. Business looks brisk.. It's the most obvious way for supporters to show their appreciation of Kyogo Furuhashi as he continues his impressive adaption to life in a very different footballing environment.

The £4.5 million signing from Vissel Kobe delivered another all-action instalment. He was involved in the creation of Celtic's opening two goals - the first with a sublime pass - before netting the third that ultimately killed hope of Hearts' somehow salvaging their day. The narrow scoreline was far from a true reflection of the 90 minutes

The in-form Kyogo Furuhashi secured victory by bagging Celtic's third late on in the contest

Reaching the Premier Sports Cup quarter finals provided Ange Postecoglou with revenge for that opening Premiership defeat at Tynecastle 15 days ago. It also counts as another little step forward in his nascent reign.

Conceding two second half goals removed some of the gloss from what had, at the interval, looked like being a landslide victory. Defensive issues remain. This time, new signing Carl Starfelt was the most culpable.

Going forward, however, Celtic continued their recent irresistible streak. That's now 16 goals from their last four outings.

Furuhashi has five in five, but it would be wrong to solely credit his input. Celtic's breakthrough came from Odsonne Edouard after he was restored to the starting line-up.

Aaron McEneff had caused a late scare by slotting home for Hearts deep into added time

The French striker's future at Parkhead will be determined by the final two weeks of the transfer window, with suggestions some English Premier League admirers are being deterred by wage demands as the final year of his current contract ticks down. Time well tell.

What's certain is that having both Edouard and Furuhashi was a boon for Celtic in this match. There were times when the former looked enlivened by the latter's energetic spark. Behind them, Tom Rogic extended his own recent purple patch with another exhibition of exquisite close control.

Stephen Welsh put Celtic 2-0 up in an utterly dominant first half before Starfelt conceded a penalty that was converted by Liam Boyce early in the second period. After Furuhashi struck on 63 minutes, substitute Aaron McEneff's stoppage-time finish added a degree consolation for Hearts. In truth, though, they never really looked like extending a previously perfect start to the season.

A midweek knock was the reason for Ryan Christie dropping out of Celtic's squad. His place in the starting line-up went to Edouard. James McCarthy was named among the substitutes for the first time following his free transfer acquisition and appeared for the final 17 minutes.

Pre-match, Robbie Neilson described this as Hearts' 'biggest challenge for six months'. It quickly became apparent why. Penned deep in their own territory, Neilson spent so much of early stages frantically waving his side forward that he was in danger of developing cramp in his right arm.

Liam Boyce pulled a consolation goal back for the visitors after slotting home from 12-yards

It was a futile gesture. Unsettled by the pace, movement and invention of an ebullient Celtic, the visitors struggled to string more than two passes together. Their midfield could neither engage effectively nor retain possession. Hearts didn't muster a single shot before the break.

The opening goal may have take 29 minutes to arrive but the tone was set long before then. Rogic and David Turnbull were having a field day, prompting those in front of them to link with creative purpose. Parkhead simply enjoyed the show.

Rogic fed Furuhashi for an ambitious attempt from an acute angle that Craig Gordon smuggled wide. A hero in Hearts' recent league win, the former Celtic goalkeeper was beginning a far busier meeting with old club.

James Forrest took a fresh air swipe from a Greg Taylor cross before Furuhashi was blocked on the follow-up. Next, Beni Baningime - a summer addition at Tynecastle - had his pocket picked to allow the ball to be worked to Edouard. He would soon make up for a right-foot shot scuffed wide from 18 yards.

Stephen Welsh peels away in celebration after doubling Celtic's lead against Hearts

First, though, Edouard would become the game's first booking. Turnbull's quick through ball sent him scampering into the area. The striker toppled under pressure from John Souttar and referee John Beaton produced a yellow card for simulation.

Some sublime Rogic footwork - foxing Alex Cochrane and Craig Halkett - led to the Australian dragging an effort marginally wide. By the time Furuhashi saw a first-time effort thump against Souttar's chest, Hearts had been stretched to breaking point.

They finally snapped when Furuhashi's delightful pass off the outside of his boot released James Forrest. He drove forward to commit Cochrane and Edouard smartly finished the cutback. The combination between the front three was superb.

That interplay was quickly reprised in the same order to draw a fine Gordon save. A second goal felt inevitable. It arrived on 34 minutes.

Furuhashi's sheer desire was crucial as he lunged after a mishit strike from Turnbull to win a corner. The Japanese forward took it quickly to Edouard, whose inswinging cross was tailor-made for Welsh to plant a terrific downward header beyond Gordon. The defender had earlier been unlucky with a cute attempt from a Turnbull corner.

The defender saluted the home fans after giving his side room to breathe in the cup clash

You expected Hearts to be further engulfed in the second period. Briefly, though, the Gorgie side offered a spot of unexpected resistance.

Neilson's half-time introduction of Josh Ginnelly, replacing Andy Halliday, brought some much-needed threat. Ginnelly quickly gave Starfelt an issue with a driving run, even if his claim for a penalty was optimistic.

Even so, the scare should have acted as a warning to the Swedish centre-back. But Starfelt was at fault when Hearts brought themselves back in contention.

Ginnelly was again involved. He surged onto a long pass down the right flank down before sending in a hopeful low cross.

Striker Odsonne Edouard got the Hoops off the mark with a composed, slotted finish

Starfelt had a chance to clear, yet took a poor first touch that allowed Boyce to get on top of him. Down went the Hearts striker and Beaton immediately pointed to the spot. Boyce took the penalty himself and coolly sent Joe Hart the wrong way with his side's first shot on target.

From a position of absolute dominance, Celtic were suddenly confronted by doubt. It didn't persist. Furuhashi saw to that.

His movement was again impressive as he latched onto a Rogic through-ball. A left-foot thump carried plenty of power but might actually have been heading wide before it seemed to clip the inside of Gordon's right glove.

Callum McGregor and substitute Adam Montgomery both drew terrific saves from Gordon before McEneff tapped in with almost the last kick of the game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brentford's maiden Premier League victory against Arsenal was made even more memorable for one young supporter as he enjoyed a heartwarming moment with manager Thomas Frank after the game.

The Bees are back in the top flight for the first time since 1947 and got off to a superb start courtesy of goals from Sergi Canos and Christian Norgaard.

With Brentford supporters cheering in the stands after the game, Frank took the time to celebrate with a young fan.

This is the content we all 𝙇𝙊𝙑𝙀 to see!



❤️ @BrentfordFC pic.twitter.com/3HNLpnLSRC — 𝙏𝙤𝙢 𝘽𝙚𝙧𝙚𝙨𝙛𝙤𝙧𝙙 (@tomsportsjourno) August 15, 2021

A young Brentford fan had a memorable moment with Thomas Frank after the win v Arsenal

Frank celebrated with the fan after Brentford's impressive 2-0 victory at home to Arsenal

The supporter also received high-fives from Christian Norgaard and Vitaly Janelt.

Brentford's players celebrated the win with a lap of honour. There was a fantastic atmosphere at the Brentford Community Stadium and Frank will be hoping that his team will be able to build further momentum when they face Crystal Palace away in their next game.

After the game Frank said: ‘What an atmosphere. In a way I'm speechless. For our fans they can dream.

Christian Norgaard, one of Brentford's goalscorers, gave the young fan a high five

Another Brentford player, Vitaly Janelt, also came over to see the supporter after the game

‘We're No 1 in the Premier League and that's a fantastic story. We're just a bus stop in Hounslow. We're not supposed to be here, so we've got to celebrate every win, but we also want more.'

Brentford caused many problems for Arsenal as they frequently harried their opponents into making mistakes.

Although they are new to the Premier League they certainly didn't seem daunted by their opening assignment and will now have increased confidence that they can remain in the division.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With a couple of minutes to go at an increasingly lively Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, Jack Grealish stretched out a tired leg and brought Lucas Moura to the ground.

Cue some pushing and shoving, a yellow card for Grealish and further proof for the 25-year-old that his summer of overwhelming love with England is already a distant memory.

Grealish, Manchester City’s £100million record signing, had seen this coming. Back in the hot and heady days of June, he had laughed while at Euro 2020 about how strange it was to feel the weight of the country behind him. ‘I am used to everybody giving me grief,’ he had said with a smile.

Jack Grealish endured a frustrating Premier League debut for Manchester City on Sunday

City fell to a 1-0 defeat and Grealish was booked in the second-half for a tackle on Lucas Moura

So here he was. Playing no longer for his native Aston Villa but still on familiar ground all the same. Booed and jeered by Tottenham fans at almost every turn, he will not care about any of that.

Good players always worry opposing fans. He will have been as flattened as anybody in sky blue by the result, though.

It was supposed to be Tottenham in turmoil here. They were the ones trying desperately to hang on to their star forward, the ones with a sixth-choice manager in charge for the first time.

Grealish couldn't make an impact on the game as City struggled to break Tottenham down

For City this was merely supposed to be the start of another season of excellence. But all that got tipped marvellously on its head.

By the end of an absorbing game, Grealish must have been wondering when he was going to get to play with all of City’s good players. Kevin De Bruyne began the day on the bench while Phil Foden was absent injured.

Tottenham’s manager Nuno Espirito Santo, meanwhile, walked down the tunnel at full-time grinning broadly and fist bumping with the home supporters.

As he made his way back out for media interviews later, he offered the same to the team of Sky pundits standing on the touchline. For the home team, it was that kind of day.

Few tried harder for City than Grealish. Stationed on the left side of his team’s midfield three, he almost won a penalty with a typically sharp burst forwards in just the third minute.

As City dominated early play, he was integral. Then, as they faded later on, he sought positions right across the field in a bid to make something happen. But this was not his day, nor indeed City’s.

Pep Guardiola’s team looked short of match fitness and that didn’t help him. With players like De Bruyne, Kyle Walker, John Stones and the holding player Rodri on the bench after their efforts in the Euros, this was a scratch City team and over the course of the 94 minutes they looked a little like it. Tottenham, on the other hand, grew into the game and deservedly won it. Early on their attempt to draw their opponents on to them and then break looked as though it was a plan that needed work.

But over time, it did work. Their best two players were the Brazilian Moura and the Dutch international Steven Bergwijn.

Lucas Moura and Steven Bergwijn impressed for Tottenham in their opening day victory

Moura, once of PSG, was particularly impressive, breaking hard through the middle on several occasions to feed Bergwijn and goalscorer Son Heung-min.

The 29-year-old has been with Spurs for three-and-a-half years but has frequently been the odd one out as first Mauricio Pochettino and then Jose Mourinho tried to squeeze him, Son and of course Harry Kane into two attacking positions.

If Kane stays at Tottenham beyond this transfer window, the shadows may once again beckon for Moura and that would be a shame. He was terrific here.

At their best, Nuno’s Wolves team played a little like this. They were not afraid to defend before springing upfield quickly, often switching play from one side of the field en route.

At times in the Midlands, the Portuguese coach was accused of defensive tendencies but that’s the problem with counter attacking. It only ever brings a coach any credit on the days it works.

Certainly, Tottenham will have harder afternoons.

The result gave Nuno Espirito Santo's side the best possible start to his reign as manager

The Kane issue will hang heavy over Nuno and his squad until it is resolved. If he doesn’t play when Spurs go to Nuno’s old club on Sunday then the manager will be asked why. And on and on it will go until a definitive point is reached.

For now, though, this was a day to be reminded that Tottenham do have alternative talent on the books. This fabulous stadium was bouncing by full-time and as the City bus prepared to leave somebody had started to play Neil Diamond’s Sweet Caroline over the concourse tannoy.

That was the theme of England’s summer of work, of course. For Grealish, the challenges have already taken on a different shape.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Six fans were arrested following clashes between Manchester United and Leeds supporters before Saturday's game at Old Trafford.

Greater Manchester Police staged a major security operation for the high-risk fixture and had to break up 'isolated incidents of disorder' around the city centre.

During the game, some of the 3,000 Leeds supporters briefly aimed sick taunts about the Munich Air Disaster at their rivals.

Six fans were arrested following clashes between Manchester United and Leeds supporters before Saturday's game at Old Trafford

There were allegations that this was in response to a Turkish flag being thrown into the away end. Two Leeds fans were killed in Istanbul in 2000 before a UEFA Cup tie against Galatasaray.

The away fans also aimed foul-mouthed abuse at former United and Leeds defender Rio Ferdinand, who was working as a pundit for BT Sport, as they waited to be allowed out of the stadium.

Tempers boiled over as fans made their way to Old Trafford before the game, with violent clashes between supporters outside cafes and restaurants.

Tempers boiled over as fans made their way to Old Trafford before the game, with violent clashes between supporters outside cafes and restaurants

A video posted on Twitter showed fans using bins and chairs as weapons as one lone police officer frantically tried to separate those involved using a baton.

Another video shared online showed the moment a police van arrived to a brawl which had spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

Men could be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the skirmage, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring. It was the first time in 17 months that Old Trafford hosted a capacity crowd and the first meeting between the two teams with fans since 2004.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Inter Milan fans have defaced another mural of former striker Romelu Lukaku after his £97.5million move to Chelsea.

Supporters are furious at the player and their own club for allowing the star forward - who scored 30 goals last season as the Nerazzuri won their first Serie A title in 11 years - to leave especially after both the player and the Italian side claimed the Belgian would be staying earlier this summer.

The latest defaced mural scribbles out part of the Belgian striker's face and has 'sell out traitor' written in Italian.

Part of Romelu Lukaku's face has been scribbled out with 'sell out traitor' written underneath

Inter Milan fans are angry at the club and Lukaku for his mega money move back to Chelsea

Originally the mural depicted Lukaku clashing heads with former Manchester United team-mate and AC Milan rival Zlatan Ibrahimovic during a Milan derby clash last season.

Ibrahimovic - who also played for Inter Milan earlier in his career - is not defaced in the graffiti on the mural.

It comes after a mural painted for their Serie A title success was defaced shortly before his move to Chelsea was confirmed.

The mural showed Lukaku pointing two fingers in the air towards the Inter Milan badge and the Italian flag, and most of the phrase 'Dear Milano, you're welcome' has been blocked out with black paint, barring the word 'Milano'.

The mural pictured in February shows Lukaku and Zlatan Ibrahimovic's head to head clash during the Milan derby

Inter Milan's main ultra group in the Curva Nord are responsible for the vandalism of the mural, created for the Belgian when he first joined the club in 2019 from Manchester United.

And a message on the group's Facebook page to the departing Belgian striker read: 'Dear Lukaku, we expected more honest and transparent behaviour from you.

'But, despite the fact we protected you like a son, like one of us, you too proved yourself to be just like all the rest, going to your knees for money. We wish you the best, even if greed doesn't always pay.'

It comes after another Lukaku mural outside the San Siro was defaced shortly before his move to Chelsea was confirmed

Lukaku since the confirmation of his move to Chelsea, posted a statement on his social media focusing on the positives of his 'beautiful story' at Inter Milan.

He wrote: 'Dear Inter fans, Thank you. Thank you for loving me as one of your own. Thank you for making me and my family feel at home in Milano.

'Thank you for the unconditional support and love on a daily basis. Thank you for motivating me even more after the first season.

'When I came to Inter, I immediately felt that I would do well for this club.

Lukaku helped fire Inter Milan to the Serie A title last season by scoring 24 league goals

'The love and reception I first received at Malpensa airport was the start of a beautiful story. I made it my mission to never let you down every time I wore the Inter shirt.

'I gave 100% in every training session and every game so that I could make you proud.'

He went on to add: 'I hope you guys understand my decision to move on to Chelsea.

'It's a chance of a lifetime for me and I think at this time of my career it is a chance that I always dreamed of.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Frankie Dettori hailed Palace Pier as the best miler he has ever ridden as the colt overcame a disrupted preparation to land back-to-back runnings of the Prix Jacques Le Marois at Deauville.

It was a sixth win in the Group One race for Dettori as Palace Pier, who beat Poetic Flare by a neck, became the first horse to win the Marois two years running since Spinning World in 1997.

John Gosden, who trains Palace Pier in partnership with son Thady, said the odds-on favourite was only 80 per cent fit after missing work because of a blood disorder which forced him out of last month's Sussex Stakes at Glorious Goodwood.

Frankie Dettori think he has ridden the greatest miler of his career, after winning on Palace Pier

Dettori won on Palace Pier at the Prix Jacques Le Marois at Deauville for a second year in a row

Dettori said: 'I love the horse — he's the best miler I've ridden. He's got everything.

'We were rushing to get him here. He's missed a bunch of work but it is so good we got away with it.'

Palace Pier, who has won nine of his 10 starts, will be given a break until Champions Day at Ascot in October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taika Waititi has paid tribute to his friend Chris Hemsworth on his 38th birthday.

The Thor director, 45, shared a hilariously 'unflattering' photo of the movie star in the hair and make-up chair for their most recent project, Thor: Love and Thunder.

Chris beamed for the camera as his long blond wig cascaded down his muscular shoulders.

Funny: Taika Waititi shared an 'unflattering' photo of Chris Hemsworth as the Thor star celebrated his 38th birthday on Wednesday. Chris beamed for the camera as his long blond wig cascaded down his muscular shoulders in the hair and make-up chair for Thor: Love and Thunder

He wrote in the caption to his pal: 'It takes 13 hours to make this hairline perfect for the silver screen and you take it like the true champ you are. Happy Birthday bro.'

Many fans also wished the Marvel actor a Happy Birthday, and some were taken aback by Taika's photo of Chris.

Among them was a follower who wrote: 'Wow. Finally an unflattering picture of Chris Hemsworth. And they said it would never happen.'

Pals: Taika wrote in the caption to his pal: 'It takes 13 hours to make this hairline perfect for the silver screen and you take it like the true champ you are. Happy Birthday bro.' Pictured left to right is Matt Damon, Chris and Taika

Blown away: Many fans also wished the Marvel actor a Happy Birthday, and some were taken aback by Taika's photo

Taika first worked with Chris on Thor: Ragnarok in 2017 and recently wrapped filming the fourth instalment in Sydney earlier this year.

The film boasts a star studded cast including Natalie Portman, Chris Pratt, Matt Damon, Tessa Thompson and Christian Bale.

Also wishing Chris a Happy Birthday was his older brother Luke Hemsworth, who used the opportunity to brazenly troll him instead.

Banter: Also wishing Chris a Happy Birthday was his older brother Luke Hemsworth (left), who used the opportunity to brazenly troll him instead. Sharing a picture of himself alongside the pair's other sibling, Liam, 31, Luke quipped: 'Happy birthday brother @chrishemsworth!'

Sharing a picture of himself alongside the pair's other sibling, Liam, 31, Luke quipped: 'Happy birthday brother @chrishemsworth!

'Love you mate will remember this trip the Kimberly region for ever. So many memories together.'

Fans in the comments section were quick to respond at the funny dig, sharing an abundance of crying with laughter emojis over the banter between the pair.

Siblings: Luke, 40, (R) is the oldest of the Hemsworth Brothers, followed by Chris, 38, (C) and Liam, 31 (L). Pictured in 2015

Old friends: Chris' trainer and friend Luke Zocchi (right) also shared a photo to Instagram of the Thor star as a very awkward teenager to mark his birthday

Chris' trainer and friend Luke Zocchi also shared a photo to Instagram of the Thor star as a very awkward teenager to mark his birthday.

In the image, a young Chris sported short hair with blonde highlights as he posed for the camera after enjoying a swim with Luke standing beside him.

He wrote in the caption: 'Happy birthday to this special human @chrishemsworth. When we met in the schoolyard many years back.

'I always knew you would make it to the second round of the dancing with the stars. Love you mate have an epic day!!!!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TOWIE bosses have been accused of acting 'irresponsibly' after cruelly axing 10 young cast members 'without warning' despite telling newbies 'you'll be a star.'

The devastated group were sacked ahead of the start of the 29th series in hastily arranged meetings last month, which many wrongly believed were storyline consultations.

MailOnline can reveal the brutal cull left the cast 'distraught' after they were sold a dream by TV bosses and are now facing financial hardship in incredibly tough economic times.

'They showed no remorse': TOWIE bosses have been accused of acting 'irresponsibly' after cruelly axing 10 young cast members including Chloe Meadows (pictured) 'without warning'

A talent management source told MailOnline: 'It has been a challenging two years for most people financially, this was their career and TOWIE effectively sacked a bunch of youngsters from their jobs and for what reason?

'There was no problem with anyone on the show, they could have given them another six months or the chance to look for other opportunities, but to just fire them all overnight was irresponsible.

'The cast believed they were meeting producers for a catch-up ahead of filming resuming in August, so everyone was ready and excited with their updates – but without warning they were booted off the show.'

'It was brutal': The devastated group, which included Ella Rae Wise (pictured), were sacked ahead of the start of the 29th series in hastily arranged meetings last month

An axed cast member, who cannot be named for legal reasons, said: 'Everyone was dressed up ready to meet the new executives to talk about their storylines because that's what we were told but it turned out to be a completely different conversation.

'The entire cast were phoning each other asking "am I sacked? Am I sacked?" The way it was done, they showed no remorse and didn't take our feelings into account. It was brutal, like a massacre. Some people were really upset and crying.

'Producers recruited a load of youngsters and thought they were going to make it work but now they've chucked them all off. One newbie was told "you're going to be star" and was reassured they'd be on the next series, but it was all short-lived.'

'Challenging': MailOnline can reveal the brutal cull left the cast 'distraught' after they were sold a dream by TV bosses and are now facing financial hardship in tough economic times (pictured: Courtney Green)

Axed: Last month, TOWIE confirmed future series will 'follow a smaller group of cast members and show more of their personal passions and professions' (pictured: Clelia Theodorou)

Last month, TOWIE confirmed future series will 'follow a smaller group of cast members and show more of their personal passions and professions.'

In a statement posted on social media the show said: 'Those who won't appear on screen next series will always be part of the TOWIE family and we wholeheartedly thank them for sharing their lives with us.'

Stars including Courtney Green, 26, Chloe Meadows, 28, and Clelia Theodorou, 26, as well as Nicole Bass, 30, Kelsey Stratford, 20, and Ella Rae Wise, 21, were dropped.

Harry Lee, 26, Harry Derbidge, 27, Rem Larue, 27, and Tom McDonnell, 26, will also not be returning following the cull.

A TOWIE spokesperson said: 'As always the welfare of past and present TOWIE cast is of paramount importance to us and we continue to offer our robust welfare and psychological support.

'In addition to this, we are providing access to a number of advisory services to offer further support including; financial management training, social media management, career advice and life coaching.'

'It was all short-lived': Amber Turner (pictured far left) remains on the show, while close friends Chloe Meadows (middle) and Courtney Green (far right) have been axed in the latest cull

In 2019, TOWIE bosses cast a 'new era' of stars such as Ella and Kelsey to make the show more appealing to younger generations.

Chloe Brockett, 20, is now the only signing from two years ago that remains on the show alongside veterans Chloe Sims, 39, Pete Wicks, 32, and Amy Childs, 31.

A former cast member said: 'They're saying they want to closely follow the lives of cast but at the same time want it to be 'high drama' like Love Island. In truth, they don't know what they're doing.

Moving forward: In 2019, TOWIE bosses cast a 'new era' of stars such as Ella and Kelsey Stratford (pictured) to make the show more appealing to younger generations

'The cast have been silenced by their contracts so are scared to speak about how they've been treated. We're not allowed to talk about how we feel or what we've gone through.

'Over the years so many people have been thrown on and off the show. Cast members aren't allowed to be who they want to be; they're forced to repress their personalities for the purposes of the show.

'They want you to be who they want you to be and if you are, you're their favourites, and you'll get all the storylines and be involved in the drama.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Geno Doak, the longtime beau of reality star Mama June Shannon, has been sentenced to 16 months in prison in connection with a drug conviction stemming from a 2019 incident in Alabama.

Doak entered custody July 29 and has a release date of November 28, 2022, according to documents viewed by The Sun. He previously told the outlet he was 'very concerned' with the prospects of a stint in prison.

Doak entered into a plea deal with prosecutors and is serving his sentence at Macon Community Corrections, TMZ reported on Wednesday. He is also sentenced to two years of probation and a substance abuse program as part of the plea.

Hard times: Geno Doak, 45, the longtime beau of reality star Mama June Shannon, has been sentenced to 16 months in prison in connection with a drug conviction stemming from a 2019 incident in Alabama

Doak, 45, and Shannon, 42, were arrested March 15, 2019 arrest outside of a gas station in Alabama in connection with crack cocaine possession, after police were called to the scene for a domestic dispute.

Doak was also charged with third-degree domestic violence and harassment, as well as drug paraphernalia possession, in the incident. Authorities said they recovered from their vehicle items including needles, a green pill and a glass pipe with white residue.

In the case, the Mama June: From Not to Hot star received a sentence of 100 hours of community service in connection with the incident.

The struggles for Shannon prompted numerous family problems, as her daughter Lauryn Shannon, 21, assumed custody of Alana, 15, in the wake of the 2019 arrest.

Doak said he was 'very concerned' with the prospects of a stint in prison

Details: Doak and Shannon, 42, pictured on her reality show, were arrested March 15, 2019 arrest outside of a gas station in Alabama in connection with crack cocaine possession

The McIntyre, Georgia native earlier this summer had a reunion with daughters Anna, 26, Jessica, 24, Lauryn and Alana during a baby shower for Lauryn; Anna told The Sun that Doak was not present at the gathering.

In an April edition of her new WE tv show Mama June: Road to Redemption, Mama June spoke with Alana about how she had 'missed out on a lot' amid the years of turbulence.

'I want to be here for y'all and I want to be the best mom I can be,' she said on the show, which documented ongoings as she and Doak both checked into a rehab facility.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island have received a record breaking 24,763 Ofcom complaints over Faye Winter's expletive-filled row with Teddy Soares.

Thousands of viewers took to the media watchdog to express their upset at the Friday 6th August episode in which Faye, 26, let rip at Teddy, 26, in a furious rant after watching a clip of him in Casa Amor.

The video, shown during the islander's Movie Night challenge, saw Teddy tell fellow contestant Clarisse Juliette that he was 'sexually attracted' to her.

Not impressed: Love Island have received a record breaking 24,763 Ofcom complaints over Faye Winter's expletive-filled row with Teddy Soares

Faye's rant - branded 'horrendous', 'abusive', and 'gaslighting' by fans of the show - resulted in the most expletive-ridden episode ever, with reports that contestants swore 125 times, while Faye is said to have said 'f**k' 57 times.

And in the aftermath of the explosive scenes, Ofcom have confirmed the episode received nearly 25,000 complaints.

An Ofcom representative told The Mirror: 'We’ve received a high volume of complaints about last week’s Love Island, which is consistent with a trend of growing complaints about high-profile TV shows.

'We are carefully assessing the complaints we’ve received, before deciding whether or not to investigate.'

Wow: Thousands of viewers took to the media watchdog to express their upset at the Friday 6th August episode in which Faye, 26, let rip at Teddy, 26, in a furious rant after watching a clip of him in Casa Amor

The preceding episode on Thursday saw 675 people complain as the ITV2 show aired the start of the awkward challenge.

This series previously saw a high of 4,000 complaints following the episode in which Faye was shown a postcard which suggested that Teddy had cheated on her, with viewers fuming that it was 'misleading'.

In the wake of the shocking episode, a spokesperson for Love Island addressed the backlash, adding to the publication: 'Welfare and duty of care towards our contributors is always our primary concern, and we take the emotional well-being of all the Islanders extremely seriously.

Shocking: Faye's rant - branded 'horrendous', 'abusive', and 'gaslighting' by fans of the show - resulted in the most expletive-ridden episode ever

Argument: In the now infamous argument between the couple following the Movie Night challenge, Faye is said to have said 'f**k' 57 times

'We have dedicated welfare producers and psychological support on hand at all times who monitor and regularly speak to all of the Islanders in private and off camera, especially if someone appears to be upset.

'All the Islanders are therefore fully supported by the professionals on-site and by their friends in the villa.'

They concluded: 'Islanders can always reach out and talk to someone if they feel the need.'

During Friday's episode, a heated Faye ended her romance with Teddy after the 'sexual attraction' comments he made to former islander Clarisse were shown on screen during the Movie Challenge.

Showdown: During Friday's episode, a heated Faye ended her romance with Teddy after the 'sexual attraction' comments he made to former islander Clarisse were shown on screen during the Movie Challenge

Row: Trying to reason with Faye, Teddy said: 'If you don't want to believe that I give a s**t about you… I'm less p**sed off about what you saw, and I'm more p**sed off about the way that you've reacted'

'Regardless of what was shown or said, I know my worth and this is done,' she told the senior financial consultant, adding: 'I'm glad that screen came out tonight, it tells me a lot about you.'

Trying to reason with Faye, Teddy said: 'If you don't want to believe that I give a s**t about you… I'm less p**sed off about what you saw, and I'm more p**sed off about the way that you've reacted.'

But Faye still refused to budge, and walked away from the conversation, adding: 'I'm done with this conversation. If you wanna speak about my reaction based on your actions, you can f**k off. My reaction was only based on your f**king actions, so f**k off.'

Their sit-down chat came at the end of the episode, after Teddy had tried numerous times to talk to Faye, who first signalled to Teddy that she was upset straight after the challenge when she flipped him the bird.

Hot water: Love Island bosses had since responded to complaints for allowing contestant Faye's 'verbal abuse' amid a row with show partner Teddy to play out on screen

'Do you know how childish that is?' Teddy told Faye, to which she fired back: 'Do I look like I give a f**k?'

Teddy then tried to approach Faye while she was standing in the kitchen with other islanders, asking her: 'Why am I getting a middle finger?'

'Why are you talking to me?' retorted Faye, adding: 'I don't want to speak to you because I'm being an adult and I don't want to have a conversation right now.'

Approaching Faye for a second time minutes later, Teddy asked: 'Are you done shouting?' but Faye made it apparent she was still not ready to hear him out, saying: 'If I was you I'd just keep walking Teddy, I have f**k all to say to you.'

Speaking out: Following the row, a member of Teddy's family voiced their frustration at Faye's behaviour in the villa and criticised her 'bad attitude'

Following the row, Teddy's cousin Tania Monteiro, 36, who lives in Portugal, hit out at Faye and reportedly called for her removal from the villa.

Speaking to The Sunday People, she said: 'I don't have words for what she has done.

'Yesterday I said, you are not a girl I was thinking would be good for my cousin because he needs a girl with a little bit of attitude, but not a bad attitude, a passive woman, not an aggressive woman.'

Meanwhile, Faye's family recently broke their silence on social media, after a receiving a slew of abuse over the weekend.

Backlash:Meanwhile, Faye's family recently broke their silence on social media, after a receiving a slew of abuse over the weekend

Her Instagram account - which is being run by her family - remained silent in the immediate aftermath, but posted a message on Sunday evening.

It read: 'We understand that fans of Love Island have opinions on Friday night's episode. While we don't want to comment on the events of the show, we ask everyone to remember:

'You are watching a highly edited TV show which is created for entertainment - you can never see the full picture.

Plea: Her Instagram account - which is being run by her family - remained silent in the immediate aftermath, but posted a message on Sunday evening

'Faye is human. She may not always get things right. There are human beings managing the islander's social media pages who will be seriously effected by your comments. We ask that everyone please remembers this before commenting or messaging.

'We make no apology for turning off comments, blocking and deleting, to protect the mental well-being of ourselves and Faye when she comes out. We would encourage anyone struggling to do the same thing.

'We hope that we can all get back to enjoying the show together rom now on. Love team Faye x'

Teddy and Faye have since reconciled with Tuesday's installment seeing the couple kiss and make up after the blonde beauty issued a grovelling apology.

Back on: Teddy and Faye have since reconciled with Tuesday's installment seeing the couple kiss and make up after the blonde beauty issued a grovelling apology

Faye told him she had 'no excuses' for the way she spoke to him during their heated row, explaining: 'Seeing what I saw on screen, I was hurt. For me to react like that, I obviously do care about you.

'I would love to show you that I'm not done and continue with you on this journey.'

Despite Teddy hinting to Faye that she has plenty of work to do, saying: 'I want to know that you actually want it,' the pair shared a kiss and confirmed their romance is back on as their fellow islanders cheered.

Love Island continues Wednesday at 9pm on ITV2 and ITV Hub.

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cara Santana was seen leaving a Pilates class in West Hollywood on Tuesday.

Dressed in all black, the Vida actress, 36, looked upbeat as she laughed with a friend and held her small pup close.

The ex of Desperate Housewives actor Jesse Metcalfe, 42, carried a fuzzy white bag and held a canned drink and a set of keys in one hand.

Cheerful: Cara Santana was seen leaving a pilates class in West Hollywood on Tuesday

Her dark hair sat atop her head in a white scrunchie. She wore a pair of black leggings with a matching crop top. Both had drawstrings in the front.

The 36-year-old star added a comfy, hooded, oversized jacket to her look. She accessorized with black sunglasses.

On her feet were black ankle socks and black Birkenstock sandals.

Cracking up: Dressed in all black, the Vida actress looked chipper and upbeat as she laughed with a friend

Joining the El Paso native, her friend wore a pair of teal biker shorts, a brown Cactus Jack hoody, and a black Prada handbag.

The unknown gal pal flashed a lavender manicure as she covered her mouth in laughter.

The star recently moved into a new home and she's been documenting the transition on Instagram.

Cozy: The 36-year-old star added a comfy, hooded, oversized jacket to her look. She accessorized with black sunglasses

Apart from her career as an actress, Santana maintains a presence as a clothing designer and spoke about her recent experience with her eponymous collection during an interview with HollywoodLife.

The performer spoke about how she and her collaborators weathered the pandemic by selling their wares directly to consumers as well as in stores.

'I was really grateful...I had such a successful female team behind me and that's what we did,' she said.

The actress also spoke about how becoming an entrepreneur has changed her outlook on life and why she was happy to have taken on another profession.

'It's so awesome and it's so rewarding and I think it's just another reminder to me that you shouldn't let other people define what you can and can't do,' she expressed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dakota Johnson has a slew of new co-stars for her new movie Cha Cha Real Smooth, which has started production in Pittsburgh.

Leslie Mann, Brad Garrett and Raul Castillo have joined the cast, along with Odeya Rush, Vanessa Burghardt, Evan Assante and Colton Osorio, via Variety.

The film comes from writer-director Cooper Raiff (S***house), who also stars in the film himself.

New cast: Dakota Johnson has a slew of new co-stars for her new movie Cha Cha Real Smooth, which has started production in Pittsburgh

The story follows a 'directionless college grad' who has been making ends meet as a bar mitzvah hype man.

While he's embarking on this new occupation, he is also starting a new relationship with a young mother and her teenage daughter.

No details were given for the roles that any of the cast members have at this time, though that may change as production continues.

No details: No details were given for the roles that any of the cast members have at this time, though that may change as production continues

'We are thrilled to begin production on this heartwarming, heartbreaking, heart-pumping and unique film of Cooper Raiff’s, with our friends and partners at TeaTime and Endeavor Content,' said Erik Feig, who will produce and provide financing through his Picturestart company.

'Cha Cha Real Smooth is going to become a whole bunch of people’s favorite movie of all time pretty soon,' Feig added.

Johnson will also produce alongside Ro Donnelly through their production company TeaTime Pictures.

Favorite: 'Cha Cha Real Smooth is going to become a whole bunch of people’s favorite movie of all time pretty soon,' Feig added

Producer: Johnson will also produce alongside Ro Donnelly through their production company TeaTime Pictures

Both Picturestart and Endeavor Content will provide financing, with Endeavor co-repping worldwide distribution rights with ICM Partners.

No release date plans were revealed quite yet, and it's unclear when this film may be released at this time.

Johnson has The Lost Daughter coming later this year, which is directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal and stars Olivia Colman and Peter Sarsgaard.

Coming soon: Johnson has The Lost Daughter coming later this year, which is directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal and stars Olivia Colman and Peter Sarsgaard

Mann plays Margot Cleary-Lopez in the upcoming TV series The Power and her husband Judd Apatow's new movie The Bubble.

Castillo recently starred in Wrath of Man and Army of the Dead, and he has The Same Storm coming soon.

Garrett most recently starred in Penny Dreadful: City of Angels and Single Parents and he'll next be seen voicing T-Bolt in The Clockwork Girl.

New movie: Mann plays Margot Cleary-Lopez in the upcoming TV series The Power and her husband Judd Apatow's new movie The Bubble

Recent roles: Castillo recently starred in Wrath of Man and Army of the Dead, and he has The Same Storm coming soon
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They went official in December 2019 and have gone from strength to strength since.

And Charles Leclerc and his bikini-clad girlfriend Charlotte Sine enjoyed some quality time together during a beach day in Mykonos on Friday before heading to Nammos Restaurant for lunch.

The Ferrari driver, 23, and the 21-year-old architecture student topped up their tans and had a splash in the ocean with Charlotte showing off her sizzling physique.

Sunshine: Charles Leclerc (right) and his bikini-clad girlfriend Charlotte Sine (left) enjoyed some quality time together during a beach day in Mykonos on Friday

The beauty flaunted her curves in an aqua blue bikini as she strolled along the sand and accessorised with a blue necklace and pink tinted sunglasses.

Meanwhile Charles went shirtless showing off his fit physique in a pair of jazzy multicoloured swimming shorts.

The pair - who are both Monegasque - were also joined by Charles' brother Arthur for the day out in the sunshine as well as a wider group of friends.

Wow: The Ferrari driver, 23, and the 21-year-old architecture student topped up their tans and had a splash in the ocean with Charlotte showing off her sizzling physique

Stunning: The beauty flaunted her curves in an aqua blue bikini as she strolled along the sand and accessorised with a blue necklace and pink tinted sunglasses

Hunk: Meanwhile Charles went shirtless showing off his fit physique in a pair of jazzy multicoloured swimming shorts

Cute: They went official in December 2019 and have gone from strength to strength since

Fun in the sun: Charlotte was making the most of her day at the beach as she took a stroll on the sand

Family: The pair - who are both Monegasque - were also joined by Charles' brother Arthur for the day out in the sunshine as well as a wider group of friends

The couple went official in December 2019, after Charlotte - who speaks French, English and Italian - shared a series of loved-up snaps of the pair on a skiing holiday.

Since then she's frequently declared her love for the handsome driver to her 276,000 Instagram fans, declaring him 'the one' and her 'world'.

Charles was previously in a relationship with Giada Gianni (reportedly a friend of Charlotte's) for around four years.

Lovely: The couple went official in December 2019, after Charlotte - who speaks French, English and Italian - shared a series of loved-up snaps of the pair on a skiing holiday

Bronzed: Charlotte topped up her tan as she lounged on the beach on Friday

Star: Leclerc is a Monégasque racing driver, currently racing in Formula One for Scuderia Ferrari, under the Monégasque flag

Fun: The stunning couple were joined by a big group of friends as they headed back from lunch

Incredible: She was flaunting her curvy figure in an aqua coloured bikini

Success: Leclerc won the GP3 Series championship in 2016 and the FIA Formula 2 Championship in 2017

Cooling off: She headed for a refreshing dip in the sea with their group of friends

Curves: Charlotte was showing her incredible physique in the blue bikini as she chatted away

But despite engagement rumours the pair broke up in 2019.

Afterwards the Italian shared an Instagram video declaring: 'Charles left me. He wants to devote himself only to Ferrari.'

Leclerc is a Monégasque racing driver, currently racing in Formula One for Scuderia Ferrari, under the Monégasque flag.

Leclerc won the GP3 Series championship in 2016 and the FIA Formula 2 Championship in 2017.

Time off: Charles is currently taking some time off from his driving to enjoy a summer holiday

Toned: The driver, 23, was showing off his fit physique in his jazzy swimming shorts

Cooling off: He took a refreshing dip in the ocean at one point with one of his male friends

Time together: The group looked in high spirits as they strolled along the coast after their lunch

Taking a dip: The F1 driver went shirtless, wearing his jazzy shorts, while in the sea
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They recently returned from a romantic trip to her native Brazil.

And on Saturday night, Alessandra Ambrosio looked very much in love with her new boyfriend Richard Lee, as the pair headed into dinner at trendy hotspot Nobu in Malibu, California.

The former Victoria's Secret Angel, 40, stared lovingly into the male model’s eyes, as he smiled back affectionately.

On Saturday night: Alessandra Ambrosio looked very much in love with her new boyfriend Richard Lee, as the pair headed into dinner at trendy hotspot Nobu in Malibu

Ambrosio wore a cute and sexy bright green knit dress, which had a keyhole opening at her midriff.

She carried a woven straw purse, and walked along in similar-looking sandals that looked to be made from rope.

The mother of two painted her finger and toenails in matching shades of green, and had an emerald pendant necklace on her chest layered with other pieces of delicate jewelry.

Look of love: The former Victoria's Secret Angel stared lovingly into the male model’s eyes, as he smiled back affectionately

Peek-a-boo: Ambrosio wore a cute and sexy bright green knit dress, which had a keyhole opening at her midriff

She wore mismatched earrings with one in the shape of a feather.

Her brown hair was down for the evening, and her makeup was soft.

Richard, whom Alessandra began dating earlier this year, was chic and understated in an all-black outfit.

He wore a matching beaded bracelet and carried a pale green sweatshirt over one shoulder.

Lovely: Alessandra's brown hair was down for the evening, and her makeup was soft

Earlier in the day: The brunette beauty uploaded an action shot of the pair playing beach volleyball to her Instagram, tagging Richard as he ran to the net to hit the ball

He looked happy and thrilled to be by his beauty’s side.

Neither Richard nor Alessandra were wearing face coverings while they were outdoors.

Earlier in the day, the brunette beauty uploaded an action shot of the pair playing beach volleyball to her Instagram, tagging Richard as he ran to the net to hit the ball.

Romantic: The couple recently returned from a romantic trip to her native Brazil

Alessandra confirmed her smoldering romance with Richard when they were spotted on a romantic dinner date in February.

She was previously involved with Italian fashion designer Nicolo Oddi who founded the brand Alanui with his sister Carlotta.

Meanwhile, Alessandra shares her two children Anja and Noah with her ex-fiance Jamie Mazur, who co-founded RE/DONE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi revealed Neymar and Mauricio Pochettino played major roles in his move to Paris Saint-Germain during his press conference that unveiled him as a Parisien player.

The 34-year-old, who left Barcelona last week in a shock exit via a free transfer, took part in a press conference at the Parc des Princes before he was presented to the club's raucous supporters and ultras outside the stadium.

Reports claimed former Barcelona team-mate Neymar was messaging Messi continuously over recent months over a move to France, with the former Barcelona captain revealing that he was influenced by the Brazilian forward.

Speaking about Neymar, Messi revealed in the press conference: 'I know him well. We were apart before but I think we are better together. Neymar was one of the reasons I came here.

Lionel Messi was officially unveiled as a Paris Saint-Germain player on Wednesday morning

Messi took part in a press conference before being unveiled to the PSG fans and ultras

Messi (right) revealed former Barcelona winger Neymar (left) played a big role in his arrival

'I know all of my team-mates though. We've all met many times before. I can't wait to play with the team-mates that I have, we have the same objectives.'

Messi also provided insight into his conversation with PSG head coach Pochettino, who he telephoned before deciding to sign his contract with the French giants.

'The coach and coaching staff had a big part in the negotiations,' Messi claimed. 'When I saw it was possible, I spoke with him (Pochettino) straight away. I've known him for a while.

'I spoke to him, the fact we are the two Argentines helped a lot. We spoke, it went well to begin with. The technical staff at PSG helped my decision.'

Messi also praised the influence of PSG's Argentine head coach Mauricio Pochettino (right)

Messi was forced to leave Barcelona last week when the Spanish club revealed they could no longer afford to keep him due to the club's poor finances.

The Catalans had a club debt of £1billion in February with Barcelona president Joan Laporta blaming the previous board of directors for their captain's departure, with Messi now signing a £1million-a-week contract in Paris.

The Argentine was emotional in his Barcelona farewell press conference on Sunday and revealed in his PSG introduction on Wednesday that he wants to return to the club he played over 700 games for and won 35 major trophies with.

He said: 'Everything that has happened to me this last week has been hard, quick and emotional.

Messi's PSG introduction on Wednesday comes four days after he left Barcelona in tears

'I can't believe what I lived and experienced in Barcelona but I feel impatient and happy at this new life with my family as well. I am very happy. This whole week I have gone through ups and downs but we are processing it everyday little by little.

'It would be good to return to Barcelona. But I can't wait to play here as well.

'Everyone knows that I left Barcelona a few days ago, it was tough it's true because it was several years I've be there. But since I arrived here I felt a great happiness and a great eagerness to start training.

'I can't wait to join my team-mates, the head coach and to start this new stage. I want to thank (sporting director) Leonardo, the president and all the club for the way this happened.

Messi was joined at the Parc des Princes by his wife Antonela and his three sons

'After the press release from Barcelona they (PSG) took their position and it was very quick. It did not take long, it was a difficult decision and I want to thank everybody at PSG for what they did for me.'

Messi also praised the way PSG helped his family transition into the move from Barcelona, with his wife Antonela Roccuzzo and three sons Ciro, Mateo and Ciro alongside the Argentine at the Parc des Princes.

'I spoke with Leonardo and I said the only thing that counts for me is my family can adapt quickly but I am ready,' Messi revealed. 'I can't wait to start and my friends in the dressing room and it's clear that I can start quickly with my team-mates.

'I can't wait to start his new adventure to start training, to know my new team-mates and to make contact with them and to play. I am ready for the sporting plan and this could be a great experience. We, as a family, are calm and happy.'

The 34-year-old arrives at PSG having won six Ballon D'Or trophies along with the 35 team honours he won at Barcelona, though he has not won the Champions League since lifting the Treble alongside Neymar in 2015.

He now joins a PSG side that have spent heavily in their quest to win the Champions League

He now joins a PSG side equipped with several other world-class talent, which Messi paid tribute to, including former Real Madrid defender Sergio Ramos, Euro 2020-winning goalkeeper Gianluigi Donnarumma and 2018 World Cup golden boy Kylian Mbappe.

Messi refused to admit whether PSG are now favourites for the Champions League with this stellar squad but claimed he came to the French capital to target a fifth European gong.

He said: 'The Champions League is not easy. We can have the best team in the world but not win. It's football - there are small details that can change that.

'The Champions League is difficult. Paris knows that. It's the competition where there's the best in the world. I don't know if we're the strongest, but we must be united. That gives you chance. You need to find this chance and then take it.

Messi won four Champions League titles at Barcelona but has not won the title since 2015

'The best teams in the world have not won the Champions League, it's a special competition. My objective is to lift another Champions League and I'm at the right place to do it.'

Messi will also lead PSG's challenge to wrestle the Ligue 1 title back away from last year's shock champions Lille, with the Argentine describing the French top flight as a 'competitive league'.

He added: 'I've followed Ligue 1. I have friends in Paris. The signings they have made has been good.

'It's a competitive league. The other teams are well built as well. Everyone wants to beat Paris. I'm happy to be here.'

PSG chief Nasser Al-Khelaifi (left) said the club could afford Messi and and comply with FFP

Despite the heavy spending by PSG on talents including Ramos, Donnarumma and Inter Milan's £60million right back Achraf Hakimi this summer, PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi revealed PSG are not breaking Financial Fair Play (FFP) rules with Messi's signature.

The PSG supremo claimed: 'For us, we follow FFP regulations from day one until the end. Before we do anything, we look with commercial and finances people and we thought could we have capacity to sign him.

'We knew we could sign him and today what Leo is bringing to the club is huge. What you as media need to focus in is not the negative side of things but the positives he can bring.

Messi admits he does not know when he will be able to make his PSG debut

'He is an asset for the club, everything will grow commercially. In three days, if I show you the figures, you will be shocked. I hope he does not ask for any more in terms of salary but we always look at FFP and will always follow it.'

As well as Neymar and Pochettino, Messi paid tribute to Italian midfielder Marco Verratti, a key component of the PSG midfield, who was linked with a move to Barcelona for most of his career.

'He's a great player. He has shown he's the best in his position. It's true. I came here to play by his side, he's a phenomenon,' Messi said.

Messi (far left, pictured on holiday in Ibiza earlier this summer) praised PSG midfielder Marco Verratti (far right) as one of the best players in his position

'He's a spectacular player. It's true. But it's the same for the others. They are the best in the world. Verratti's a big player. I want to add my strengths to PSG.'

PSG's next match is against Strasbourg this Saturday, August 14 - but Messi could not confirm whether he would be able to make that match due to a lack of pre-season preparation.

He added: 'I stopped playing for a month, I had a meeting with the head coach and the coaching staff. When I'm ready to play I will play, but I can't give you a date.'

Sportsmail's SAM BLITZ was on the live blog for Messi's first press conference as a PSG player, RECAP what happened below...
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christian Pulisic likes to make all the right moves, even if that involves taking on N’Golo Kante.

It’s a challenge few of his Chelsea team-mates would advocate but the clue to his confidence lies in the tattoo on his left forearm: a queen chess piece.

‘Chess is a recent passion that I rekindled during all the time indoors in lockdown,’ says Pulisic. ‘I’d say N’Golo and I are the top two.

Christian Pulisic has opened up on his long love for playing chess with team-mate NGolo Kante

Pulisic is this season hoping for a stronger campaign under Thomas Tuchel at Stamford Bridge

Pulisic is pictured with his new Puma boot

‘We always have good battles. He was much stronger than me when I started, always the No 1, but I made it my goal to beat him so I had to work hard.

‘I used to see him playing Olivier Giroud on the plane and we’d talk about it. It’s an incredible game that can help you with a lot of things like problem-solving or seeing different patterns. I’m not saying it directly correlates to me being a better footballer but it’s certainly better than staring at a screen, gaming.’

On closer inspection, the tattoo bears the name ‘Mate’. It is Pulisic’s middle name and that of his beloved late grandfather.

‘I had it done after the Champions League final. There’s no great significance to the queen, though it’s a cool piece — versatile, powerful and can move anywhere.

The American says he is typically embroiled in tense chess games with his Chelsea team-mate

Pulisic says the board game lets him take a new perspective and is better than video games

‘It was my grandpa who taught me how to play when I was younger. I was nowhere near his level and I wish we’d played more but I’m glad we shared that. It’s a memory I hold close to my heart. That’s why the tattoo is so special to me.’

When Mate passed away last December, it preceded a dark period for the American, living alone in London.

Already prone to over-analysing his performances, that introspection went deeper after Thomas Tuchel replaced Frank Lampard as manager and Pulisic found himself increasingly on the bench.

Wrestling with the changes in his life challenged his mental health, prompting Pulisic to dig deep and ask for help.

‘It took me a while to realise that to speak up feels strong,’ says Pulisic. ‘I thought that I was too tough to need help. When it’s all on you, it can really feel like a lot. Opening up, it’s a hard thing for a lot of people, as it was for me. I reached out to a therapist and that’s not something that anyone should ever be ashamed of.

Pulisic is fired up ahead of the new season having struggled throughout the last campaign

Pulisic is prone to over-analysing his game, while the death of his grandfather preceded a dark period of his life

The American thought he was 'too tough' for help, but reached out for mental health support

‘It was kind of building up, as it was for a lot of people,’ he reflects. ‘Not just living alone but everything being closed up. Covid times brought a lot of changes and things were happening in my life.

‘I was lucky that people at Chelsea and the national team steered me in the right direction.’

Catharsis comes from what he describes as ‘clear the head’ runs around Wimbledon and Richmond Park — ‘a beautiful part of London’ — and a support system of family back in Hershey, Pennsylvania.

Among his inspirations has been his autistic brother, Chase.

‘Chase has taught me to just enjoy life. The way I see him, he enjoys just doing the simple things. He doesn’t have a care in the world and doesn’t let anyone’s judgement affect him. He inspires me every day. I wish I could be like that at times; how confident he is in himself, it’s amazing to me.’

Pulisic says that Chelsea boss Thomas Tuchel is 'intense' and he is eager to impress the coach

For a £58million signing, Champions League winner and US captain, the vulnerability that 22-year-old Pulisic shows is surprising. It is a reminder that mental health can challenge anyone, or it is perhaps indicative of Tuchel’s coaching practices.

TV viewers have been able to hear first-hand the blunt messages Tuchel barks out from the sidelines. Having played for the German at Dortmund, Pulisic knows him well.

‘He’s always been intense, very competitive, nothing much has changed. Without the crowd noise you can hear him more but he doesn’t mean it in a bad way.’

That brought small comfort last season when, after standout performances against Atletico, Porto and Real Madrid, Pulisic found himself dropped for the second leg of the European semi-final. Afterwards, he voiced his frustration.

‘It was very tough. I felt like I was in my best form and to be back on the bench was extremely tough. When you are in form, you feel good and want to carry on.

‘Competition here is fierce. We want to win titles. It is about keeping your head in the right place so if an opportunity comes you can still make a big impact.’

While Pulisic hopes to deliver on the pitch, he is delivering off it with a $500,000 (£360,000) donation to help develop playing fields for youngsters at the club where he grew up

While Pulisic is determined to take that chance this week, the season begins against the backdrop of a campaign for social change that he is driving back home in the United States.

At the height of Covid in Pennsylvania, Pulisic donated meals for medical workers and poured $500,000 (£360,000) into a scheme to develop playing fields for youngsters at the club where he grew up. ‘It seemed a simple thing to do,’ says Pulisic.

In the same vein, he is working with Puma to grow participation in the sport — establishing camps and taking football to the under- privileged across the States. The occasion is marked by Puma releasing a personalised boot for Wednesday's UEFA Super Cup game against Villarreal — with a chess piece on the heel.

So how would he feel if his project spawned the next captain of America? ‘Old,’ he laughs. ‘No, that is the absolute dream. It would be incredible to have an impact on anyone’s career. I want the game to grow. I’m just very passionate about allowing anyone who loves the game to play. That’s what I’d like to be my legacy, giving people that chance.’

Puma have teamed up with boot customiser Silni to produce a special pair of ULTRA 1.3s that Pulisic will debut in tonight’s Super Cup final.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The need for England to add an 18th player in Moeen Ali to a bloated squad that already includes two spinners for Wednesday's second Test suggests more a little muddled thinking.

It certainly hints at desperation on the part of England to take Moeen from the helter-skelter of the Hundred, where he was smashing Welsh Fire to all parts of Edgbaston on Monday, to the rarefied red-ball atmosphere of Lord’s and a crucial encounter against India.

But the latest twist in the roller-coaster ride that is Moeen’s Test career was confirmed when England sent out an SOS to their only real genuine all-rounder capable of stepping into the huge shoes vacated by Ben Stokes.

Moeen Ali is back involved with England as he is recalled to replace Ben Stokes against India

The star has just been involved with Welsh Fire at the Hundred event at Edgbaston this week

Moeen, who has a formidable record against India, looks certain to play and form part of a five-man attack while batting in the No 7 position where he averages 37 in Test cricket.

And, really, the only surprise is that he was not in the squad in the first place and especially when Stokes was then ruled out and replaced instead by Craig Overton.

So why is now the time, after a drawn first Test, to rip up their best-laid plans and bring in Moeen to leapfrog over Jack Leach and Dom Bess straight into the second Test?

‘When we first picked the squad Ben was in it,’ said England captain Joe Root, again choosing to carry out his media duties a day early so he can concentrate fully on the Test.

Root said that Ben Stokes was the initial pick, and it makes sense to bring in Ali amid his form

‘We also thought Chris Woakes would be up and running in time for this game but that’s not quite materialised. So, it seemed sensible to bring in Mo, with the way he’s playing, what he’s capable of and how he can balance the side.

‘Yes he’s not played a lot but he’s got bags of experience and I think that holds a lot of weight in the situation we are in right now. I’m a huge fan of Mo and it will be wonderful to see him back in the Test arena.’

It has not always appeared the England hierarchy are big fans of Moeen. Rather than offer him the support when he wanted a break from Test cricket in 2019 that they are rightly giving to Stokes now, they stripped him of his full central contract.

Then, after Covid ruled Moeen out of last winter’s series in Sri Lanka, England got themselves into a shemozzle when he returned in the second Test in Chennai and took eight wickets. His scheduled departure for home as part of the flawed rest and rotation policy was then botched to make it appear he had ‘chosen’ to miss the rest of the series.

Stokes has quit the squad as he looks to take a break from cricket to protect his mental health

Now, at 34, he is back for his first home Test since that chastening Ashes appearance at Edgbaston two years ago and his first red-ball match of any kind since Chennai.

‘We try to manage things as best we can,’ said Root when attempting to defend an ECB negligence towards red-ball cricket and its players that has come home to roost this year.

‘It’s great to see Mo back around things. If he gets an opportunity he’ll be desperate to impress and show everyone how good he is in Test cricket as well as white-ball.’

The sudden promotion of Moeen looks the one guaranteed change England will make to the side who got away with a draw at Trent Bridge thanks to the brilliance of Root in making one of his best hundreds and then the Nottingham weather.

They will also ponder at least two more, with Ollie Pope finally expected to be fit and pushing for a middle order slot and Haseeb Hameed still breathing down the necks of the under-pressure top three.

Much talk this week has centred around giving Dom Sibley and Zak Crawley, in particular, ‘one chance too many rather than one too few’ but it was intriguing to see Hameed fielding in the slips during practice at Lord’s yesterday. If he does not play tomorrow then his second coming will not be delayed too much longer.

Ali could be a key man as England look to take victory after a draw in the first Test with India

Clearly Hameed mark II, stronger looking and now with long hair and luxuriant beard, has impressed his captain. ‘One thing I’d say about Has is that ever since the first day I met him I’ve been extremely impressed,’ said Root.

‘His maturity served him really well during a difficult spell in his career and now you’re seeing him come into some really good form. We think of him physically maturing but I think his game has grown as well, he’s added shots to what is a very strong defence and has turned himself into a brilliant player.

‘His work ethic is outstanding. He thinks about the game extremely well and it’s great to have had him in and around the squad this summer. If he gets an opportunity I’m sure he’ll look to take it with both hands and try to make the position his own in this team.’

It is some recommendation from the captain and one that will weigh heavily on England’s top three if they do get the chance to sup in the Lord’s last chance saloon.

But one man who has got used to last chances and keeps on coming back is Moeen. And England look a stronger side for his latest return.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kyle Sinckler has been cited for biting South Africa lock Franco Mostert in the second Test, but remarkably no other players face disciplinary proceedings.

The Lions prop will appear before a judicial panel via video link on Tuesday to answer a charge relating to an incident in the 64th minute of the match at Cape Town Stadium on Saturday, which the tourists lost 27-9.

Mostert emerged from a ruck, looked at his arm and informed referee Ben O’Keeffe that he believed he had been bitten. Sinckler will be hit with a minimum 12-week ban if the citing is upheld.

Kyle Sinckler has been cited for 'biting' South Africa's Franco Mostert during the second Test

The incident is alleged to have taken place during a ruck in the 64th minute of the game

Surprisingly he was the only player to be cited after what was a volatile encounter on Saturday

However, there has been widespread disbelief after World Rugby announced that Sinckler was the only player on either side to have been cited by Australian match commissioner Scott Nowland, following a volatile encounter.

The Lions will surely wonder how Cheslin Kolbe can avoid further sanctions for taking out Conor Murray dangerously in the air and how Faf de Klerk will not be investigated for what appeared to be a high tackle, also on Murray.

The Springboks’ management angrily demanded a red card when Maro Itoje could be seen kneeling on the throat of Damian de Allende, but the Saracens and England lock has not been cited. And Stuart Hogg faced a trial by social media over allegations that he had bitten Willie le Roux, but he is also in the clear.

The Scotland captain on Sunday denied the claims against him. Still images and video footage showed Hogg’s face apparently in contact with the arm of Le Roux, who reportedly suggested to the officials that he had been bitten.

South African media were quick to seize upon what was perceived to be evidence of a heinous offence, but Hogg spoke out to clear his name.

In a statement from the Lions, he said: ‘Following speculation that has surfaced online, I would like to categorically deny any foul play.

Stuart Hogg has played down speculation he bit the arm of Willie le Roux during the game

Cheslin Kolbe was shown a yellow card for taking out Conor Murray in mid-air

'I would never bite an opponent and I am annoyed and upset by this unsubstantiated accusation. I’ve always been proud of playing rugby in the spirit of the game.'

That spirit of the game has been tarnished of late by Rassie Erasmus and the latest indications are that South Africa’s out-spoken director of rugby will, eventually, face punishment for casting doubt on the integrity of match officials.

Meanwhile, there was an unexpected boost for South Africa when it was confirmed that - ahead of schedule - Duane Vermeulen has rejoined the Bok squad after recovering from surgery on a serious ankle injury.

The 35-year-old Bulls No 8, who was Man of the Match in the World Cup Final triumph over England in 2019, is not certain to be available on Saturday, but he is suddenly back in contention, which spells potential trouble for the Lions.

The hosts have sorely missed the long-time stalwart of their pack and head coach Jacques Nienaber said: ‘Duane will be medically assessed as soon as possible. We will never risk a player who is not 100 per cent fit but he brings experience to the squad and it will be great to have him with us.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Itoje-fest could be the best yet this year, as Maro returns to his parents' garden in Edgware for their souped-up family barbecue in September full of Lions stories.

'It started in 2018, so we're on to our third version having missed it last year; Ugo Monye keeps asking for an invite!' Itoje's brother Jeremy tells Sportsmail with a laugh.

'All of north-west London comes to our parents' garden in Edgware for Itoje-fest!

Maro Itoje is looking to write his name into the history books with the Lions in South Africa

Jeremy Itoje, Maro's older brother, has given fans a insight into the rugby star's background

'On the patio we have a DJ — our mate DJ Salus — there's music, Nigerian food, as well as burgers and sausages. It's party theme!'

There will be plenty to celebrate if Maro and the Lions complete their series win over South Africa over the coming two weekends.

Jeremy — two days less than a year older than Maro, aged 27 — watched the first Test at their shared house south of Barnet.

'At the stadium I'm pretty low-key, but in my own space I go crazy!', he says sitting on the sofa of their five-bedroom home, having welcomed Sportsmail into the place they used to share with Saracens wing Rotimi Segun.

'I had a few friends over and we were going absolutely mental for it. Especially his performance — I was screaming at the TV.

'In terms of a defensive performance, it was one of the best I've seen from him. I think he still has a bit more to offer offensively but from a defensive side it was class.'

The Itojes, like all Lions families, have to watch from afar this time. They travelled to New Zealand four years ago, when Maro was the youngest tourist, and loved it.

Itoje won the Man of the Match award for his towering display in the first Test vs Springboks

'We were there for three weeks, so the Tests and the Hurricanes game,' adds Jeremy.

'It was awesome — especially with how cocky the Kiwis were, it's crazy! I remember I was in the lift with this retired 70-year-old All Black and he was like, "You guys are going to lose 3-0… no chance".

'He had no idea I was Maro's brother. The Wellington second Test was class — especially when they were singing, "Oh Maro Itoje" at the end. Even Alun Wyn Jones was singing it.'

There are few clues at chez Itoje that one occupant is a sporting great. Two pointers stand out. On a sofa in the living room sits the stuffed toy lion given to him as a 22-year-old in New Zealand.

Contrary to popular belief, the youngest player is allowed to keep the toy, so for these Tests it has pride of place at home.

The second hint is a framed photo of him with mother Florence, father Efe, sister Isabel and brother Jeremy after the 2017 second Lions Test in Wellington. The family are all wrapped up in scarves and hats, Maro, having completed his coming-of-age performance to beat the All Blacks, in full kit and beaming with them.

Otherwise, as you might expect, Itoje's sanctuary is hardly an homage to rugby.

Jeremy (second left) and the family celebrate with Maro after the second Test win in New Zealand in 2017

Two large prints of African art adorn the short hallway. In the main sitting room where Jeremy chats away, six more pieces depicting elegant ladies add vibrant splashes of colour to the walls.

Beside the fireplace sit two bejewelled female figures, a thin talking-drum over in the corner.

'Maro loves his African art,' Jeremy explains. 'Every time we go back to Nigeria, he goes to a market in Lagos where he picks it all up from. He curated an exhibition in Mayfair with a few African artists recently, which was really cool. I went down, and you see all these faces that are in the papers… David Lammy, Mrs Blair, Diane Abbott, a few other artists and DJ Cuppy. It was nice.'

As we talk a fox leaps across Maro and Jeremy's garden — perhaps eyeing up the koi carp, goldfish and sturgeon the last owner left in their pond two years ago.

'Unfortunately one of the sturgeons died the other week,' Jeremy says. 'But Maro knows. It happened when he was here.'

During their daily chats, Jeremy and Maro discuss the house more than skewering Springboks.

'We speak pretty much every day — but hardly about rugby,' Jeremy continues. 'There's a builder coming soon. In the garage we have a gym, but we're changing it to kit it out a bit more. There was a leak the other day, stuff like that!'

As brothers and house-mates, of course Jeremy and Maro share a special bond — even if they are Manchester United and Arsenal fans respectively.

Every October until they were teenagers they would share birthday parties, as well as spending hours together playing Fight Night boxing games and watching WWE wrestling at home in Cricklewood and Edgware.

Jeremy's graduation photo with father Efe (top left), mother Florence (bottom left), Maro (back centre) and sister Isabel (top right)

Jeremy revealed all about his brother's upbringing with him standing on the brink of history

'He was a big Undertaker fan, and we both liked The Rock.' smiles Jeremy, who undertook a white-collar boxing fight while at Loughborough University.

'When it came to sport I wouldn't say it was much of a competition, as Maro was a 200m runner, threw shot put and played basketball. He was very much superman at that sort of stuff.

'Ever since my dad got us Fight Night for the PlayStation in 2005 we've been entrenched in boxing.

'I would always pick Muhammad Ali and Maro would be Joe Frazier or Roy Jones Jnr. My dad was a massive Ali fan. We'd have car journeys where he would tell us about his fights.'

While they did once play rugby together when at St George's Harpenden before Maro moved to Harrow School — Jeremy playing tighthead prop was amazed at how easy it was to lift Maro the lock in the lineout — playing sport has never been an end-goal for any member of the Itoje family.

'My dad has an educational past, both he and my mum did university and master's degrees, so for them education was the main thing,' says Jeremy, chief of staff for the financial services and insurance part of IT giant Atos.

'Growing up we didn't think about rugby, we would have much rather been wrestlers or footballers. Sol Campbell was one of his heroes, as was Jay-Jay Okocha.'

The Itoje sister, Isabel, is a coming force in her field too. At 25, she helps women displaced from homes due to domestic violence, while also educating around race and acting since graduating from university.

Jeremy was amazed how easy Maro was to lift in the line during their school days together

So the conversations around the dinner table have always reached deeper than rucks and mauls.

'Our family have always discussed race,' says Jeremy. 'As a family with Nigerian heritage in Britain, it's probably irresponsible if you're not discussing race with your kids.

'My dad always spoke about it. We have political debates around feminism with my sister, discussions about what Boris Johnson is getting up to. Rugby is at the very end of the conversation scale.'

It largely is for Maro too. The England lock, still just 26, is far keener to talk art, politics, the merits of taking the knee, his work around The Black Curriculum and The Digital Divide — a stance fully supported by his family.

'If he had just been a rugby player that would have been awesome, right? But he can do a lot more from his platform, and has the responsibility to,' Jeremy says.

'In particular we're really proud of those extra bits he does. If you have a care and a passion about something, I think it's your responsibility to say what it is.'

So while Maro cements himself as the Lion King in South Africa, come Itoje-fest his family will be far prouder of the impact he makes outside the game as they tuck into jollof rice, burgers and yams in north London.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Raheem Sterling is predicting that his goal haul will get a boost from Manchester City’s £100million record signing Jack Grealish.

Sterling scored 10 times in the Premier League as City won a third title under Pep Guardiola last season, half his tally from the previous campaign.

The 26-year-old believes the addition of Grealish will prove a masterstroke and is expecting more chances to come his way.

Raheem Sterling believes he will score more goals following Jack Grealish's arrival at Man City

‘Jack is a player I believe can truly have a great career here,’ Sterling said. ‘It adds another creative player to this team which I am really excited about, so hopefully he can add a few more goals to my tally.

‘The international period (Euro 2020) was the first time I was really around him for a long period of time. He is a player who always wants the ball, gets in good pockets of space and is creative.

‘He wants to prove himself at the highest level. I don’t think there is a better club for him to try to do that.’

The Aston Villa star sealed a £100m move this summer, bolstering Pep Guardiola's attack

Sterling believes that Grealish's creativity will allow City to unpick defences this season

Sterling had lost his place in Guardiola’s preferred starting XI towards the end of the last campaign before returning to the side for May’s Champions League final defeat by Chelsea.

The forward was England’s standout performer at Euro 2020 and is eager to kick on now after returning to City training earlier this week.

‘I had a great summer holiday for a week or so, and now I am raring to get back,’ he added.

‘It is a season that I am really looking forward to. I have got all my energy and attention to focus on going into the season. You can’t wait until September for the window to shut to get into it. You have got to come out fast.

Sterling, 26, is raring to go with City this season after a superb summer with England

‘We have to be fully focused to win and we are fully aware of that. We know we have got the game to try to retain our title.

‘We have won it two years on the bounce (in 2018 and 2019). It is something that we are capable of. That winning mentality, once you get a taste of it, you want it even more. If you want to keep winning, you don’t want to see someone else take the Premier League trophy.’

Sterling called on his team-mates to relax in Europe, remaining adamant that their time will come to lift the Champions League crown. ‘The most important thing is to not put too much energy into that,’ he said.

‘We will be fine. The team we have and the players, we should just be enjoying it, getting into our rhythm and it will happen.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United got their Premier League campaign off to a flying start by putting five goals past Leeds United at Old Trafford on Saturday.

Paul Pogba became the first United player to register four assists in a single Premier League game for the club in over 10 years, while Bruno Fernandes found the back of the net three times to claim a hat-trick.

Sportsmail have rated the players and managers from both sides as United walk away with three points...

Manchester United (above) got their Premier League campaign off to a flying start by putting five goals past Leeds United at Old Trafford on Saturday

Manchester United (4-2-3-1):

David De Gea 6

Solid enough although his communication could have been better with his defence. Could do nothing about Ayling’s shot.

Aaron Wan-Bissaka 6

Looked solid enough defensively and linked up well with James in attack. His pace helped out his defence at times, too.

Victor Lindelof 7

With Raphael Varane unveiled before kick-off, pressure is on the Swedish defender and he responded well with numerous well-judged interceptions plus an assist.

Harry Maguire 6

Moment of indecision with de Gea wasn’t great but did a good enough job of keeping Leeds danger man Bamford quiet.

Harry Maguire had a moment of indecision with de Gea wasn’t great but did a good enough job

Luke Shaw 7

Continued where he left off, with a sound defensive performance complemented by some lung-busting attacking play.

Scott McTominay 7

Still working his way back to full fitness but put in a strong 70 minutes which featured plenty of hard running and sound decision making.

Fred 7

A slightly surprising choice to start but helped McTominay boss the middle and even had time to bomb forward for United’s fifth.

Daniel James 7

Energetic performance, popping up on both wings and covering acres of space. Final ball could still be better.

Daniel James gave an energetic performance, popping up on both wings and covering acres

Bruno Fernandes 10

A stunning 29-minute hat-trick from the player Ole Gunnar Solskjaer does not want to carry his team’s goal-scoring burden this season. All were immaculate finishes.

Paul Pogba 8

Missed a glorious opening when clean through on goal but more than made up for it with the passes for four of United’s five goals!

Paul Pogba pissed a glorious opening when clean through on goal but more than made up for it with the passes for four of United’s five goals!

Mason Greenwood 9

Incredibly sharp, almost capitalising on a back pass to score and setting up a great chance for Pogba. Deserved his goal.

Substitutes

Nemanja Matic for McTominay 69mins, 6

Anthony Martial for Pogba 74mins, 5

Jadon Sancho for James 74mins, 6

Substitutes (not used) Heaton, Mata, Martial, Pereira, Dalot, Sancho, Matic, Williams, Van de Beek.

Jadon Sancho came off the bench to make his Manchester United debut at Old Trafford

Leeds United (4-1-4-1):

Illan Meslier 6

Looked sharp and confident under a lot of early United pressure but will have been disappointed with Bruno’s opener and the carnage that followed.

Luke Ayling 6

Stupendous strike levelled the scores - not a bad way to mark a first ever Premier League goal. Kept busy defensively by Pogba and Shaw.

Pascal Struijk 5

Leeds were over-run at the back, almost from kick-off, and Struijk was as bad as anyone. Beaten too easily by Greenwood for his goal.

Leeds were over-run at the back, almost from kick-off, and Struijk was as bad as anyone

Liam Cooper 5

Like most of his fellow defenders, looked confused by what was going on as Bielsa tinkered with tactics and formations as the game went on.

Stuart Dallas 6

Moved from full-back into midfield as part of Bielsa’s half-time re-shuffle and immediately set up Ayling’s equaliser.

Robin Koch 4

Filled Kalvin Phillips’ defensive midfield role and while his effort could not be questioned, he left his back four exposed and lost Bruno for the opener.

Raphina 6

Almost gifted United an opener with a poor early back-pass but lovely free-kick delivery should have been converted by Bamford.

Mateusz Klich 5

A by-stander in midfield as United constantly punished Leeds on the counter-attack,. Let Fred jog past him to score United’s fifth.

Klich was a by-stander in midfield as United constantly punished Leeds on the counter-attack

Rodrigo 6

Struggled to make an impact on the game, short of a couple of decent first half passes, and sacrificed by Bielsa at the break for left-back Firpo.

Jack Harrison 6

Showed some nice touches and was instrumental in Leeds’ more promising attacking moments in the first half.

Patrick Bamford 5

Missed Leeds best chance of the first half with a wayward set-piece header and barely saw the ball again.

Patrick Bamford missed Leeds' best chance of the first half with a wayward set-piece header

Substitutes

Junior Firpo for Rodrigo 45mins, 5

Helder Costa for Harrison 69mins, 5

Tyler Roberts for Bamford 76mins, 5

Substitutes (not used) Klaesson, Forshaw, Roberts, Costa, Phillips, Summerville, Greenwood, Shackleton.

Referee: P Tierney 8
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The All Blacks overwhelmed Australia with a 57-22 drubbing in Auckland on Saturday to make a winning start to the Rugby Championship and ensure the Bledisloe Cup stays in New Zealand for a 19th straight season.

Hooker Codie Taylor scored twice and Rieko Ioane, Brodie Retallick, Ardie Savea, Sevu Reece, Will Jordan and David Havili also grabbed tries as the hosts earned a bonus point and put paid to any notion that they are a fading force.

The visitors were still in touch at 21-15 down at halftime, but five tries in the second half comfortably secured the All Blacks a 22nd successive victory over the Wallabies at Eden Park in a winning streak stretching back to 1986.

All Blacks captain Sam Whitelock holds the Bledisloe Cup after they defeated Australia 57-22

The jubilant New Zealand players celebrate with the trophy following their victory in Auckland

Codie Taylor scored two tries as All Blacks won trophy for 19th season in succession

Australia, who had needed a win to keep the annual three-match Bledisloe Cup series alive after a 33-25 defeat last week, scored three tries through a brace from winger Andrew Kellaway and a Tate McDermott effort but they fell away towards the end.

'Felt like we battled away in the first half but it was really nice that we got some dominance and put points on the board,' said All Blacks captain Sam Whitelock.

'Sure there's always things to work on, but if you'd offered me a win at the start tonight, I'd have been happy, so really, really happy.'

The Wallabies had more possession but the All Blacks are past masters at the counter-attacking game, and time and again they ruthlessly punished the visitors for their errors.

Centre Ioane's fourth minute try and the Reece score that took the lead to 38-15 14 minutes after the break both came from intercepts of lofted passes as Australia attempted to get the ball wide quickly.

The tries from lock Retallick and number eight Savea both came from broken play with the All Blacks showing once again that few teams can match them when it comes to moving the ball quickly and finding support players.

New Zealand's Rieko Ioane (left) was involved in a clash with Matt Toomua (right) of Australia

Brodie Retallick was among the New Zealand players who scored a try during their victory

Scrumhalf McDermott's try came just before the halftime break as Australia exerted real pressure on the home line, and they continued in the same vein early in the second half.

Savea was shown a yellow card two minutes after the break as the home side defended frantically, but a crooked lineout throw relieved the pressure and by the time the loose forward returned New Zealand had scored 10 unanswered points.

'We didn't capitalise on that yellow card at all,' said Australia skipper Michael Hooper.

'In fact New Zealand really put us to the sword there and showed their class.

'We didn't respect the ball, couple of intercept tries ... you do that against a team like New Zealand and they capitalise. We didn't stay in the fight long enough.'

World champions South Africa, who sat out last year's Rugby Championship because of concerns at the lack of preparation time for their players during the COVID-19 pandemic, return to the fray against Argentina in Port Elizabeth later on Saturday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal are reportedly willing to sell captain Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang this summer.

Aubameyang, 32, is club skipper but manager Mikel Arteta is understood to harbour concerns about the striker's diminishing goalscoring returns.

And according to the Times, the Gunners could sell him just one year after he signed a £350,000-a-week contract to help fund a rebuild and make wholesale improvements to their squad.

Arsenal are reportedly willing to sell captain Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (above) this summer

Gunners manager Mikel Arteta is understood to harbour concerns about his goalscoring form

The Gabonese forward scored 60 goals in all competitions across his first two full seasons at the club, earning himself a bumper new three-year deal in September 2020.

But there are concerns over the forward's finishing in recent times, with just 10 league goals last season.

Moreover, he has not hit the target once in pre-season, despite featuring in all six warm-up matches for the new campaign.

The Gabonese striker, 32, only signed a bumper new £350,000 contract in September 2020

And fellow striker Alexandre Lacazette, 30, could also be on the chopping block - with both set to miss the season opener against Brentford on Friday evening.

Eddie Nketiah is injured, meaning youngster Folarin Balogun or Gabriel Martinelli could start up front for the Gunners.

The club are thought to be keen on Chelsea's Tammy Abraham to spearhead their frontline, with Roma also linked with the 23-year-old.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Premier League fans will have noticed that Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp was on the touchline without his trademark glasses in their 3-0 victory over Norwich.

It was a sight that Liverpool fans would have first noticed during their pre-season training camp when they were taken aback by pictures of the German without his famous specs.

And the Daily Mirror have reported that the Liverpool manager has had treatment on his eyes since the end of last season.

Jurgen Klopp had an operation on his eyes meaning he no longer needs his famous specs

It has surprised some fans who are used to seeing Klopp with his trademark glasses

A source told them: 'He's had a bit of treatment on his eyes which went really well. It means he doesn't need to wear his glasses all the time. But he still may wear them occasionally in the dugout.'

Some fans were shocked on social media to see Klopp without his frames.

Twitter user Callumpal96 tweeted: 'Jurgen Klopp looks weird without his glasses. Like Pep with hair. Just doesn't look right.'

May Elmi tweeted: 'I'm seeing Jurgen Klopp without his glasses tonight. Is it a new style or did he break them again?! LOL.'

Klopp famously broke his glasses while emphatically celebrating Adam Lallana's late winner in a 5-4 victory over Norwich in 2016.

LFCMumble offered a word of caution though as they commented: 'I just hope Jurgen Klopp's glasses weren't lucky glasses.'

Liverpool got their season off to a flyer with a comfortable 3-0 victory away at Norwich

I'm seeing Jurgen Klopp without his glasses tonight. Is it a new style or did he break them again?! LOL#NORLIV — MAY ELMI (@mahamadsonic) August 14, 2021

Jurgen Klopp looks weird without his glasses. Like Pep with hair. Just doesn't look right — Cxllum (@_CallumPal96) August 14, 2021

Klopp, has spoken about previous treatment he has received, including on his teeth which he joked about comparisons with Roberto Firmino.

He said: 'I went to the dentist because I had some problems so really it was like you have to come in or it will get worse.

'So I had to have antibiotics and medicine and I said 'could we do something new like crowns', and they said, 'yeah, of course we can'.

I just hope Jurgen Klopp’s glasses weren’t lucky glasses — LFC Mumble (@lfcmumble) August 14, 2021

'It was not as if I saw Bobby Firmino's teeth and said 'I want them' – but I like them though. Firmino has world class teeth.'

Klopp has got his eyes set on reclaiming the Premier League title with Liverpool this season.

They got their season off to a flyer with a convincing victory thanks to goals by Diogo Jota, Roberto Firmino and Mo Salah.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku says he returns to Chelsea a 'complete' player as the Belgian revealed that regular phone calls with club legend Didier Drogba have helped him prepare for his return.

Lukaku, 28, last week completed a £98m switch to Stamford Bridge from Inter, eight years on from leaving West London for Everton having failed to make the grade with the Blues.

The Belgian has since developed into one of the finest marksman in Europe, scoring a combined 193 goals during spells at Everton, Manchester United and Inter.

Romelu Lukaku believes he returns to Chelsea a 'complete' player following his £98m move

Thomas Tuchel has long sought an elite goalscorer for his European champions, and Lukaku's arrival has been met with hopes high of the Blues launching a real challenge to Manchester City for the Premier League crown.

And Lukaku believes that he begins his second Stamford Bridge spell a 'complete' player, before outlining his intentions to take on a leadership role within the dressing room.

‘I just feel more complete,' he told Chelsea's official website. 'I’ve tried to master all the facets that a striker needs and I just want to keep improving on the small details all the time and keep improving on my strengths as well.

Lukaku returns to Stamford Bridge an elite goalscorer eight years on from his departure

The Belgian says he has mastered all facets of his game during his time in England and Italy

‘I just want to try to help the team win and be available for the manager as well as for my team-mates. I want to make sure that they feel comfortable and they can lean on me in whatever situation we’re in.

‘I’m a leader but I’m also more of a gel person, making sure that everybody feels comfortable and confident.

'That’s the way I lead. When I was at Inter and when I’ve been captain of the national team, I make sure that everybody is confident and knows what they have to do.'

Lukaku added that he has already spoken with Tuchel about his role on and off the pitch, insisting that he is comfortable in being the focal point or running in behind opposition defences.

The 28-year-old is also confident that he will prove a strong leader in the Blues dressing room

The 28-year-old also lifted the lid on his relationship with Blues legend Drogba, with whom he has spoken to regularly as a mentor. Lukaku said phone calls have been frequent since his return to Stamford Bridge.

'Our relationship means the world to me,' he said. 'It’s not like we talk once a month, I talk to the guy every few days!

'We have a group chat so we’re constantly communicating and I’ve been on the phone with him a bit more in the past two weeks.

Lukaku (R) revealed that he has regularly spoken with Didier Drogba (L) ahead of his return

‘I had a lot of questions to ask and he still knows a lot of people here so he really prepared me well with the last details.

'Now I just need to get to know the players and the manager a bit better and just be available as quickly as possible for the team.’

Lukaku is now out of quarantine and will be gearing up for Chelsea's upcoming fixture with Arsenal, where he is expected to make his debut for his new club.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@he American international also hailed the squad depth Chelsea now possess

Christian Pulisic has hailed the acquisition of new Chelsea striker Romelu Lukaku and believes the Belgium star can help bring more 'exciting times' to Stamford Bridge.

The Blues, who won the Champions League last season started their Premier League campaign in impressive fashion with a 3-0 win over Crystal Palace on Saturday.

However, Lukaku didn't feature against the Eagles due to quarantine protocols following his £98 million transfer from Inter Milan, and Pulisic expects the Belgium star to give the west London outfit a more clinical edge going forward this season.

Chelsea star Christian Pulisic hailed new team mate Romelu Lukaku as a 'great goal scorer'

Lukaku missed the 3-0 win over Crystal Palace on Saturday due to quarantine protocols

'Lukaku's a great striker.' The American international told Chelsea's official website.

'He plays really good with his back to goal, holding the ball, and he's a great goal scorer, so I'm very excited to play with him. It's going to be exciting times.

'We have a very good team with a lot of depth and it's a really exciting team. When you have a bunch of good players it's never a bad thing so we're really excited to see how this year goes.'

The Blues eased to a comfortable victory over Palace in their first domestic fixture of the new campaign, and prior to that they added another trophy to their cabinet after beating Villarreal on penalties in the UEFA Super Cup.

The Blues defeated Europa League winners Villarreal on penalties to win the Super Cup

Chelsea are seemingly in a good position to win more silverware this season, but Pulisic who was on the scoresheet during Saturday's win over Palace insists no-one is getting carried away with their fine start to the season.

He added: 'Obviously it's always nice to get on the score sheet so I'm very happy, but I'm just happy about the win for the team,'

'We put a really good performance together and the clean sheet was very important, so it was a really good day for us and I'm just happy with getting three important points.

'Obviously challenging for the title is what we're going to fight for, but it's just the first game. We're going to take it game by game, and try to put a great season together.'

Next up for the Blues is a trip to north London to face Arsenal on August 22.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay is the ninth celebrity contestant confirmed for the new series of Strictly Come Dancing.

The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Gordon Ramsay's daughter Tilly, 19, is the NINTH contestant announced - as her dad warns her not to date any of the dancers!

Tilly revealed she'll be fitting in her appearance on the show around her studies, as she starts university in September, but said she's 'excited for the challenge' of making it all work.

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew.

'I've tried dancing when I was younger, ballet and stuff, but I wasn't very good so I moved to football camp.

'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun.'

Proud parent: The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning (pictured together in a throwback)

This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best. Proud of you girl.'

Tilly's mum Tana then quipped, 'Glad it's her and not you [Gordon]. Tilly you're incredibly brave. Good luck,' before Gordon jumped in to warn: 'And don't date those dancers!'

Tilly often shares dancing videos with her dad on TikTok and said she believes Gordon secretly wants to take part in Strictly, but he would be 'too scared' to go through with it.

She said: 'I think he does, but I think he'd be too scared to. Trust me when I say he's not the best dancer. Sorry, dad!"

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew'

Tilly said in a statement: 'I’m so excited and grateful to be joining the Strictly family! I’m always up for fun new challenges and this will be my biggest adventure yet!

'I’m going to put my heart and soul into this and can’t wait to get my dancing shoes on and show my Dad how it’s really done! Bring on the glitz, glamour and sequins!'

After the announcement, Gordon took to Instagram to gush: ' So proud of this one @tillyramsay youngest dancer ever ! good luck darling❤️ @bbcstrictly'.

Sweet: This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best'

Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon.

She presented Matilda and the Ramsay Bunch on CBBC, which saw her cooking and having adventures along with her family, for which she received three Children’s BAFTA nominations.

In 2017 she published her first cookery book, inspired by the show, titled: Matilda & The Ramsay Bunch: Tilly's Kitchen Takeover.

Tilly and her Dad also hosted a regular cooking item on This Morning, Big Chef Little Chef.

Tilly said: 'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun'

Multi-tasker: Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon

Moments after Tilly was announced, Greg Wise was unveiled as the tenth celebrity contestant.

The Sense and Sensibility actor, 55, was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and revealed he finally decided to sign up to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer.

Speaking about his motivation, Greg - who is married to Emma Thompson - explained: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

New contestant: Emma Thompson's husband Greg Wise has also signed up to Strictly in honour of his late sister who loved the show so much she was buried in a glitterball coffin

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare’s London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer, before her death in 2016 aged 51.

Tragic: Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013, was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable (pictured in 2013)

On the night she died Greg wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Greg said in a statement: 'My beautiful sister was a huge disco queen. She left our world almost exactly 5 years ago in a glitter ball coffin.

'This is for her. My gorgeous Diva sis, who would have been insane with excitement that her little bro was doing this. I will channel her, as her bro can’t dance - but I’m thrilled to be dipping my toes, knees, hips and arms into this wonderful world, and hope to make her proud, and obviously make her laugh...”

Cute couple: Greg added that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show

Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking on Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility.

Greg also wrote box-office hit film Last Christmas with his wife, Emma, and the book Not That Kind of Love with his late sister Clare Wise.

He added that Emma was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show.

Speaking on This Morning, he continued: 'It's going to be so important having her there. She's done three films back-to-back this year, so she's exhausted now anyway.

Motivated: Speaking about his motivation, Greg explained, 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music'

Nerves: He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor

He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor and strutting his stuff.

When it was suggested there would be a lot of attention on him during his Strictly stint, he said: 'Yeah, which is one of the things I'm slightly more nervous about than the actual dance steps.

'But it's about being out there and exposing yourself as someone who can't dance, and learning.'

One to watch: Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown (pictured) Cranford and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility

It comes after Katie McGlynn and Dan Walker were confirmed as contestants on Strictly.

The former Corrie star, 28, and journalist, 44, were announced as being the seventh and eighth stars set to compete on the hit show during Tuesday's BBC Breakfast.

They will join Dragons' Den star Sara Davies, Rhys Stephenson, AJ Odudu, GBBO's John Whaite, Robert Webb and Tom Fletcher in the impressive line-up.

Joining the show! Katie McGlynn (pictured) and Dan Walker were confirmed as celebrity contestants on the 2021 Strictly Come Dancing line-up on Tuesday

Katie said: 'It's been so hard keeping it a secret, but I can finally say that I'm getting ready to shake my shimmy and become part of the Strictly family!

'I'm really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill on this crazy journey and cannot wait to slip into some sequins along the way.

'Although I do get to have so much fun as an actress, a lot of my roles have involved quite serious and challenging storylines, so I'm fully ready to let my hair down and do something different, even if it is completely outside of my comfort zone.

'I can't promise that I'll be the best, but I'm going to give it 110 per cent on the dance floor! As long as I don't fall over I'll be happy.'

Star-studded! Journalist Dan, 44, is the eighth star confirmed to take part in the show

New challenges: Dan's part in the competition comes after he announced he was stepping down as presenter of Football Focus (pictured on the show) following 12 years at the helm

Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Coronation Street, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020.

The actress was also a regular in Waterloo Road, appeared in BBC One dramas The Syndicate and Moving On and currently stars in Hollyoaks as mysterious newcomer Becky Quentin.

While Dan, who recently quit Football Focus after 12 years at the helm, appeared via video for the big reveal as he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo.

He said: 'I only told my kids last weekend so they're not very happy with me either, hardly anyone has been in the circle. I'm very sorry I was told it would make great telly if I didn't tell you Louise! [his co-presenter, Minchin]'

Exciting news: Dan appeared via video, much to the surprise of Katie and his BBC Breakfast co-hosts, for the big reveal because he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo

Dan continued: 'My 20 years of contemporary dance training are helpful! I'm one of those people I've danced at three weddings and two school discos.

'I'm enjoying the experience when it starts of actually learning to dance. I'll be honest I'm not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball.'

And turning his attention to a pro partner and getting on the dancefloor, Dan said: 'I will accept anyone if they will accept me!

'I'm 6ft 6 so the question often asked is can anyone that tall look half decent on the television when trying to dance, just anyone who is tall enough, and doesn't mind the odd stray elbow in the back.'

The TV host also chatted about his pal Shirley Ballas, adding: 'Shirley is always a pro isn't she? We did a Comic Relief thing together, and she was really upset so I did a Paso Doble thing with one of the rugs and it really made her laugh.

Bring it on: Katie admitted that she's 'really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill'

Tragic: Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Corrie, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020

Up for a challenge: Looking ahead to the competition, Dan joked that he's 'not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball'

Unexpected: Dan didn't tell his BBC Breakfast co-host Louise Minchin about his Strictly gig

'It won't affect our friendship as I hope this won't affect our friendship Louise.'

However it seems like Dan's real judges might be his children, with him revealing their reactions: 'My children said this, one said "oh this is exciting", another one said "don't dance with your mouth open", and the third said "don't go out in week one".

'It's just going to be, as you well know you need a bit of fun and we've been sat on our sofa for the past year and dealing with some horrible stories so I think it will be nice for our kids to be able to watch something that's not a matter of life and death.'

Dan added: 'Last Christmas I sat down with the children and they said "dad, we'd love you to do some TV we'd like to watch, Saturday Mashup and Strictly", hopefully I won't embarrass them too much!

'It has the magic to make everybody smile': Katie also praised Strictly for 'pulling everybody' together with its 2020 series during the pandemic

It's all feathers and sequins from now! Katie was revealed to much fanfare, with dancers creating a dramatic entrance for the actress

Stunning: Katie rocked a green and white wrap dress styled with summery white heels for the announcement on Tuesday

All smiles: She could not hide her excitement after leaving the London studios following the big reveal

'I have no idea where the tiny bit of talent will take, I'm just going to enjoy it, have a bit of fun, my phone is full of people who are very angry I never told them about this!'

Katie, who didn't know a second announcement was happening, then added: 'I'm so excited. I think last year everybody pulled together for Strictly and it was a kind of a blessing, and I think this year it has the magic to make everybody smile.'

The latest announcements come after Sara Davies was revealed as being set to compete - joking that she can't wait to see the 'impact of training on her mum tum'.

The Dragons' Den star, 37, could not hide her excitement as she was confirmed to be a celebrity contestant and chatted on Good Morning Britain on Monday.

Speaking about the show, Sara said: 'My Mam and Dad are going to be so excited. I'm really nervous because so far the producers keep asking me if I can dance.

Joining the line-up! Sara Davies was revealed as the sixth contestant set to compete in this year's Strictly Come Dancing on Monday

'Truth be told – I haven't got a clue! I've not danced since I did ballet lessons when I was little. The business world has taught me that tenacity, drive and determination deliver results, I hope that I can bring that to the dancefloor.

'And I'm excited to see the impact of all those hours of training on my mum tum.'

Sara was the youngest ever dragon on the panel of entrepreneurs on BBC show Dragons' Den, when she joined in 2019.

A businesswoman, her company Crafter's Companion, which she started as a student, now employs almost 250 people worldwide and has earned her the affectionate nickname of the Crafting Queen.

She is the recipient of over 30 business awards and, in 2016, she was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to the economy.

From the boardroom to the ballroom! The Dragons' Den star, 37, (pictured on the show) admitted she's not too confident about her dancing skills but is excited for the challenge

Got any tips? Kate, who has also competed on Strictly, reassured Sara that she didn't have much dancing experience before taking part either

While chatting to GMB's Kate Garraway on Monday, Sara also revealed that she's always wanted to try out her dancing skills on Strictly since being a 'little girl'.

Sara added: 'It just looks like the most amazing experience but it always felt like a pipe dream. Then I joined Dragons' Den and Deborah [Meaden] had done it and I didn't dare to dream, but hoped one day maybe.'

The businesswoman also discussed plans for a live studio audience being able to watch the stars compete in the 2021 Strictly series.

Sara said she's hoping that small family bubbles will come watch, gushing that it 'will make my parents life' as they'd be so excited to see her dance on the show.

Speaking about the plans for an audience, Sara revealed: 'I really hope so.

'We're still waiting for a lot of the plans, but I believe they are going to be allowed a small studio audience. So maybe family bubbles. I just want my mum and dad to be able to come and watch. It will make their life.'

Keep dancing! CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson was recently announced as the fifth star on the line-up

Taking to Instagram Rhys wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show'

It comes after CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson, 27, was announced as the fifth celebrity to take part in the new series of Strictly Come Dancing.

Rhys said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn.

The presenter revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday and said: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

'I cannot wait to experience it all: the costumes, the orchestra, even Craig's glare. I am ready.'

As well as presenting CBBC live, Rhys as also presented some of the biggest shows across the CBBC slate, including Blue Peter and Saturday Mash-Up!, and appeared on The Dengineers and Newsround.

Outside of presenting, Rhys is an ambassador for Place2Be, a charity which provides mental health services in schools.

Making history: Great British Bake Off winner John will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership

Yay! After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being'

Sharing his news on Instagram, the presenter wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show, I want it all, the sequins, the costumes, Craig's glare, BRING IT.'

Elsewhere in line-up news, Great British Bake Off winner John has revealed he will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

He said: 'What's exciting for me, is that I'm going to be one half of the first all-male partnership, which is a great step forward in representation and inclusion.'

John later took to Instagram to thank fans for their support, as he broke down in tears while talking into the camera.

John went on: 'I'm so grateful, excited, and nervous to be joining the Strictly family...

'I've been wearing sequins and jazzy attire since I was three years old and can't wait to hurl myself, full throttle, around the most glamorous dance floor on earth...

'Whoever it is I'm paired with, I hope they are up for a challenge as I want our routines to include lots of spectacular lifts!'

After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, there's so many nice messages already and I've only just come off air and I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being....

'I'm so excited to be on Strictly, it's a dream come true and it's even more of a dream to be doing the first all-male partnership and I hope that there are kids watching who look up and think, 'It's okay to be who you are'.

'So thanks for all the messages, I'm going back to bed, lots of love!'

John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23. John has presented various TV shows and currently has a weekly cooking segment on Steph's Packed Lunch.

He has written for a variety of newspaper and magazines on the topics of food and mental health, and has published five cookery books. John also runs his own cookery school, John Whaite's Kitchen.

Back then: John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23 (pictured in 2016)

John used his GBBO fame for good, when he won the show and began fighting for LGBTQ rights. He appeared on the cover of the UK gay culture magazine Attitude with his now husband-to-be, Paul Atkins, to whom he became engaged in 2017.

He spoke about his experience of coming out, saying: 'I didn't really know any gay people because it was still a bit of a touchy subject, especially being a working class northern lad – it wasn't often discussed...

'But I really admired my friends at drama who were all very 'fabulous darling' and they really helped me through it. I definitely want to marry Paul (my partner of five years – not Paul Hollywood!) because I adore him and respect him so much...

'I know I don't want to be with anyone else and I have tested what else is out there! When it comes to cake, I'll be making lots of our families' favourites!'

Tough: John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes

John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes.

He said: 'Some days I'd wish I had never been on the show, because in reality, it totally derailed me from a steady lifepath. I could blame the production company or the BBC.

'It would be simple to point the finger and say they gave me no advice on how to manage the transience of the industry, or how to comprehend the temporariness of my appeal.

'They didn't, and perhaps in the wake of reality TV star meltdowns and suicides, there should be a serious reform of the way contributors are prepared for, and guided through, their post-show life.

'But I don't think it would have made an ounce of difference even if they had. Addiction to the razzle dazzle came naturally to the youthful me...

Line-up: It comes after the first three names have been announced for Strictly Come Dancing 2021 [pictured McFly's Tom Fletcher (L) and presenter AJ Odudu (R)]

Starring role: Peep Show actor Robert Webb is also taking to the floor

'What I failed to remember though, was that age-old mantra: be careful what you wish for. Because as the next batch of Bake Off stars emerged, my appeal shrank. Year on year, the working days became fewer and financial offers were smaller.

'The life to which I had become accustomed slowly dissolved. With more days alone at home, waiting by the phone like an anxious 1980s teenager urging their crush to call, my already depressed state of mind worsened...

'I drank more than I should have and posted unwisely on Instagram and Twitter. If I knew then what I knew now, would I do it all again? Absolutely. But I'd approach it so differently.'

Last week, the first three names were announced for this year's show.

McFly pop star Tom, Peep Show actor Robert and presenter AJ were revealed on Wednesday's edition of The One Show, with the rest of the names set to be drip-fed to fans over the next couple of weeks.

Big shoes to fill! Tom's McFly bandmate Harry Judd won Strictly n 2011 [L] while Robert squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009 [R]

Music and dancing: Tom is on quarter of boy band McFly [pictured last week with Dougie Poynter and Danny Jones]

Tom, 36, has big shoes to fill on Strictly. His McFly bandmate Harry Judd won the show in 2011. And Tom's wife Giovanna Fletcher is the reigning champion of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!

Robert, 48, is sure to feel the pressure too, after he squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009, performing What A Feeling from '80s film Flashdance, beating the likes of Keith Lemon and Paddy McGuinness to the title.

2021 has been a busy year for AJ, 33, who has featured on 14 TV shows, including Cooking With The Stars and Celebrity Karaoke Club. She has appeared as a panelist on Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two in the past, too.

The three contestants were unveiled one by one with The One Show presenter Alex Jones revealing they were given the code names of Buzz Lightyear (Tom), Spoongebob Squarepants (Robert) and Marge Simpson (AJ).

Excited: Tom was the first celebrity announced and said: 'I'm so pleased the news is out it's been so hard keeping it secret'

Cackling: Tom also shared his sister's hilarious reaction to the news on Instagram, where it seemed she was beside herself with laughter

The veteran dance show was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.

'Undertone of terror': Robert was the next star announced, along with a hilarious clip of his 2009 Comic Relief performance

Overjoyed: AJ was the third contestant announced and told how she kept her participation in the series a secret from her mother Florence, who was watching at home

But 2021 will include the show's themed weeks - such as movie week, musicals week and Halloween week.

Last year, these were scrapped, proving too complicated to manage amid the pandemic. The show's Christmas special will also be back, with the show set to start in its usual early-autumn time slot, rather than in October, like last year.

It's said rather than a fewer number of celebs, the full 15 will be taking part again, having cut this to 12 last series.

Still a no-go: Blackpool has been axed AGAIN due to the ongoing pandemic

There are also plans to reinstate the live audience too - another aspect disallowed last season.

Isolation will remain in place for the professional dancers. This will see them sent to a hotel near the Strictly studios in Hertfordshire several weeks ahead of the show's return.

The celebs will also not have the usual three-week gap between being paired up with their pros and dancing for the first time on live TV. This has been reduced to one week thanks to logistical factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He is one of Hollywood's top stars.

And Bradley Cooper has been using his platform to represent worthwhile causes in the most relaxed way possible.

The 46-year-old actor was seen bringing awareness to the One Tribe Foundation in the form of a T-Shirt while out and about in Santa Monica on Monday.

Bradley matched the top as he sported a pair of grey sweat shorts and black flip flops.

Sending a message: Bradley Cooper was seen bringing awareness to the One Tribe Foundation in the form of a T-Shirt while out and about in Santa Monica on Monday

He donned a pair of black Persol sunglasses while juggling various items in his hands including water bottle, keys, and baseball cap.

The shirt he was wearing represents a suicide prevention nonprofit which provides education and therapy to veterans, first responders and their families.

Based out of Texas and formerly known as 22KILL, the One Tribe Foundation 'services and facilities to address today’s growing mental health issues including depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and suicide,' according to a release.

Brad used his star power recently to promote Penn's Community Organized Relief Effort which has been on the ground providing cost-free COVID-19 testing and vaccinations.

Chill: The 46-year-old actor matched the top as he sported a pair of grey sweat shorts and black flip flops

Sean and Bradley have a connection that goes way back to 1999 - years before Bradley became a movie star in his own right.

When Sean was being interviewed on Inside The Actors Studio a 24-year-old Bradley was one of the students in the audience who asked him a question.

Bradley asked him about starring in the 1998 movie Hurlyburly which featured Sean as a character he had played onstage years earlier.

The young aspiring actor then sat rapt as Sean explained that 'having done the play ended up being like an intensive rehearsal period for the movie, and then the movie becomes its own process as would a movie that had a two-week rehearsal period.'

During a 2015 appearance on The Howard Stern Show Bradley recalled he was 'so nervous' before asking Sean his question.

He also noted that his segment 'never aired,' saying that 'they only aired it after, I think, I started doing well as an actor.'

Old connections: When Sean Penn was being interviewed on Inside The Actors Studio a 24-year-old Bradley was one of the students in the audience who asked him a question

About three years ago when Bradley was being feted with the American Cinematheque Award one of the speakers was Sean, per Entertainment Tonight.

Whilst at the lectern Sean took the opportunity to playfully rib the guest of honor by replaying the throwback video of the pair of them on Inside The Actors Studio.

Sean publicly gushed about Bradley after the younger actor made his directorial debut with a remake of A Star Is Born starring himself opposite Lady Gaga.

He praised Bradley for 'mentoring a brilliantly talented by very inexperienced leading lady to an astonishing performance,' while 'playing a very tortured character who's really struggling and that's challenging for an actor to do and own it organically' and also 'directing a movie at scale like this' on Jimmy Kimmel Live!.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Erika Girardi fled a group trip before a bombshell story broke about her embattled husband Tom Girardi and their lavish lifestyle on Wednesday's episode of RHOBH - where her costars questioned whether or not she would be going to jail.

The 50-year-old reality star broke down in tears during a get-away weekend in La Quinta after Garcelle Beauvais, 54, blurted out that ex Tom still called Erika daily.

Erika and her estranged husband Tom, 82, are both currently facing claims of allegedly embezzling settlement funds that were meant to help the families of plane crash victims.

The singer told Garcelle that she had crossed a line by bringing up something that she had shared in confidence.

Tough time: Erika Girardi fled a group trip before a bombshell story broke about her embattled husband Tom Girardi and their lavish lifestyle on Wednesday's episode of RHOBH

'This is very hard,' Erika said with tears running down her face. 'This is a hard time in my life.'

Lisa Rinna, 57, hugged Erika as she sobbed and said 'I'm sorry that happened. It's f***ed up.'

Erika's over the top emotional reaction during the episode titled 'Circle Of Distrust' had the women questioning whether there was more that they weren't being told about regarding her situation.

After Lisa's comment, Garcelle grabbed her phone and said 'I'm leaving.'

Tears flowing: The 50-year-old reality star broke down in tears during a get-away weekend in La Quinta

In a confessional, Garcelle said she was really mad because she didn't think that Lisa 'gave her the benefit of the doubt.' She said Lisa was supposed to be working on building their relationship.

Kathy Hilton, 62, convinced her to stay and Garcelle sat back down with the women. She apologized to Erika who told her it was okay.

'You don't need to leave, it is okay,' Erika told her before she started sobbing.

Hot seat: Garcelle Beauvais, 54, blurted out that Tom Girardi, 82, still called Erika daily prompting Erika to lose it

In a confessional, Kyle Richards, 52, said whatever was happening with Erika it had to be something major because she looks 'broken.'

Garcelle hugged Erika while apologizing again and Erika repeated that it was okay.

Sutton Stracke, 49, also said in a confessional that she found Erika's reaction 'a little much' and that it made her wonder whether Erika was being honest with them.

Broken down: In a confessional, Kyle Richards, 52, said whatever was happening with Erika it had to be something major because she looks 'broken'

Erika then decided to go home and told the women she needed to take care of some things.

When Erika walked out, Sutton told Garcelle that she didn't do anything wrong. Outside, Dorit Kemsley, 44, told Erika that she hated to see her upset like this and that she was sorry for what happened.

'Me, too,' Kyle said.

Taking off: Erika then decided to go home and told the women she needed to take care of some things

Lisa told Erika, as they waited with her for her ride, that they knew that she would open up in her own time.

'So why push it?,' Lisa said.

After Erika left the housewives returned to the living room of Kyle's La Quinta house where Lisa said she was so sad over the incident.

Sad situation: After Erika left the housewives returned to the living room of Kyle's La Quinta house where Lisa said she was so sad over the incident

Garcelle, clearly mad, didn't even look at her. Lisa asked her why she felt she had to ask Erika about Tom.

Crystal Kung Minkoff, 35, told Garcelle they should go back to their hotel and get ready for dinner.

Once outside while waiting for their ride, Garcelle said she didn't think that a lot of people were on her side. In a confessional, Garcelle said she had always felt that there was an inner circle to their group that did not include her.

Not happy: Garcelle, clearly mad, didn't even look at Lisa who sided against her

Inside the house, Lisa told Kyle, Dorit, and Sutton that she didn't think it was their place to ask Erika questions. Lisa then checked her phone for the latest news and saw that there was a report that Tom's creditors planned to file an involuntary bankruptcy petition.

Dorit said that if all of Tom's assets went into this bankruptcy filing that Erika was not going to get a 'dime.'

The women then changed for dinner.

Legal commentary: Dorit Kemsley said that if all of Tom's assets went into this bankruptcy filing that Erika was not going to get a 'dime'

Despite the fact that they were just having dinner at Kyle's house, the women dressed to the nines. Lisa wore a black Gucci jumpsuit and Dorit wore a Gucci partially see-through outfit. Sutton, wore a red plaid blazer, with a vintage Cartier diamond cuff.

Lisa asked her if it was real.

'What do you mean?' Sutton said. ' It's vintage Cartier.'

Dressed up: Despite the fact that they were just having dinner at Kyle's house, the women dressed to the nines

'You're so f***ing rich,' Lisa said. 'I forget.'

Garcelle and Crystal walked in and the women complimented each other on their outfits. Kathy asked if anyone had spoken to Erika and Kyle said she texted her. Garcelle said she also sent her a text but did not hear back.

Kyle told her that the next time she sees Erika that she won't be mean to her, but that she just won't trust her.

Good times: The women complimented each other on their outfits

'I get that,' said Garcelle. 'But I did not do it intentionally.'

Lisa asked Garcelle if there was anything she could 'own' about the situation. Lisa said in a confessional that Garcelle needs to 'check herself as to why she does what she does.' She said Garcelle is not someone who has 'your back.'

Dorit said to Garcelle that she didn't think that she wanted to hurt Erika, but that she was 'needling a little bit.' Garcelle denied it and said she wasn't going to hurt someone who was at their bottom.

On defense: Garcelle denied going after Erika and said she wasn't going to hurt someone who was at their bottom

'That's not who I am,' said Garcelle.

Lisa asked to make her understand what happened. Garcelle said she wished she had been told not to say anything because she wouldn't have, but she wasn't and she 'over stepped.'

Garcelle said in a confessional that she didn't do anything intentional or had anything to own, but just confessed to over-stepping to shut Lisa up.

Over stepped: In a confessional, Garcelle said that she didn't do anything intentional or had anything to own, but just confessed to over-stepping to shut Lisa up

The women sat down for dinner. Kathy brought up that she had heard that someone at the table said they didn't see color. She then told them a story where Michael Jackson told her that he didn't see color and that neither did she.

Sutton, in a confessional, said she was not going to touch that one.

Garcelle tried to explain to Kathy that she wanted her to see color.

Staying out: Sutton, in a confessional, said she was not going to touch that one as the talk turned to race

'If you don't see color then you don't see me,' said Garcelle.

Kyle tried to explain that Kathy meant that she thought everyone was equal, but Garcelle said that was not true at all because 'we are not treated equally as you are…we should be but we are not.'

Garcelle asked the women if they ever told their children to be careful when the cops pulled them over. Lisa and Kyle said no. Garcelle said she often worries about her son Oliver being pulled over.

No color: Kathy Hilton told them a story where Michael Jackson told her that he didn't see color and that neither did she

'In an instant, he is not my son and he's just a black man,' Garcelle said in a confessional. 'And this world does not see the value in black men.'

Crystal said she was also always taught growing up to protect herself. She said she would be picked on when she was younger. Dorit told the women that she has a lot of people who have worked for her that are multicultural and her children are used to it. Dorit said that some of the people her children loved most are 'dark-skinned.'

Garcelle asked if black and brown people were the only help at Dorit's house. Dorit said no and added that her mother's best friend was black. After dinner, Kyle then asked the women if they would make her life easier by all rinsing their plates and putting them in the dishwasher. Dorit suggested that next time they all go on vacation that they chip in to hire some help.

Good point: Garcelle asked the women if they ever told their children to be careful when the cops pulled them over

'Kyle what kind of vacation is this,' Dorit said in a confessional. 'We dress for dinner, not for dishes.'

In a confessional, Kyle didn't think it was such a big deal to ask the other housewives to just rinse their one dish. 'You would think I was asking them to detail my car or something,' she said.

Later after some of the housewives staying at Kyle's house had changed into their pajamas, Lisa shared with them that her husband Harry Hamlin gets acrylic nails because he plays guitar. They all laughed when they saw the picture of Harry's nails.

Then the next morning as the women were still drinking their coffee the alerts kept going off on their phones and it became apparent what made Erika so upset.

The Los Angeles Times had just published a story titled 'The legal titan and the 'Real Housewife': The rise and fall of Tom Girardi and Erika Jayne.'

News story: The Los Angeles Times had just published a story titled 'The legal titan and the 'Real Housewife': The rise and fall of Tom Girardi and Erika Jayne'

'It's not good' Kyle said to Lisa.

Kyle recounted later that she thought it couldn't get any worse for Erika. She said the article said that Tom stands 'accused of stealing millions of dollars from vulnerable clients, including Indonesian children orphaned by a plane crash and a burn victim.'

She read that the article also said that Tom 'has bristled at allegations that he diverted firm assets for lavish living' but his lawyers admitted in court that Tom had been unable to tell them what happened to the money.

The article: Kyle said the article said that Tom stands 'accused of stealing millions of dollars from vulnerable clients, including Indonesian children orphaned by a plane crash and a burn victim'

The article also reported that Tom allegedly had improperly funneled more than $20 million to Erika Jayne's entertainment company.

'That's a lot of money,' Lisa said.

Sutton came downstairs in her pajamas and joined Kyle and Lisa and told them that she had also read that the article used the words 'Ponzi scheme.' She said if Tom is found guilty that he is going to jail.

'Is someone going to jail?' Kyle asked as Sutton replied, 'If he's found guilty, yeah. He's going to jail.'

Ponzi claim: Sutton came downstairs in her pajamas and joined Kyle and Lisa and told them that she had also read that the article used the words 'Ponzi scheme'

They then discussed whether in Bernie Madoff's case whether his wife was implicated and went to jail. Sutton told them she wasn't. But, Sutton told them, that tricky part for Erika was if her business was in her name and she accepted these funds.

'That's not good,' Sutton said. 'If she did receive $20 million from him from the firm then that money should be going back to all the victims.'

Kyle wanted to know what happened to the money and Sutton said she thought it was gone.

Not good: 'That's not good,' Sutton said. 'If she did receive $20 million from him from the firm then that money should be going back to all the victims'

Sutton said in a confessional that these are not white collar crimes and that these crimes have victims. She said it looked like this was a lot bigger and had been going on a lot longer than they had been told. Kyle and Sutton agreed that Erika knew this article was coming out and was probably the reason behind her leaving.

Lisa said she didn't believe that Erika knew what Tom was doing. She said in a confessional that in her house when Harry puts contracts on the table that she has just signed them.

Sutton said the problem for Erika was that if her name was on the LLC that she would be held responsible for that LLC. Sutton said in a confessional that 'if the devil himself puts money in your LLC, you are responsible for it.'

Showing support: Lisa said she didn't believe that Erika knew what Tom was doing

Dorit said that the picture that was being painted by this article was that Erika and Tom had a very lavish lifestyle and all this money was just an effort to keep it up.

'The picture that was being painted is very, very different from reality,' said Kyle.

After reading the report, Dorit said it felt as if they did not know Erika at all and that Erika's freedom is at stake. Kyle wondered in a confessional what else Erika had been keeping from them.

Sutton also questioned whether they had all 'been slightly duped by the lies' and Dorit said it was a 'hard pill to swallow' as he's known Erika for years.

'It's almost as if we don't know her at all,' Dorit said.

Back at the La Quinta hotel, Garcelle also discussed the article with Crystal Kung Minkoff, 35. Garcelle said later in a confessional that the article explained why Erika flipped out on her. She said the paper must have called and given Erika a heads up.

The women then packed up and returned to their lives and homes in LA. Dorit was FaceTiming with her husband PK who was with Boy George and even the famous singer asked about Erika.

'Just thank God it's not your drama, that is all I have got to say,' Boy George said. 'That's the good news.'

Popular topic: Dorit was FaceTiming with her husband PK who was with Boy George and even the famous singer asked about Erika

Kyle called Dorit to discuss. Kyle said in a confessional that the thought that Erika knew something and was covering for Tom crept into her head. She told Dorit that Sutton wanted to set up a meeting without Erika. Dorit agreed to hold the meeting at her house.

Kyle said in a confessional that she was shocked when she opened up her phone in the morning and saw pictures of the alleged mistress and texts from Tom leaked by Erika on Instagram. Kyle said she thought Erika was posting pictures because people thought her divorce was a hoax.

Lisa said she had spoken to Erika that morning and she told her that her divorce lawyer told her to take the photos down. Sutton arrived and told the women that she thought they had all been placed in a bad position.

Alleged mistress: Kyle said in a confessional that she was shocked when she opened up her phone in the morning and saw pictures of the alleged mistress and texts from Tom leaked by Erika on Instagram

'I left yesterday very concerned,' Sutton said. 'My alarms and red flags started flying everywhere. What have we gotten ourselves into?'

Sutton told them she wasn't sure how much she wanted to be around Erika during this time.

The show ended with a 'To Be Continued' message.

The Real Housewives Of Beverly Hills will return next Wednesday on Bravo.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She takes on a leading role of Watts in the near-future Sci-Fi blockbuster.

And Thandiwe Newton, 48, certainly made a show-stopping entrance on Wednesday evening as she hit the red carpet at Reminiscence's UK premiere at London's BFI IMAX.

Cutting a slim figure in a black maxi dress, featuring an eye-catching green ruffled neckline, the actress commanded attention in the unmissable number.

Classy: Thandiwe Newton stunned in a green-collared black maxi dress as she led the stars at the Reminiscence premiere in London on Wednesday

Elevating her height with a pair of black-strapped heels, the BAFTA winner gave her best power pose, placing her onyx-nail-painted hand firmly on her left hip while shooting a pout.

With her sleek brown tresses tied back in a middle-parting, Thandiwe accessorised her waist with a pair of classic black belts.

The Westworld star sported a smoky eye makeup look and wore a pair of emerald green earrings to complete her ensemble.

Beauties: The Westworld star sported a smoky eye makeup look, while Rebecca Ferguson, who takes on the role of Mae in the blockbuster, looked phenomenal in a tiger-print dress

Strike a pose: Thandiwe certainly made a show-stopping entrance as she hit the red carpet at London's BFI IMAX

Fashion forward: Cutting a slim figure in a black maxi dress, featuring an eye-catching green ruffled neckline, the actress commanded attention in the unmissable number

Confident: Donning a pair of black pump heels, the Swedish actress's makeup had been applied flawlessly and her short dark blonde tresses fell gracefully in curls

Meanwhile, her co-star Rebecca, who takes on the role of Mae in the blockbuster, looked phenomenal as she modelled a glossy tiger-print maxi-dress.

Stunning a crowd of onlookers, the 37-year-old oozed confidence in a corset-style strapped top and clutched a charcoal purse with both of her hands.

Donning a pair of black pump heels, the Swedish actress's makeup had been applied flawlessly and her short dark blonde tresses fell gracefully in curls.

Centre of attention: Hollywood A-Lister Hugh Jackman, 52, who stars in the movie as Nick Bannister, looked typically suave as he joined his female co-stars for the event

Suited-and-booted: Wearing a timeless grey suit and white shirt, accessorised with a light brown tie, the Aussie star had groomed his brown locks into a smart quiff

Team: Rebecca (left), Hugh and Thandiwe (right) make up Reminiscence's star-studded line up

Hollywood A-Lister Hugh Jackman, 52, who stars in the movie as Nick Bannister, looked typically suave as he joined his female co-stars for the camera-flash-filled event.

Wearing a timeless grey suit and white shirt, accessorised with a light brown tie, the Aussie star had groomed his brown locks into a smart quiff.

Beaming for the crowd of onlookers, the Wolverine actor placed his left hand in his pocket as he kept firmly in position in a pair of shiny black leather shoes.

All-black: Jonathan Nolan (left) looked debonair in a black suit. Also in attendance was Mojean Aria (right), who paired a cowboy hat with a black Burberry suit and khaki polo shirt

Smiles: Lisa Joy (left) put on a risqué display in an extremely high-cut onyx gown while Harpz Kaur (right) kept it casual in a light-blue denim zip-up sleeved-dress

All good here: Amir Khan shot a thumbs-up to the cameras while donning a navy polo shirt and Jonathan Nolan looked debonair in a black suit

Also in attendance was Mojean Aria, who paired a cowboy hat with a black Burberry suit and khaki polo shirt.

Amir Khan shot a thumbs-up to the cameras while donning a navy polo shirt and Jonathan Nolan looked debonair in a black suit.





Lisa Joy put on a risqué display in an extremely high-cut onyx gown while Harpz Kaur kept it casual in a light-blue denim zip-up sleeved-dress.

Erim Kaur flashed a beam to onlookers while sporting a high-cut black ruffled dress.

Stars: Damien O'Brien combined a pair of charcoal jeans with a white crew-neck T-shirt and black bomber jacket, while Erim Kaur flashed a beam to onlookers

Glamorous: Ikram Abdi Omar looked stylish in an all-black ensemble and orange heels

Trendy: Luke Catleugh (left) wore his hand in his grey suit pocket, which he paired with a black crew-neck T-shirt. Jack Howard (right) cut a grey suit, which he wore above a classic white shirt

Damien O'Brien combined a pair of charcoal jeans with a white crew-neck T-shirt and black bomber jacket. He accessorised his look with an eye-popping red baseball cap.

Jack Howard cut a grey suit, which he wore above a classic white shirt.

Luke Catleugh wore his hand in his grey suit pocket, which he paired with a black crew-neck T-shirt.

Ikram Abdi Omar was also spotted posing up a storm on the blue carpet in an all-black ensemble and and orange heels.

Gripping: The movie, which releases on August 20th, takes place in the near future where Miami has been flooded by rising seas

The movie, which releases on August 20th, takes place in the near future. Miami has been flooded by rising seas and Nick Bannister (Hugh Jackman), a lonely army veteran, offers clients the chance to relive any memory they wish.

When the mysterious Mae (Rebecca Ferguson) enters his life, a passionate love affair erupts.

However, when a different client's memories involve Mae in a string of violent crimes, Nick must venture through a dark past to unravel the truth about his lover.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She made her West End debut in 2:22 A Ghost Story earlier this month before impressing critics during Wednesday's press night.

And amid praise for her 'notably confident and scary' performance in the new play, one person who perhaps didn't wish Lily Allen as well was her husband David Harbour, who jokingly sent her 'bad luck' flowers.

Taking to Instagram on Thursday following her latest performance in front of theatre reviewers, Lily, 36, shared a note from her Stranger Things star beau, 46, who remarked that he hoped she wasn't 'reviewed well' as he'll be 'miserable.'

Oh dear! Lily Allen's husband David Harbour jokingly sent her 'bad luck' flowers ahead of her West End debut in 2:22 A Ghost Story as he claimed he'd be 'miserable' if she was reviewed well (pictured in 2020)

Alongside a pretty bunch of flowers, he penned a message which read: 'My ambitious wife, these are bad luck flowers 'cause if you get reviewed well in this play, you get all kinds of awards and I will be miserable.'

The humorous actor signed off with: 'Your loving husband'.

Highlighting the fact that she had in fact received great reviews for her performance, Lily hilariously captioned her post: 'sad day for @dkharbour.'

Lily's production, which opened at London's Noel Coward Theatre on August 3, received high praise from critics who praised the 'macabre playfulness' of the production and Allen's stellar stage presence.

Stage star: The singer, 36, made her West End debut in 2:22 A Ghost Story earlier this month before impressing critics during Wednesday's press night (pictured on stage on August 5)

Funny: Taking to Instagram on Thursday following her latest performance in front of theatre reviewers, Lily shared a note from her Stranger Things star beau, 46, who remarked that he hoped she wasn't 'reviewed well' as he'll be 'miserable'

Lily plays the character Jenny in the supernatural thriller about four friends caught up in a night of high tension.

She is joined on stage by former EastEnders star Jake Wood, City Of Angels actor Hadley Fraser and Julia Chan of Silent House.

The play follows Jenny, who believes her new home is haunted but her husband Sam (Fraser) remains sceptical.

Sarcasm: Alongside a pretty bunch of flowers, he penned a message which read: 'My ambitious wife, these are bad luck flowers 'cause if you get reviewed well in this play, you get all kinds of awards and I will be miserable'

Oh well! Highlighting the fact that she had in fact received great reviews for her performance, Lily hilariously captioned her post: 'sad day for @dkharbour'

Plug: The star also took to Instagram to plug the play after the press night

They argue with their first dinner guests, old friend Lauren (Chan) and new partner Ben (Wood) and decide to stay awake until 2.22am to discover the truth.

As well as recent praise from critics, Lily already received glowing reviews from social media following her debut performance earlier this month.

Following the show, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise with one viewer penning: 'I had goosebumps at the end, the audience were screaming. What a play, what a show, what a cast. It’s unbelievable that was her west end debut'.

Fans took to the microblogging site to write: 'WOW!! I had goosebumps at the end, @sophdoesthings was crying, the audience were screaming...

Haunting: Lily plays the character Jenny in the supernatural thriller about four friends caught up in a night of high tension - she is joined on stage by former EastEnders star Jake Wood, City Of Angels actor Hadley and Julia Chan of Silent House.

Chilling: They argue with their first dinner guests, old friend Lauren (Chan) and new partner Ben (Wood) and decide to stay awake until 2.22am to discover the truth

'What a play, what a show, what a cast. @LilyAllen KILLED IT!!! I am so proud of her, it’s unbelievable that was her west end debut never mind opening night!...

'Absolutely loved the play last night!! One of the best things I’ve seen in years - you were brilliant, as was the rest of the cast! Smiling face...'

'No spoilers but that was incredible such an amazing play loved it so much! Now Shhh I won’t tell- you HAVE to book and see this !! #222AGhostStory'.

The play will run at the Noel Coward Theatre until October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They jetted into Andalucia earlier this week for a sunshine break.

And, Vogue Williams stunned in a chic swimsuit as she and shirtless husband Spencer Matthews, 33, enjoyed a family beach day in the Costa Del Sol, Spain on Wednesday.

The DJ, 35, oozed elegance in her black swimwear, with a woven fedora bearing her married initials, VM, and classic shades keeping her sun-safe.

Hot mama! Vogue Williams, 35, stunned in a chic swimsuit as she enjoyed a family beach day in the Costa Del Sol, Spain on Wednesday

Vogue paraded her slim frame in the swimsuit which featured an eye-catching plunge-front held together by large gold buttons.

The TV personality accessorised with a smattering of metal jewellery and a beaded glasses chain.

MIC star Spencer showed off his buff body while cooling off in the sea during a break from his sunlounger.

Vogue was in the company of her shirtless husband and their two young children: Theodore, two, and one-year-old daughter Gigi.

Buff! Her shirtless husband Spencer Matthews, 33, showed off his buff body while cooling off

Family fun: The mother-of-two took Theodore, two, into the sea to splash about

Athletic: Spencer showed off his swimming abilities as he dove into the sea

Hot stuff: Vogue and Spencer showed off their gym-honed bodies on the beach

Energetic: Theodore ran along the sand as he enjoyed time with his parents

The DJ and her MIC star husband spoke on their podcast, Spencer & Vogue, when they revealed their unusual nickname for their daughter: 'fat maggot'.

Vogue said: 'I know, every parent loves their plump little fat daughter. We call ours the fat maggot.'

Explaining the name, Spencer said he likened his daughter to the insect and revealed he believes she will turn into a butterfly.

He said: 'And she's so sweet, she crawls around like a little maggot consuming anything she can get her hands on.'

'Becoming plumper, and rounder, until one day, even though she's not a caterpillar, she'll turn into a beautiful Maggotfly, a butterfly, yeah.'

Fashionista: Vogue wore a floral tunic as a cover-up while making her way to and from the beach to enjoy a day in the Spanish sunshine

Keeping it simple: Spencer opted to wear just a plain pair of black swim shorts

Water baby: Vogue's baby boy shrieked with delighted as waves splashed up at him

Mummy's boy: The toddler held onto Vogue's hang before speeding up

Gorgeous pair: Vogue and her handsome husband shared the load as they carried their belongings

Little rascal: Theodore couldn't be held back as he darted off with his little legs

Discussing their other child, son Theodore, Spencer said that he 'drives you up the walls.'

He said: 'He's quite spoilt, he just whinges all the time and without drawing attention to the fact that I spent many months in Africa doing incredibly lovely charity work, none of those kids cried none of them.

'Of course if they hurt themselves they might cry but I have spent time with loads and loads of two to ten-year-olds in Africa and they have nothing they never cry. Theodore cries in his mountain of toys because he can't find something.'

Vogue then offered an explanation as to her son's behaviour and said: 'I don't think you understand that is what a two-year-old does and the problem with Theodore was we were away.

'Everyone kept giving him TV which he's not allowed and he turns into the moodiest little naughty boy and that is why.'

And again! Theodore couldn't get enough of being hoisted above the waves by his mum

Centre of attention: Theodore commanded his mum's attention as he ran about on the sand
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Billie Piper's rocker partner Johnny Lloyd took to Instagram on Thursday to share a snap of her calling her 'beautiful lady' in the caption.

Johnny, 38, added a red love heart alongside the adorable picture of his partner.

The Doctor Who actress, also 38, then reposted the image to her own social media story with the caption a string of red love heart and tongue emojis.

Glowing: Billie Piper's boyfriend Johnny Lloyd, both 38, took to Instagram on Thursday to post a a sweet snap of her wearing pink, calling her 'beautiful lady'

The former Doctor Who actress looked down at the ground as she glowed in the image and wore a pink dress with matching lipstick.

Her dark blonde locks were tied in a loose pony tail as she let her tousled fringe frame her face.

The couple were first romantically linked in 2016 and they're now the proud parents of two-year-old daughter Tallulah.

Cute: The pair were first romantically linked in 2016; pictured in May 2021

The I Hate Suzie star has recently released her passion project Rare Beasts.

Billie directed and stars in the flick as a single mum Mandy, who is navigating her failed love story with Pete (Leo Bill).

The star's character is said to be a modern woman in a crisis who is also trying to raise her son, Larch (Toby Woolf) in the midst of a female revolution.

Mandy is also seen mining the pain of her parents' separation when she falls upon a troubled man, Pete, who is searching for belonging and 'restored' male identity.

Rare Beasts was written back in 2012 when Billie was pregnant with her second son, Eugene, nine, who she shares with her ex husband Laurence Fox.

Billie and her ex have two children together, the older of the two being 12-year-old Winston.

Although the 'anti-romantic comedy' premiered at the Venice Film Festival back in 2019, it was eventually released on May 21.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's going to be walking down the aisle to wed fiancé William Lee-Kemp in September.

And Jess Wright's sun-soaked Ibiza hen party getaway continues to be in full swing with the TOWIE star taking to Instagram on Sunday to share a busty series of shots with her fans.

Cutting a 1920s inspired feathered mini dress, the Essex girl flashed a beaming grin towards the camera while holding a glass of white wine, in a post captioned, 'Dreamy nights.'

Dazzling: Bride-to-be Jess Wright showcased her ample assets in a TINY feathered mini dress on Instagram on Sunday as she continues her sun-soaked hen party getaway in Ibiza

With her ample assets almost spilling out of the sheer number, Jess flashed her sun-kissed legs and donned a pair of gold strapped heels.

With a silver zip-up bag in-hand and a huge steel watch on her wrist, the Celebrity Karaoke Club star looked like she was having a whale of a time as she flung her arms in the air and posed up a storm.

Jess's wore a full-face of flawlessly applied makeup, including an eye-popping ruby red pout.

Her chocolate tresses had been styled into a plait, however she let her shorter strands loosely fall down to frame her face.

Busty: With her ample assets almost spilling out of the tiny number, Jess flashed her sun-kissed legs and donned a pair of gold strapped heels

In an interview with Hello! Magazine, the amateur singer admitted she and William, 34, had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there.

Living it up! The Celebrity Karaoke Club star looked like she was having a whale of a time as she flung her arms in the air and beaming for the camera

'I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rhian Brewster finally broke his Sheffield United duck as the Blades advanced to the second round of the Carabao Cup following a 1-0 victory over Carlisle.

Brewster's first goal for the club since his transfer from Liverpool last summer separated the two teams, giving Slavisa Jokanovic his first win as manager.

Billy Sharp had an early effort blocked and Kacper Lopata saw his towering header saved by Lukas Jensen.

Rhian Brewster finally scored his first goal for Sheffield United on Tuesday night

The youngster scored the winner in the Blades' Carabao Cup first-round win over Carlisle

Brewster opened the scoring in the 24th minute, applying the finish after Sharp's shot was saved.

Full of confidence, Brewster also tried a 25-yard drive which was deflected just off target as the Blades saw out the game.

Lewis Thomas was Forest Green's penalty shootout hero as the League Two side stunned Championship Bristol City.

Regan Hendry equalised for the hosts deep into stoppage time as the game went to spot-kicks after a 2-2 draw.

And with Rovers leading 6-5, Thomas dived the right way to keep out Cameron Pring's kick.

Morecambe came from behind to earn a famous 2-1 win at Blackburn.

League Two side Forest Green stunned Championship opponents Bristol City in the shootout

Rovers dominated the first half and deservedly led through Tyrhys Dolan's header, but were pegged back early in the second half by Cole Stockton's confident finish.

And the Sky Bet League One new-boys secured victory over the 2002 winners six minutes from the end when Burnley loanee Adam Phillips emphatically converted a penalty.

Much-changed Birmingham squeezed through to the second round after debutant Marcel Oakley's late goal downed a spirited Colchester 1-0 at St Andrew's.

Oakley's deflected shot in the 76th minute finally saw off the League Two side as crowds returned to St. Andrew's for the first time since March 7, 2020.

But there was little to cheer for the home fans - whose side showed 11 changes from Saturday's 1-0 win at Sheffield United - before 18-year-old right back Oakley struck.

George Saville scored his first goal back at Millwall as the Championship side came from behind to defeat Portsmouth 2-1 and reach the second round.

Morecambe came from behind to earn a famous 2-1 win at Blackburn Rovers

Saville returned to the Lions from Middlesbrough during the summer and his smartly-taken volley eventually saw off League One Pompey, who had defender Callum Johnson sent off.

Meanwhile, Stoke's new signing Sam Surridge bagged his second goal in as many games and skipper Harry Souttar was also on target as the Potters eased to a 2-1 home victory over Fleetwood.

Former Bournemouth striker Surridge pounced with a smart close-range strike on the stroke of half-time as the Championship side edged a scrappy affair against their League One visitors at the bet365 Stadium.

And Australia international defender Souttar powered a 77th-minute header beyond keeper Alex Cairns to secure place in the second round.

Ryan Hardie's double helped Plymouth to a stunning 4-0 win over Championship side Peterborough at the Weston Homes Stadium.

Hardie's first-half double and second-half Luke Jephcott and Panutche Camara goals made it a comfortable win for the League One side who have now progressed past the first round in the last four seasons.

A much-changed Birmingham City downed a spirited Colchester 1-0 at St Andrew's

Preston knocked Mansfield out of the Carabao Cup in the first round for the second year in a row after a hard-earned 3-0 victory at the One Call Stadium.

Preston were lucky to be ahead at the break. But two goals in 11 second-half minutes killed the League Two side off.

Josh Sheehan's penalty shoot-out winner put Sky Bet League One new-boys Bolton into the second round at the expense of Championship side Barnsley, with a helping hand from debutant goalkeeper Joel Dixon.

Dixon saved Devante Cole's spot-kick, leaving midfielder Sheehan to score past Jack Walton and secure a 5-4 shoot-out win following a goalless 90 minutes.

It was Bolton's first cup win over the Tykes in 109 years.

New Swansea head coach Russell Martin secured his first victory at the second time of asking when his side defeated a youthful Reading outfit 3-0 in the first round.

City went ahead in the 16th minute of a low-key first period when defender Joel Latibeaudiere nodded in powerfully.

Swansea then cruised to victory, with Piroe's calm finish from the edge of the area in the 83rd minute settling it.

Stoke's new signing Sam Surridge (right) bagged his second goal in as many games as the Potters eased to a 2-1 home victory over Fleetwood

Reading, who had used their three substitutes, were forced to play the last 20 minutes with 10 men after left-back Nelson Abbey went off injured.

Cardiff manager Mick McCarthy praised the impact of his new short-term signing Marley Watkins after he scored twice on his Bluebirds debut in a 3-2 win over Sutton.

Watkins' brace came either side of half-time and helped Cardiff turn the tables after they fell behind to the League Two new boys - who were playing in the Carabao Cup for the first time.

Cardiff confirmed Wales cap Watkins - who left Bristol City in the summer and has been on trial in the Welsh capital - had signed a deal until the end of August before kick-off.

Joseph Anang was the hero with two shootout saves as League Two Stevenage defeated local rivals Luton 3-0 on penalties to progress to the second round of the EFL Cup following a 2-2 draw in normal time.

The home side conceded the lead twice in a chaotic four-goal first half, with goals by Elliott List and Ben Coker cancelled out by Luton's Cameron Jerome and Admiral Muskwe.

Despite the two-league gap between the sides it was an even affair from the off, aided by the fact Hatters manager Nathan Jones made 10 changes to the side that started their win against Peterborough at the weekend.

Josh Sheehan's penalty shoot-out winner saw Bolton dump out Championship side Barnsley

Both sides scored within the first five minutes of the game, with Stevenage going ahead through last season's top scorer List in the second minute, only for Luton debutant Jerome to draw the visitors level three minutes later.

Boro again failed to hold onto their lead, though, as former Leicester man Muskwe struck for the visitors five minutes before half-time.

Neither side was able to dominate a calmer second half, but Stevenage and Anang held their nerve in the shootout to progress to the next round.

Wigan caused a minor upset at Hull by progressing to the second round of the Carabao Cup following a penalty shootout victory.

Manchester United loan signing Di'Shon Bernard missed the key spot-kick when he fired over the crossbar, allowing Jordan Cousins to score the winning penalty to earn League One Wigan a deserved victory.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish became the most expensive British footballer ever by completing an historic £100million move to Manchester City.

The 25-year-old underwent a medical at the City Football Academy and signed a six-year contract worth more than £200,000 a week.

Grealish revealed the driving force behind leaving his boyhood club, Aston Villa, was winning major trophies after City triggered the release clause in his contract last week.

Jack Grealish has completed his record-breaking £100million move to Manchester City

The England star will look to carry his class from Villa to the Etihad this season

‘I am over the moon. To come and play for a club like Manchester City is obviously massive for me personally,’ Grealish said.

‘It was obviously a difficult few months because I have been an Aston Villa fan for my whole life, but when I spoke to the manager here and you see what type of players they have got here, in the end it was something I couldn’t say no to. I am absolutely delighted to be here.

‘Trophies are the main reason why I joined. There are obviously a lot of reasons why I decided to come here. The manager has been a massive factor; playing under the best manager in the world was something I couldn’t really turn down.

‘Obviously the players that we have got here, I think everyone knows how much I admire Kevin [De Bruyne]. It is going to become a dream come true to play alongside him. But competing for major trophies is something that I wanted to do. It was something I couldn’t turn down.’

Grealish posed alongside Txiki" Begiristain after signing the bumper contract

City spent heavily to bring in Pep Guardiola’s man. The British record has changed on 17 occasions since the Premier League’s inception, passed between the division’s largest clubs, with City now setting it for the second time after the £32.5m capture of Robinho in 2008.

City, who broke their club record last season when taking Ruben Dias from Benfica for £62m, have recouped around £50m in player sales this season. They hope to double that total before the end of the month, before factoring in the potential departure of Bernardo Silva.

Grealish added: ‘I have been here now for 24 hours and the whole club has been unbelievable for me and my family. It just feels like a family club, even when I am at the training ground, when I am here.

‘It seems like a proper football club going in the right direction, challenging for titles, for the Champions League and that is why I have come here.’

Grealish said the main reason he joined City was for trophies after signing his huge deal

Earlier on Thursday, Grealish was seen leaving Manchester City headquarters as he closed in on his move.

Sportsmail revealed on Wednesday that Grealish had started his medical at City's Etihad training ground after the Premier League champions activated a clause in his contract last week.

And Grealish was seen in the back of a large black van outside City's training complex on Thursday with the final formalities of the deal later completed.

Grealish's arrival is a huge statement of intent from City, who are prepared to break that transfer record again before the end of this month to land Harry Kane from Tottenham.

Grealish (back seat) was seen leaving Manchester City headquarters earlier in the day

Grealish moves away from boyhood club Aston Villa despite signing a new deal a year ago

Grealish will now get the platform he has craved and many felt he deserved after his cameos for England at Euro 2020. The midfielder was mostly used from the substitutes' bench by Gareth Southgate but was a regular face on the Three Lions' route to the final.

He now joins a superb core of England talent currently in Pep Guardiola's squad, with Phil Foden, Raheem Sterling, John Stones and Kyle Walker all playing at the Etihad Stadium.

Sportsmail revealed in March that City had become favourites to sign Grealish and they have maintained a dogged pursuit. They opened official talks last week and offered the £100m clause figure in full on Friday.

Grealish has only just returned to pre-season training after playing for England at Euro 2020

How Sportsmail led the way on Grealish Sportsmail's Chris Wheeler reported back in March that City were favourites to sign Grealish this summer. Matt Hughes revealed back in May that City were ready to make Grealish English football's first £100million star. And in June, we revealed that City's £100m bid was set to be enough to land Grealish despite Villa's offer of a new contract. Advertisement

Grealish returned from holiday in Dubrovnik at the start of this week and remained respectful to his boyhood club by resuming training. He spoke with sporting director Johan Lange and discussed taking the next step up in his career with chief executive Christian Purslow and chairman Nassef Sawiris.

Villa had tried hard to convince Grealish to stay. They had offered him a new deal, barely 11 months after he signed his last, and outlined their ambition to challenge the top six.

They underlined that ambition by pulling off a shock £30m swoop for Southampton striker Danny Ings - to take their spending to £60m in just one day.

They confirmed the £30m arrival of Bayer Leverkusen winger Leon Bailey - a move exclusively revealed by Sportsmail last month - earlier in the day.

Villa have also added £40m man Emiliano Buendia to their squad from Norwich earlier this summer, who is very much an attacking in a similar mould to Grealish.

The Midlands' club's supporters also tried to convince their club captain to remain at the club this week whilst he was posing for pictures with Villa fans at their pre-season training camp.

Aston Villa fans tried to urge Grealish to reject Manchester City's offer at their training camp

The 25-year-old departs Villa having spent his entire career at his boyhood club, barring a season-long loan spell at Notts County in the 2013-14 season, with the midfielder developing from academy product to club captain.

He made 213 appearances at Villa Park since making his debut in May 2014, scoring 32 goals and registering 43 assists.

Last season was his best campaign to date, producing 12 assists for Smith's Villa and netting six goals, which is particularly impressive given he missed a third of the season due to a shin injury.

Last season was Grealish's best season at Villa scoring six goals and adding 12 assists

The 25-year-old will now link up with Pep Guardiola's (above) Premier League champions

His attention will now turn to helping City defend their Premier League title and could potentially make his debut in Sunday's Community Shield at Wembley with Leicester.

City are also keen to add Tottenham striker Harry Kane to their squad, with the 27-year-old yet to return from pre-season training despite his holiday in the Caribbean coming to an end.

Guardiola's side's offer of £100m was rejected by Spurs, and there is uncertainty over whether the champions can strike a compromise with Daniel Levy.

The Spurs chairman has put a £150m price tag on last season’s top scorer, and the Kane saga is expected to drag on unless Spurs alter their demands.

Grealish joins a strong English core at Man City, including Raheem Sterling (far right)

Grealish is set for City and his England team-mate Harry Kane is also a target for the club

The Spurs talisman was due to return to pre-season training on Monday but has continued his summer holiday with an extra day in Florida.

The 28-year-old still plans to return to Spurs this weekend, but he is likely to need a Covid test at their Enfield base and complete a period of isolation before he can return to training.

He could 'test to release' on day five of his quarantine but even then is likely to be short of fitness for next Sunday's opener against City, the team he is pushing to sign for.

New Spurs head coach Nuno Espirito Santo revealed he is yet to speak to Harry Kane, despite the Portuguese manager being in charge of the north London club for over a month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea have suffered a setback ahead of the new Premier League season, with Hakim Ziyech having to be substituted with what appeared to be a dislocated shoulder.

Ziyech had put Chelsea ahead against Villarreal in the UEFA Super Cup at Windsor Park, but then suffered a nasty-looking injury after he was caught by Juan Foyth.

After receiving lengthy treatment Ziyech was eventually helped off the pitch by a physio, with Christian Pulisic replacing him in the 43rd minute.

Hakim Ziyech had to be substituted against Villarreal with an apparent dislocated shoulder

The Chelsea winger required treatment before he was eventually taken off in the Super Cup

The news will be hugely frustrating for Chelsea boss Thomas Tuchel, especially after Ziyech enjoyed a productive pre-season.

Ziyech had opened the scoring in the 27th minute as he hit the ball into the ground and past Villarreal goalkeeper Sergio Asenjo. Gerard Moreno equalised in the second half before substitute Kepa Arrizabalaga played a starring role to earn victory for the Blues in a penalty shootout.

28-year-old midfielder Ziyech showed glimpses of his ability during his first season at Chelsea and it was expected that he could push on this time around, but it now seems that his start to the campaign will be delayed.

The news will be a major blow for Chelsea manager Thomas Tuchel ahead of the new season

Ziyech put Chelsea ahead in the 27th minute against Villarreal but he later had to go off

Rio Ferdinand described Ziyech's injury as 'disappointing', especially considering how well he has performed in recent games.

Speaking on BT Sport, Ferdinand said: 'A lot of injuries happen like that when you least expect it. Foyth has just jumped. It's disappointing because Ziyech has had such a good pre-season. This is a big season for him.'

Chelsea get their Premier League season underway on Saturday when they host Crystal Palace.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Aston Martin have officially dropped their appeal against Sebastian Vettel's disqualification from the Hungarian Grand Prix.

Vettel finished second in Budapest following a chaotic, incident-filled race, but his podium place was wiped out after the FIA failed to extract the required fuel sample.

His team initially pressed ahead in an attempt to overturn the decision, claiming that there was more than enough fuel left inside the car, but have now conceded defeat.

Aston Martin have dropped their appeal against Sebastian Vettel's disqualification in Hungary

Their right to review the incident was waved away by stewards earlier this week, although they looked set to push on with a separate appeal against the punishment.

Now, however, they have confirmed they will not continue with the challenge to the FIA's International Court of Appeal.

A statement from Aston Martin said they have withdrawn their appeal 'on the basis that we believe doing so outweighs the benefits of it being heard'.

The FIA were unable to extract the mandatory one-litre fuel sample after the race in Budapest

Aston Martin chief Otmar Szafnauer had said the team would weigh up the 'full appeal process'

The concession means that the results are now official, with Mercedes hotshot Lewis Hamilton taking second and Carlos Sainz of Ferrari finishing third.

That has resulted in Hamilton retaining his eight-point advantage at the top of the drivers' championship over Red Bull rival Max Verstappen.

Esteban Ocon claimed a fairy-tale first victory in F1 for Alpine, while Vettel's disqualification reshuffled the top three spots.

He was unable to keep his runner-up place with the FIA not able to take the mandatory one-litre sample after the race.

Vettel's second-placed finish was torn up and the 18 points he won have been stripped off him

Esteban Ocon (seen celebrating with Vettel) clinched his first ever victory in F1 in Hungary

An incensed Aston Martin explained that a fuel system failure was the reason behind the issue, and pitched this as new evidence to stewards on Monday.

This was deemed to not be 'relevant', though, and the case was thrown out.

As a result, Vettel missed out on the 18 points in the drivers' and constructors' championships, seeing him fall into 12th spot and Aston Martin drop to seventh.

The race in Hungary was the last before the sport's summer break, although the season resumes at the Belgian Grand Prix on August 27-29.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Rohit Sharma was bowled for 83 by Jimmy Anderson not long before tea, he had played so nicely that his dismissal was not the only surprise. Astonishingly, a player of his calibre had never made more in a Test outside India.

Sharma is 34 now and, for all the excellence of his Test record at home (seven hundreds and an average just shy of 80), has long been in danger of being pigeon-holed as a limited-overs great.

As pigeon-holes go, it’s not the worst – not in the third decade of the 21st century. Of the eight double-centuries scored in one-day internationals, he alone has three. His 264 off 173 balls against Sri Lanka at Kolkata’s Eden Gardens in 2014-15 remains a world record. If anyone embodies the white-ball zeitgeist, it is Sharma. Frankly, he could retire happy tomorrow.

Rohit Sharma produced a masterclass in batting for India as he was bowled for 83

His overseas Test record stood out on a day where India took a commanding total of 276-3

His Test career, though, has progressed in fits and starts: 41 Tests in eight years, accompanied by a general sense among Indian fans that the longest form of the game was not really his thing. And when he hooked Ollie Robinson to long leg on the stroke of lunch on the second day at Nottingham, seasoned critics sighed knowingly.

But Sharma shrugged that the stroke had always been part of his repertoire, and he had erred only in its execution. When Mark Wood, who was regularly topping 90mph, dropped short, Sharma helped him over fine leg for six, as if to underline his point.

The quality of Thursday's innings, however, lay not in the odd stroke here or there, but in its unshakeable certainty. England had picked four seamers and, under grey skies, chosen to bowl: at Lord’s, they say, you look up, not down. In similar conditions here three years ago, they had been blown away for 107 and 130.

Sharma missed that collective trauma, which may have been no bad thing, and instead batted with a calm that has often been beyond Indian openers in this country.

As Andrew Strauss observed on Sky: ‘You get the feeling that was something genuinely special. Hard conditions, overcast, bit of swing, and he was in complete control. An absolute masterclass.’

For a while, it looked as if the extent of India’s ambition would be survival. Then Sharma took four fours off Sam Curran’s third over, changing the mood of the morning. Until then, India had survived off scraps. After it, they were on their way.

Sharma embraces teammate KL Rahul after celebrating the first 100 of their partnership

Or rather: Sharma was on his way. At the other end, KL Rahul lurked in his shadow, contributing 16 to the first 100 of the partnership, and not scoring his first boundary – a straight six off Moeen Ali – until Sharma had hit 12.

That is not to denigrate Rahul, who was India’s best batsman in Nottingham, and now gradually crushed England’s spirits after his partner’s demise. His sixth Test hundred was its own kind of masterpiece, of patience and good judgment.

But it was Sharma who made the tough runs in the trickiest conditions, Sharma who singlehandedly called into question Root’s decision to bowl. Anderson and Robinson were treated with respect; Curran and Wood milked with skill. That Ali was on as early as the 29th over, in these conditions, was because England had been made to search for a wicket.

They have seen Sharma before, of course. At Chennai in February, with India 1-0 down, he kickstarted their fightback with a majestic 161 before he was fourth out at 248. Root’s team managed 134 and 164 in reply. Then, at Ahmedabad, he responded to England’s 112 with 66, the game’s highest score.

Andrew Strauss described Sharma's batting 'as something special' in difficult conditions

At the back of English minds, though, was the thought that a bit of seam and swing would make him a less serious proposition.

Yet his lapse of judgment at Trent Bridge obscured the fact that, in only his second Test in England, seven years after his first, he had had batted sensibly for nearly three hours in making 36.

For much of his career, Sharma has fought another battle, with Indian gossip columnists pitting him and his wife, Ritika, against Virat Kohli and his Bollywood wife, Anushka Sharma. Even Sharma’s exceptional one-day record has been eclipsed by Kohli. It has been easy to position him as a nearly man, a wannabe – the figure mocked sporadically as ‘Nohit Sharma’.

But since his most recent Test comeback, in December 2019, Sharma has comfortably outperformed his captain, scoring more runs for India than anyone bar Rishabh Pant.

If India go on to win this Test and – who knows – the series, someone is going to have to come up with a different nickname.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rio Ferdinand has hailed Raphael Varane's leadership qualities after the defender finally completed his move to Manchester United.

United have finalised the £42million signing of Varane from Real Madrid and Ferdinand feels that the France international will help Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side to deal with high-pressure situations.

Varane has won all 14 of the finals that he has been involved in, which Ferdinand believes will be of great use for United as they look to secure silverware this season.

Rio Ferdinand is excited by the leadership qualities of Man United signing Raphael Varane

Ferdinand believes that the experienced centre-back will help United in challenging moments

Speaking on BT Sport, Ferdinand said: 'He's played in 14 finals and won 14, so he knows exactly what he's doing. It's a big thing for Man United getting into situations when they're under pressure, they can look to this type of leader.'

Before United's game against Leeds Varane was unveiled to the crowd at Old Trafford and received a rapturous reception.

Ferdinand had a quick work with Varane to welcome him to the club and will be eager to see how the new signing gets on.

Varane has won an array of trophies and lifted the World Cup with France in Russia in 2018

Varane will hope that he will be able to replicate the impact that Ferdinand made when he joined United from Leeds in 2002.

At the age of 28, Varane is vastly experienced and has won the World Cup with France as well as four Champions Leagues with Real Madrid.

With Jadon Sancho having also joined from Borussia Dortmund, there is excitement at United about the prospect of challenging for the Premier League title.

United finished second in the league last season but were 12 points behind champions and rivals Manchester City.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ronald Koeman believes other Barcelona veterans will follow Gerard Pique's lead and take pay cuts to allow the club to register new signings or bring in another forward.

'We all know the situation that the club finds itself in and it needs help in any way possible,' the Barça coach said of Gerard Pique's salary sacrifice to allow for the registration of the new signings.

'Gerard [Pique], Sergio Roberto, [Jordi] Alba and Sergio Busquets have all been here for many years and they want to help and they have shown that. This is their club and that shows in this gesture.

'It hurts all Barcelona supporters what Messi has done but we cannot live in the past.'

Barcelona have finally been able to register new signing Memphis Depay to play in LaLiga

Defender Eric Garcia, who was previously at Manchester City, has also now been registered

Barcelona's long-serving centre-back has taken a significant cut allowing them to register Memphis Depay and Eric Garcia.

But more sacrifices need to be made to register Sergio Aguero or further reinforce the team.

Koeman added on Friday that he had not given up on bringing in another forward.

He said: 'The squad is short of forward players and we have spoken about signing a striker. It would help us but let's see if it can be possible.'

Barcelona's problems have not gone away since Messi's departure. They still owe him 52m euros (£44.2m) of deferred salary from last season.

The squad agreed to postpone wages in the 2020-21 season to help the club through the pandemic under previous president Josep Bartomeu.

Barcelona could only register Depay and Garcia after Gerard Pique took a 'significant' pay cut

Current president Joan Laporta has recognised privately that Messi needs to be paid this money. There is no question that the club will dispute the debt.

He has already admitted that Barcelona suffered losses of 487m (£414m) euros last season and still has to service a debt of 1.17bn euros (£1bn).

And while PSG boast of record shirt sales for Messi's No 30, Barcelona know their own shirt sponsorship deal with Rakuten ends next year and their Nike agreement ends in 2023.

If they are renewed they will be renewed for less money – an obvious repercussion of losing Messi whose departure slices around 30 per cent off the value of the club to sponsors.

On Thursday Barcelona rejected La Liga's deal with the US investment fund CVC that would have given them a lifeline.

Laporta was told by his chief executive Ferran Reverter that he could not sign the deal which would have brought 280m euros (£238m) to the club because it meant ceding 10 per cent of the money due to the club for sale of television rights over the next 50 years.

That mean the ball was back in the players' court and after Pique reacted others are now expected to follow suit.

Striker Rey Manaj, who impressed during pre-season, has also been registered for LaLiga

Without Messi, Barcelona don't need to make the same sacrifices but to register new players they still need to make cuts of around 50m euros (£42.5m).

They were set a limit (amortisation and payroll) of 347m euros (£295m) in March of this year and currently they are at around 400m euros (£340m).

The board cannot move forward with the plans for a revamped Camp Nou while the existing stadium crumbles around them. They had to spend 2m euros (£1.7m) this close-season to make the arena safe for spectators this campaign.

It was perhaps to distract from all this, the front page of Barcelona-supporting El Mundo Deportivo announced Real Madrid wanted to join the Premier League.

Madrid had rejected the claim calling it 'absurd' by mid-morning.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Khabib Nurmagomedov was crushing Justin Gaethje for 29–0 in the UFC 10 months ago, now he's set for the football pitch after signing with a Russian third-tier club.

The former lightweight champion retired after his final mauling victory against the American, dominating the fight in the wake of his father's passing. The Dagestani's decision to bow-out aged just 32 was down to a promise made to his mother.

Since then he has continued to train and taken up football, talking of his admiration for Cristiano Ronaldo and posting videos of training sessions.

Khabib Nurmagomedov has taken his footballing hobby to the professional ranks in Russia

Russian third-tier side Legion Dynamo announced the deal online with a contract on the table

The MMA icon is now targeting football professionally, having signed a professional contract with FC Legion Dynamo, who play in the third division of Russian football.

The club, who finished fourth in their league last season, announced the signing on online by posting a shot of Khabib shaking the hand of a Dynamo official over a contract.

'A great battle awaits our Legion, for which we need great warriors,' the club said in a statement. 'We are preparing to receive the RPL team together with Khabib Nurmagomedov.'

The president of Legion Dynamo added: 'I already see Khabib as a sharp striker. He can enter the amount into the contract himself.

Khabib was only beating Justin Gaethje back in October 2020, when he retired from MMA

'Khabib pleasantly surprised with his understanding of football and its development'

Nurmagomedov left the octagon at the top of his game, having crushed his fierce rival Conor McGregor to rack up four title defences.

Now he's turning his dedication and winning mentality to the pitch, and it wouldn't be a shock to see him make vast improvements.

Back in January Khabib tweeted: 'Preparing for my football debut. I’m free agent, and ready to accept offers.'

In a Facebook Q&A the former fighter said: 'A lot of football clubs, they offer me. But I have to, a little bit, become football shape. Because football shape is a little bit different than MMA.

'Football for me is like baseball. I watched this all the time when I was growing up, like I remember watching the old Ronaldo, the Brazilian one before Cristiano.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pep Guardiola has hit out at critics of Manchester City’s heavy spending and says it shows their owners want to invest in the club rather than take money out.

Champions City begin the new season at Spurs on Sunday having landed Jack Grealish for a record £100million with an even bigger offer ready for Harry Kane.

Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp has commented on City and Chelsea’s budgets compared to his own, complaining: ‘We are allowed to spend the money we earn... they obviously don’t have any limits.’

Pep Guardiola has fired back at Jurgen Klopp after the Liverpool boss spoke on City's spending

The Liverpool boss said there were 'no limits to Manchester City's summer transfer business

The remarks irked Guardiola, who fired back that providing City stay within Financial Fair Play rules, the owners can spend what they choose on players rather than keeping it for themselves.

‘Some owners want to benefit, our owners don’t want any benefits. So they don’t invest in the team, while we invest what we can,’ he said.

‘Before there were only one or two clubs. Now there is Chelsea with [Roman] Abramovich and our club with Sheikh Mansour. They want to be buying into football. What is the problem? We have limits for Financial Fair Play and if they don’t agree [with City’s spending] they can go to court and make a statement

‘We bought Jack Grealish because we sold [players] for £60m so in the end we have spent £40m. We follow absolutely the rules. At our club, the owners don’t want to lose money of course but they want to spend, so we can do it.

‘Years ago, when Manchester United won a lot of titles, it was because they spent more money than other clubs. Do you remember that? At that moment Man City couldn’t do it because we did not have the owners we have now.’

The Citizens paid £100m for Jack Grealish in a British transfer record signing from Aston Villa

Guardiola’s strong reaction will be perceived as a dig back at Liverpool, whose chairman John W Henry has not released similar funds for Klopp, and United where the Glazer ownership received £23m in dividends in 2019-20.

The City boss, who won the Champions League at Barcelona with seven academy graduates including Lionel Messi, indicated Liverpool should look at themselves to see why they are not spending.

‘You can win from investment. Liverpool were able to go into the market to spend on two incredible players (Virgil van Dijk and Alisson) and they won the Champions League and Premier League.

‘If they don’t want to spend more it’s maybe because they believe they don’t need it or because the owners, they don’t want it. I don’t know. I’m not there.’

A trip to Tottenham isn’t the easiest start for City, who are without the injured Kevin De Bruyne and Phil Foden and without any pre-season games for a lot of their Euro 2020 players, although Guardiola is hoping the Euros will have given Raheem Sterling a boost.

‘He has his standards; a desire to be the best,’ admitted Guardiola. ‘Last season was really good for the group which is our main target but of course Raz [Sterling] didn’t play as much in the last part of the season. Riyad [Mahrez] was in incredible form and Phil [Foden] was unstoppable.

Sheikh Mansour's club are currently under scrutiny for possible Financial Fair Play breaches

City's star-packed squad cost huge sums of money to construct since the ownership change

'But he [Sterling] had a key role at the Euros, scoring goals, making assists. I think all our players did well individually at the tournament. We are pleased, hopefully they have rested well and start again.’

Talks with Spurs over Kane are set to continue after Sunday's game with Guardiola insistent that last season’s triumph won’t count for anything given the competition in this season’s title race with Champions League winners Chelsea adding £97m Romelu Lukaku.

‘We were champions but we start from zero again. City and Liverpool have raised the bar and that’s what we have to do every season. Look at Leicester, fantastic. Then there is Arsenal, Tottenham, Chelsea, United, Liverpool and ourselves who can be competitive.’

‘We know we are still a way away from our best condition. We could not have a pre-season for 75 or 85 per cent of the players. It was similar last season and we had success because we did not cry. I am pretty sure we are going to travel to London to win, that is for sure.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mo Salah's agent posted a cryptic tweet after his client put Liverpool 3-0 ahead against Norwich City on Saturday - appearing to send a message to Reds' owners over the club's failure to offer a new contract.

The Egyptian King began the season in top form at Carrow Road, assisting Diogo Jota and Roberto Firmino before powering the Reds further ahead in the 74th minute.

Salah's contract runs out in 2023, he's yet to be offered an extension, and slow progress with Liverpool owners FSG appears to be frustrating Ramy Abbas Issa.

Mohamed Salah was on fire on Saturday as Liverpool cruised to a 3-0 win over Norwich

Moments after he scored the third goal, Salah's agent Ramy Abbas Issa sent a cryptic tweet

Prompting a host of replies from Reds fans, the Colombian agent wrote on Twitter: 'I hope they’re watching.'

The Liverpool faithful are acutely aware of time ticking down until their hero is free to leave, with @_lfc_aatif_ writing: 'Announce Salah contract extension or we riot.'

'Salah is an elite player, up there with Messi,' @loving_mushroom added. 'He gets so p***** off with a miss. Sign that new contract baby!'

Salah has long been linked to Real Madrid and Barcelona, and hinted his frustration at his Reds contract situation back in May: 'No one is talking to me about that, so I can't say much about that.

The pair are close aside from their business relationship, and are working for a new deal

The Egyptian scored and assisted the other two goals in a superb start to the 2021-22 season

'No one in the club is talking to me about anything so I do not know.'

With Barca in a tailspin and Los Blancos focused on scraping money together for a Kylian Mbappe bid, rumours linking Salah to Spain have died down.

The former Chelsea star is believed to be earning £200,000 a week with the Reds, having signed a five-year deal back in 2018 after reaching the Champions League final.

Salah's performance on Saturday will certainly encourage the owners to reward the former Premier League player of the season.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chelsea are reportedly set to continue their summer clear out by sending Kenedy and Matt Miazga out on loan.

The Blues are offloading squad players in order to fund their transfer business and have signed Marcus Bettinelli and Romelu Lukaku this summer, with the Belgian striker costing £98 million.

According to Goal.com Brazilian side Flamengo have been in talks with Kenedy for the duration of the summer, and are confident they can agree a loan deal for the 23-year-old which includes a £8.5 million option to buy.

Kenedy could be set to join Flamengo on loan with an option to make the deal permanent

Chelsea defender Matt Miazga (right) is set to join Spanish side Alaves on loan this summer

Miazga is set to join LaLiga side Alaves, however there are some details regarding the structure of the deal to be finalised. The American defender has just one year remaining on his contract at Stamford Bridge and the Blues are likely to extend his deal by a year before allowing him to depart on loan.

The west London club are set to generate more funds through player sales after agreeing to sell Tammy Abraham to Serie A side Roma for £34m.

The 23-year-old England striker has travelled to Rome for a medical and is set to link up with former Chelsea boss Jose Mourinho at the Stadio Olimpico, the Blues have an option to buy him back in 2023 for £68m.

Thomas Tuchel's side have already sold Fikayo Tomori and Marc Guehi over the summer for over £40m and are in talks with Besiktas over the sale of Michy Batshuayi.

Thomas Tuchel has raised funds for Chelsea's transfer activity by offloading squad players

The Blues are also reportedly keen to sell Ross Barkley, Davide Zappacosta and Danny Drinkwater this summer.

Meanwhile, young forward Ike Ugbo has agreed a £4m move to Belgian side Genk that will be announced pending a medical, and French midfielder Tiemoue Bakayoko has held talks with Lyon and Rennes over a move to Ligue 1.

Academy star Trevor Chalobah was set to leave the club on loan but after his impressive displays in the Super Cup and Premier League may remain at Stamford Bridge this season.

21-year-old right back Dujon Sterling could be set to leave on loan with a number of Championship and foreign clubs interested.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophie Anderton has finally married her beau Count Kaz Balinski-Jundzill after having to postpone their wedding three times during the pandemic.

The former It-Girl and model, 44, who first shot to fame as the face of Gossard bras in the 1990s, tied the knot with the Polish aristocrat, 52, in Ireland.

Speaking with The Daily Mail's Richard Eden last Friday, Sophie said: 'Yesterday, I married my best friend, soulmate and lifetime partner in crime.

Congratulations! Sophie Anderton has finally married her beau Count Kaz Balinski-Jundzill (pictured together) after having to postpone their wedding three times during the pandemic

'I cannot believe after so many obstacles and date changes, I am officially Mrs Kaz Balinksi.'

Kaz, who works in the oil business, owns a 1,500-acre estate, Glendalough House, in County Wicklow.

Sophie and Kaz had to postpone their nuptials twice last year due to Covid — and then again at the end of July when one of Kaz's four children fell ill.

One of Kaz's children is actress Ella Balinska, 24, who he shares with TV chef ex-wife, Lorraine Pascale. Ella starred in the 2019 Charlie's Angels film.

Newlyweds: The model, 44, tied the knot with the Polish aristocrat, 52, in Ireland, where he owns a 1,500-acre estate Glendalough House in County Wicklow (pictured in 2020)

Throwback: Sophie shot to fame as the face of Gossard bras and was often seen out in the 90s and 00s (pictured at the Top Of The Pops Awards in Manchester in 2002)

The happy newlyweds have been together for more than four years, with Sophie often gushing about their relationship.

In 2018 she shared her excitement about the future and told blog Beautiful Thinking: 'I'm really looking forward to getting married and having children. I've been waiting for someone to be an amazing father to my children, and it was so worth the wait'.

While in February 2020, before having to push her nuptials back to 2021, Sophie also shared some of her plans with The Daily Mail's Sebastian Shakespeare

Family: Count Kaz has four children, including actress Ella Balinska, 24, who he shares with TV chef ex-wife, Lorraine Pascale (pictured together in an undated snap)

Budding actress: Ella starred in the 2019 Charlie's Angels film (pictured in July 2021)

She said: 'We feel our life together is moving forwards after the standstill of the past eight months. It will only be a civil wedding in February — a very small affair.

'But we'll have a big blessing ceremony in the summer that Kaz's children can attend and all my family and friends who are all around the world.'

And speaking about relocating to Ireland, Sophie added: 'The best thing I ever did was get out of London — much as I love London. I've now got the mountains.'

Since being in the spotlight Sophie has transformed her lifestyle and now prioritises her health and wellness following her highly publicised battle with drink and drugs.

Loved-up: Sophie and Kaz have been together for more than four years, with Sophie often gushing about their relationship (pictured in February, when they had hoped to get married)

Changes: Sophie now prioritises her health and wellness following her highly publicised battle with drink and drugs (pictured left in 1998 and right in 1997 in London)

Speaking to The Daily Mail in 2015, the media personality dismissed her past as 'light years from where I am now.'

She explained: 'I was very unhappy [in my 20s]. I had no control over who I was or how I looked.

'I was a model but at some point modelling became only one part of what was required of us, and suddenly to be successful we had to be celebrities.

'It’s not something that came naturally. I was terrible at being famous.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She won an Academy Award for best lead actress for Silver Linings Playbook in 2013.

And it looks like Jennifer Lawrence will once again vying for Oscar gold by helping tell the story of one of Hollywood's biggest icons.

The 30-year-old actress is attached to star in a movie about Hollywood super agent Sue Mengers who was a talent agent for many filmmakers and actors of the New Hollywood generation from the 1960s to early 1980s.

Going for The Oscar gold? Jennifer Lawrence is attached to star in a movie about Hollywood super agent Sue Mengers who was a talent agent for many filmmakers and actors of the New Hollywood generation from the 1960s to early 1980s

Lawrence will portray the American icon who was notorious for her tough approach to getting the best deal possible for A-list clients such as Faye Dunaway, Steve McQueen and Barbra Streisand.

Apple and Netflix are amongst the streamers involved in a bidding war for the new flick, which will be directed by the Oscar-winning filmmaker Paolo Sorrentino.

According to Variety, bidding has reportedly eclipsed $80 million and some insiders suggest that it has reached $95 million.

Trailblazer: Lawrence will portray the American icon who was notorious for her tough approach to getting the best deal possible for A-list clients such as Faye Dunaway, Steve McQueen and Barbra Streisand, she is seen with Jack Nicholson in March 1977

Icon: At International Creative Management (ICM) Mengers represented a litany of A-listers including Dyan Cannon, Cher, Joan Collins, Candice Bergen, Gene Hackman, Faye Dunaway, Barbra Streisand, and Burt Reynolds

Lauren Schuker Blum, Rebecca Angelo and John Logan are writing the script while the movie will be produced by Jennifer's production company Excellent Cadaver as well as by her producing partner Justine Polsky.

The agent was previously played by Bette Midler on Broadway in the one-woman show I'll Eat You Last: A Chat with Sue Mengers, which was also penned by Logan.

Dyan Cannon also played a character inspired by the agent in the 1973 movie The Last of Sheila.

War: Apple and Netflix are amongst the streamers involved in a bidding war for the new flick as bidding has reportedly eclipsed $80 million and some insiders suggest that it has reached $95 million according to Variety

Man with the plan: It will be directed by the Oscar-winning filmmaker Paolo Sorrentino, who is seen in Hollywood back in November 2019

Mengers had quite the life story as she was born to a Jewish family in Hamburg, Germany before they had to flee to New York aboard the ship S.S. Koenigstein to escape the Holocaust.

She later entered the talent agency business as a receptionist at MCA in 1955 and spent some time as secretary for freelance theatrical agency Baum & Newborn before being hired as a secretary at the powerhouse William Morris Agency until 1963.

Her former Baum & Newborn colleague, Tom Korman, then formed his own agency and hired her as a talent agent where her first client was stage actress Julie Harris whom she got to appear in an episode of Bonanza specially written for her.

In the late 1960s she was hired by boutique agency Creative Managements Associates (CMA) where her clients included legends like Paul Newman, Steve McQueen, and Robert Redford.

CMA was sold to International Famous Agency (IFA) as they formed International Creative Management (ICM) where she Mengers went on to represent a litany of A-listers including Dyan Cannon, Cher, Joan Collins, Candice Bergen, Gene Hackman, Faye Dunaway, Barbra Streisand, and Burt Reynolds.

She retired from ICM in 1986 before returning for a stint at William Morris Agency from 1988 to 1990.

Fantastic four: Christopher Walken, Sue Mengers, Paul Newman and David Brown seen from left to right in October 1985

Sad: Mengers died on Saturday, October 15, 2011 from pneumonia at her home in Beverly Hills, California at age 79, as she is seen in September 1992

Mengers died on Saturday, October 15, 2011 from pneumonia at her home in Beverly Hills, California at age 79.

Meanwhile, Jennifer and Paulo are also set to work together on Mob Girl, which is based on the real-life story of Arlyne Blackman, who married into the Mafia.

The project is based on the novel Mob Girl: A Woman's Life In The Underworld by Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter and author Teresa Carpenter.

Busy: Meanwhile, Jennifer (seen in June 2019) and Paulo are also set to work together on Mob Girl, which is based on the real-life story of Arlyne Blackman, who married into the Mafia

Angelina Burnett is adapting Carpenter's novel and both Sorrentino and the Hunger Games star will serve as producers on the project.

According to the book's official synopsis, it follows Brickman 'growing up among racketeers on the Lower East Side of New York City' associating with mobsters.

It continues: 'Drawn to the glamorous and flashy lifestyle, she was soon dating "wise guys" and running errands for them; but after years as a mob girlfriend, Arlyne began to get in on the action herself - eventually becoming a police informant and major witness in the government's case against the Colombo crime family.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chris Hemsworth celebrated his 38th birthday on Wednesday.

And to mark the occasion, his three children he shares with wife Elsa Pataky baked him a homemade cake.

Chris shared photos from their family celebration on Instagram on Thursday, while also thanking fans and friends for their well-wishes.

Inside Chris Hemsworth's birthday party: The Thor star, 38, shared family photos on Instagram after being presented with a homemade surfing cake from his children

'Thanks for all the birthday messages!' Chris wrote in the caption.

'Had an epic day with the family and succeeded in devouring 75 per cent of this awesome cake that my kids made before collapsing into a giant sugary heap of joy.'

He concluded: 'Love you all! Cheers'.

Grateful: 'Thanks for all the birthday messages!' Chris wrote to his followers

Chris marveled at the surfing-themed cake, which featured blue icing, sprinkles and a mini-replica of Chris on a surfboard.

He also blew out the candles on his cake as his children sang Happy Birthday.

The actor no doubt had a small celebration at his mansion with his family, after Byron Bay was plunged into a snap Covid lockdown this week.

Making memories: Chris marveled at the surfing-themed cake, which featured blue icing, sprinkles and a mini-replica of Chris on a surfboard

On his birthday, Chris received well-wishes from fans and celebrity pals alike.

His brother Luke Hemsworth also chimed in and shared a hilarious tribute to Chris on social media, deciding to troll him on his birthday.

Luke shared a picture of himself alongside the pair's other sibling, Liam Hemsworth, 31, and quipped: 'Happy birthday brother @chrishemsworth!'

'Love you mate will remember this trip the Kimberly region for ever. So many memories together.'

Fans in the comments section were quick to respond at the funny dig, sharing an abundance of crying with laughter emojis over the banter between the pair.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophia Bush shared another troubling story about shamed One Tree Hill creator Mark Schwahn as she claimed that he had hung photos of the female cast members in their underwear in his office.

The 39-year-old actress appeared on Michael Rosenbaum's Inside Of You podcast on Tuesday as she shared a horrifying allegation regarding the 55-year-old former screenwriter, director, and producer.

Back in 2017, Schwahn was fired as showrunner from E! drama The Royals following allegations of sexual misconduct from multiple women.

Revealing: Sophia Bush (seen in January 2020) shared another troubling story about shamed One Tree Hill creator Mark Schwahn

The 39-year-old actress claimed that the 55-year-old former screenwriter, director, and producer had hung photos of the female cast members in their underwear in his office, as they are seen together in January 2011

At the time 43 women came out against Schwahn including Sophia's castmate and friend Hilarie Burton. She alleged he forcibly kissed her twice during her time working with him on One Tree Hill.

Eighteen women from that show, as well as 25 women from The Royals, starring Elizabeth Hurley, accused Schwahn of varying degrees of sexual misconduct.

Podcast host and Rosenbaum, 49, said that the showrunner 'was basically a monster' during the series' nine seasons which Bush agreed with.

Enlightening: The actress appeared on Michael Rosenbaum's Inside Of You podcast on Tuesday

'We found out from a writer that he kept a board of the fitting photos of each girl in underwear up in his office,' Bush (seen in March 2020) claimed

She explained: '18 women on our show signed a collective letter. That was 18 people willing to be public about their experiences of the cast and on the crew, and 25 women on the cast and crew of his subsequent show signed a letter in response about his behavior.'

The contents of the letter consisted of inappropriate behavior Schwahn was accused of on set of One Tree Hill before those working on The Royals made similar claims. To this day Schwahn has still not made a statement regarding those allegations.

Bush explained: 'He was very open. I think the worst of what he did was hidden. But, yeah, he was not embarrassed to be handsy, to make inappropriate commentary, to pull people into side rooms for conversations.'

Trouble: Back in 2017, Schwahn was fired as showrunner from E! drama The Royals following allegations of sexual misconduct from multiple women

Sad: At the time 43 women came out against Schwahn including Sophia's castmate and friend Hilarie Burton. She alleged he forcibly kissed her twice during her time working with him on One Tree Hill (pictured 2019)

Troubling: Eighteen women from that show, as well as 25 women from The Royals accused Schwahn of varying degrees of sexual misconduct (Bush and Burton are pictured with co-stars Bethany Joy Lenz, Chad, Sophia Bush, and James Lafferty)

She then gave her troubling account of claims a writer made regarding photos of the cast in their underwear allegedly put up on display in Schwahn's office.

Bush said: 'It's funny when you think about the things men write. We would have these scenes written for us, being with our intimate partners on the show, scenes written where we'd be in our underwear, whatever.

'We found out from a writer that he kept a board of the fitting photos of each girl in underwear up in his office. Pictures of us that were taken by the wardrobe supervisor, who was a woman, of us in different versions of underwear and/or lingerie that then had to be approved, picked and one would wind up in the show.

'He just would keep a board of all these photos. We were like, "Wow, that's super violating."'

Keeping mum: The contents of the letter consisted of inappropriate behavior Schwahn (seen in March 2015) was accused of on set of One Tree Hill before those working on The Royals made similar claims. To this day Schwahn has still not made a statement regarding those allegations

Rosenbaum asked if Bush would be able to keep her 'composure' if she was in the same room as the shamed creator.

The actress replied: 'I could do a conversation like this, but even as you ask me to imagine it, the sensation of white, hot rage in my chest is not small.

'Because not only was it the really overt just abuse and manipulation that he put so many women through, it was also the more insidious s***.'

One Tree Hill aired on The CW (previously The WB) throughout all nine seasons of the show from 2003 to 2012.

Back in the day: One Tree Hill aired on The CW (previously The WB) throughout all nine seasons of the show from 2003 to 2012

Bush along with Burton and fellow castmate Bethany Joy Lenz have recently joined forces for their own podcast, titled Drama Queens, as they take a deep dive on the show one episode at the time.

Of the podcast, Bush told Rosenbaum that she is happy to be 'healing old wounds' each week. She said: 'If it irks [Schwahn] that we have the power. I'm thrilled.'

Episodes of the Drama Queens podcast are uploaded each Monday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she is seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie.

In The Fabelmans - which is about the life of the Jaws and ET director - Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah.

The latest images feature the movie star with a blonde crop, a white-collared blue dress, and a matching blue shawl.

In character: Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she's seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie

Side by side: In The Fabelmans, Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah. On the right Leah is with her husband Arnold as well as a young Steven

The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s.

Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39.

Rogen plays the director's favorite uncle. In the photos he is seen wearing black-rimmed eyeglasses, slacks, and a sports coat.

Going back in time: The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s

Action: Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39

On Monday the 74-year-old Hollywood heavyweight shot a few scenes for the upcoming film on the beach in Malibu, California with cast members Gabriel LaBelle (who plays Steven), Sam Rechner (Ruby's Choice), and Chloe East (Genera+ion) among others.

Steven also has three sisters Nancy, Anne, and Sue but casting for those parts have yet to be revealed.

The Schindler's List director had a very colorful childhood. He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio but was raised between Haddon Township, New Jersey and Scottsdale, Arizona.

He spent three years attending Arcadia High School before moving to California with his dad after his parents divorced and he graduated from Saratoga High School.

The film is slated for a 2022 release.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The man who played Ezra Fitz on Pretty Little Liars certainly can keep a secret.

Ian Harding quietly married photographer Sophie Hart nearly two years ago in October 2019 according to a source for E! News on Thursday.

The news comes nearly a week after eagle-eyed fans noticed that the 34-year-old actor was wearing a band around his ring finger in an Instagram post.

Secret: Ian Harding quietly married photographer Sophie Hart nearly two years ago in October 2019 according to a source for E! News on Thursday, as they are seen together in November 2015

The image featured him laying in a net attached to a tree as he captioned it: 'Back in LA and living the good life (as in napping in trees and baskets).'

Several fans noticed the ring and commented with hearts as one even wrote: 'proposed.'

The Pretty Little Liars star and photographer have been romantically linked since 2011.

'Back in LA and living the good life (as in napping in trees and baskets)': The news comes nearly a week after eagle-eyed fans noticed that the 34-year-old actor was wearing a band around his ring finger in an Instagram post

Both are relatively private about their personal lives as they don't often appear in each other's social media.

Ian is best known for playing Rosewood High School English teacher Ezra Fitz (born Fitzgerald), who comes from a wealthy family, in the Freeform show.

He starred in all seven seasons of Pretty Little Liars which centered around four high school girls whose click falls apart after the disappearance of their leader.

Big role: Ian is best known for playing Rosewood High School English teacher Ezra Fitz (born Fitzgerald), who comes from a wealthy family, in the Freeform show, he is seen with Lucy Hale on the series in 2016

Hit: He starred in all seven seasons of Pretty Little Liars which centered around four high school girls whose click falls apart after the disappearance of their leader

More recently he has had steady television work on programs including Chicago Med, Kipo And The Age Of Wonderbeasts, and Long Slow Exhale.

His wife Sophie is a Los Angeles based photographer and set designer.

Back in June, Ian proudly shared a shirtless selfie as he revealed that he was fully vaccinated from COVID-19.

He showed off his impressive abs in the snap which he captioned: 'Waxed, vaxxed, and ready to PARTY [three fire emojis]'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vincent Kartheiser was reportedly the subject of two internal investigations after he joined the DC series Titans for its third season.

The 42-year-old Mad Men star isn't actively involved in any of the promotion for the series' third season after at least two complaints were made about his conduct on set, Deadline reported on Friday.

A representative for Kartheiser 'vehemently' denied the accusations made in the complaints in a statement shared with the publication on the same day.

On-set troubles: Vincent Kartheiser, 42, was twice investigated on the set of DC's Titans series for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and offensive comments,' Deadline reported on Friday; seen in 2018 in NYC

Kartheiser first joined Titans for its third season, which began airing on WarnerMedia's HBO Max streaming service on Thursday.

He plays the villain Scarecrow, who is usually paired up against Batman and was played by Cillian Murphy in Christopher Nolan's Batman trilogy.

The complaints made against him were allegedly for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and inappropriate comments' and were investigated by WBTV's Labor Relations department.

The series is filmed in Toronto, but due to Covid-19 protocols, the Burbank-based investigators were forced to speak to people on set virtually.

Kartheiser joined Titans' third season as a series regular to play the Batman villain Scarecrow (pictured). At least two complaints were allegedly made against him and led to investigations

Not in person: Burbank-based investigators looked into the allegations virtually, as Covid protocols prevented them from visiting the Toronto set; a publicity image for Titans is pictured that excludes Kartheiser

Sources on set claimed that the first complaint was filed in response to 'verbal comments and outbursts' from Kartheiser, but investigators determined that the complaints weren't severe enough to lead to his firing.

Instead, he was given a verbal warning for the alleged behavior.

A second complaint was reportedly filed weeks later, just as production was nearing the send for the season.

Sources said that Kartheiser was assigned an on-set monitor to document his behavior as a result.

Deadline also reports that sources claimed other misconduct allegations were made against the actor that were looked into, but investigators weren't able to corroborate the claims.

'Vincent Kartheiser vehemently denies the allegations,' his spokesperson said in a statement to the publication that was sent Friday. 'Warner Bros investigated this matter and made clear to Mr. Kartheiser its expectations for behavior on the set, and he agreed to comply with their directives.'

Escalation: Sources said Kartheiser was given a verbal warning after the first investigation and assigned an on-set monitor after the second investigation. He reportedly won't return for season four; seen in 2019 in Monte-Carlo

It was announced in April that Kartheiser was joining the series as a main cast member to play Jonathan Crane, better known by his villainous alias Scarecrow.

He reportedly won't be back for the fourth season, though it's unclear if that was always intended to be a one-season stint.

Kartheiser is best known for appearing as one of the leads on AMC's acclaimed period drama Mad Men throughout its seven-season run from 2007 to 2015.

He played Pete Campbell, an advertising executive at the fictional firm Sterling Cooper.

The actor was also featured in the Buffy The Vampire Slayer spinoff Angel and in the German television adaptation of Das Boot.

He has been married to Gilmore Girls star Alexis Bledel since 2014.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England were handed a blow on Tuesday when Stuart Broad injured his right calf ahead of practice at Lord's and looks certain to miss Wednesday's second Test.

Broad is set for a scan on Tuesday to determine the extent of the problem and assess whether he can play.

The 35-year-old could even be out of the rest of the five-Test series against India if he has torn his muscle or if the issue proves to be with his achilles tendon.

Stuart Broad (right) is now a major injury doubt for England's second Test match against India

The fast bowler was unable to train with the rest of the squad after seemingly twisting his ankle during a jog on the Lord's outfield and fears the problem could be serious.

England's medical staff later said the problem was with the calf rather than ankle but Broad still looks sure to miss what would have been his 150th Test.

England have plenty of options if Broad, who had a quiet first Test and was overshadowed by the emergence of Ollie Robinson, cannot make it, with Mark Wood the likeliest replacement.

Durham paceman Mark Wood is the likeliest replacement for Broad if he misses out

Or there could be a reprieve for Sam Curran, whose place is under threat from the promotion to the squad of Moeen Ali.

India, meanwhile, have an injury concern over seamer Shardul Thakur, who has a hamstring problem.

His possible absence could pave the way for a return for off-spinner Ravichandran Ashwin, surprisingly left out of the drawn first Test at Trent Bridge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@French runner Morhad Amdouni was the subject of fierce debate on social media after he appeared to deliberately knock over an entire row of water bottles during the men's Olympic marathon.

Amdouni finished 14th in the 26-mile race in sweltering conditions in Sapporo, just under six minutes behind winner Eliud Kipchoge.

But his actions were being analysed long after the race for an incident in the latter stages of the race.

Morhad Amdouni appeared to deliberately knock over a row of bottles during the marathon

Eliud Kipchoge of Kenya (left) won the men's Olympic marathon in Sapporo on Sunday

Middle-distance runner Amdouni, 33, joined his fellow competitors in reaching for a water bottle but while the other runners cleanly picked up a bottle, he ended up knocking over many bottles before grabbing the last one and continuing with the race.

His actions, deliberate or not, left the group of runners without any water to drink as they battled through the heat towards the finish.

Thoughts on Amdouni knocking over an entire row of water before taking the last one? pic.twitter.com/qrPaSzxLBW — Ben St Lawrence (@bennysaint) August 8, 2021

Australian long-distance runner noticed the incident and pointed it out on social media.

'Piers Morgan also waded in on Twitter, claiming the French runner is the 'biggest d***head of the Olympics'.

BREAKING: The Gold medal for biggest d*ckhead of the Tokyo Olympics goes to French marathon runner Morhad Amdouni who deliberately knocks over all the water for his fellow competitors…Unbelievable! pic.twitter.com/D4IwmlAHlL — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) August 8, 2021

But other users claimed that Amdouni had knocked the bottles over by accident, also pointing out that there was another table of water bottles just ahead where the runners behind the Frenchman could still grab a refreshment to stay hydrated.

Kipchoge became only the third man to win back-to-back Olympic golds in the marathon

Kenyan Kipchoge finished first with a commanding performance, winning his second straight gold medal and cementing his place among the all-time greats of the sport.

Abdi Nageeye of the Netherlands took silver and Belgium's Bashir Abdi won bronze.

Kipchoge, 36, joins Ethiopia's Abebe Bikila (1960 and 1964) and East Germany's Waldemar Cierpinski (1976 and 1980) as the only runners to win back-to-back gold medals on the Olympic stage.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ed Sheeran has been included in Ipswich Town's squad list for the forthcoming League One season and given the No 17 shirt after agreeing to sponsor the club for the current campaign.

The popular British pop artist, 30, is a life-long fan of the club and the sponsorship deal announced in May will see his album covers appear on the Tractor Boys' shirts for the entire season.

'This is bonkers really, isn't it!' said Sheeran to the club's official website. 'When Ipswich told me I thought they were joking but I love the idea.

Ed Sheeran has been named in Ipswich Town's squad for this season, taking the No 17 shirt

The British pop star (right) is a die-hard fan of the club and still lives near the club's ground

'I think this is going be a great season and I'm honoured to be a part of it. I just hope this squad number is only ceremonial because I want to see us promoted and that's not going to happen if I'm playing!'

The four-time Grammy winner still lives in Suffolk despite his global success and is a regular at the club's Portman Road ground for home matches.

Sheeran will be now eligible to play for Ipswich in the League One season, with the Suffolk side one of the contenders for promotion to the Championship. The club were taken over by an American consortium recently as they look to rise back up the leagues.

Sheeran will now be eligible to play for Ipswich ahead of the 2021-22 League One campaign

Sheeran has a squad number like the rest of the Ipswich first-team players

The Tractor Boys begin their new League One season at home to Morecambe on Saturday, which is a 3pm kick-off at Portman Road.

Ipswich chief executive Mark Ashton added: 'Having Ed involved is fantastic for the football club.

'We saw pictures of him wearing the 17 shirt when he was at the club to perform his Euro 2020 TikTok concert so Paul and I spoke about it and we agreed to offer Ed the chance of that squad number.

'It's our way of thanking him for his support and we look forward to welcoming him to Portman Road this season.'

It was announced in May that Sheeran would be the title shirt sponsor for the League One side for the 2021-22 campaign.

The logo which will be seen on the front of both the men's and women's shirts next season compromises of +, x and ÷, which are the titles of Sheeran's first three albums, as well as a minus sign and an equals sign.

Sheeran has agreed to sponsor the club's shirts for the forthcoming League One campaign

After the sponsorship deal was announced he said: 'The Football Club is a big part of the local community and this is my way of showing my support. I have always enjoyed my trips to Portman Road.

'I'm looking forward to going back there as soon as supporters are allowed into stadiums again.

'With the new owners from the US coming in, there are sure to be exciting times ahead for Ipswich fans, including myself. Hopefully we can stop being slightly on the huh!'

The singer also shared a photo of himself wearing an Ipswich kit as a youngster alongside the caption: 'This bloke is the news sponsor of @ipswichtown football club. Do well'.

Sheeran has supported to club ever since he was a child after growing up in the Suffolk area

Sheeran (middle row, second left) also performed for the England squad in the Euro 2020 bid

The sponsorship of his boyhood club is not the only impact Sheeran has had on English football this summer.

On June 23, the artist put on a special concert for the England squad during their Euro 2020 campaign to calm the nerves before their last-16 tie with Germany in June, which the Three Lions won 2-0.

Sheeran is a friend of England captain Harry Kane, who asked the pop artist in April of this year to come into the Three Lions camp to perform a concert on the squad's day off from training.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's boyhood club Newell's Old Boys poked fun at the Argentina star's Barcelona exit by joking they want him back - posting a meme of them 'praying' to god for his return.

Messi's 21-year spell at the Nou Camp is over after the Catalan outfit confirmed he would not be continuing with them after talks over a new deal were scrapped - with the player reportedly making a dramatic U-turn on his decision to sign new terms.

Barcelona blamed LaLiga over 'economic obstacles' as they struggled to accommodate the Argentine wizard and his astronomical wages on their books amid financial uncertainty at the club.

Barcelona have confirmed Lionel Messi will not be continuing with the club next season

His old side Newell's Old Boys posted a hilarious meme joking that Messi could return to them

Messi - who was said to be unhappy about taking a pay cut and the current state of the Barcelona squad - is now plotting his next move, with PSG and Manchester City said to be leading the race for his signature, but Newell's have jokingly thrown their hat into the ring.

The club - which Messi joined as a six-year-old - jumped on the bandwagon following news he would be leaving Barcelona this summer but quote tweeting the Spanish club's announcement and attaching a meme of a dog wearing a hat.

The caption underneath it reads: 'Hola Dios, soy yo de nuevo', which translates to 'Hi God, its me again.'

Newell's will need more than just the power of prayer if they hope to land Messi - with the player earning around £437,000-a-week during his last contract in LaLiga - a price only PSG and City would be able to afford.

Messi is on the lookout for a new club after his 21-year spell with Barcelona came to an end

Messi (front row, third from right) signed for Newell's Old Boys when he was just six years old

But the club ramped up the possibility of Messi ending his playing days with them last year when vice-president Cristian D'Amico said it wasn't 'impossible'

'It's a decision exclusively made by him and his family,' he said. 'We have to have the best possible context to help make a decision.

'When Maradona came to Newell's, nobody thought that he would come either. I hope to do something similar with Leo.'

D'Amico added: 'Obviously, that's not to be selling smoke. It's a difficult topic.

'What Newell's fan would not dream to see the best player in the world with the jersey of their team on? Time might allow such things, you have to be calm.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@American BMX racer Connor Fields is set to be released from hospital on Thursday, less than a week after a horror crash in the Olympic semi-finals left him with a brain bleed.

Jonathan Finnoff, chief medical officer for the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee, said in a statement that Fields would be able to return to his home in Henderson, Nevada, and start his rehabilitation.

Shortly after the medical update, Fields posted on Twitter: "I'm back. Ish. Still can only stand for 5-10 min at a time but we're working!"

American racer Connor Fields suffered a brain haemorrhage during a horror crash last week

Fields issued an update on Thursday after it was announced he was set to leave hospital

Fields was carried away to hospital after the crash, which took out two competitors

Fields, the Rio 2016 champion, went down hard in a first-corner crash during Friday's semi-final runs and was treated by the side of the circuit before being taken to Tokyo's St. Luke's International Hospital.

The 28-year-old was favourite to defend his title but went over this handlebars and fell face-first into the asphalt, taking two other competitors down with him.

Fields had to be carried away from the course on a stretcher and in a neck brace after receiving medical attention for several minutes.

He also suffered a broken rib and bruised lung in the crash and underwent CT scans on his brain, spine and abdomen while in hospital.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Italy's Gianmarco Tamberi and Qatar's Mutaz Essa Barshim both won the gold medal in the Olympic men's high jump after being offered the chance to share the top prize by the official.

After three failures each at 2.39, they ended up tied and entered a conversation with an Olympic official, who first offered them a 'jump-off' to decide the matter.

The Qatari then asked: 'Can we not have two golds?'

Gianmarco Tamberi won the gold medal in the men's high jump along with Mutaz Essa Barshim

Barshim tied with Tamberi and the pair agreed to both take the gold medal when offered it

The official responded, 'It's possible if you both decide' and before he had finished speaking Barshim offered Tamberi his hand to agree to sharing the gold and the pair shared an emotional hug before Tamberi wheeled away in celebration.

Both men were clean at every attempt to 2.37 meters and both missed all three attempts at the Olympic record of 2.39.

The 30-year-old Barshim was the silver medallist at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Games and was also on the podium at the 2012 London Games. He won the world championship gold medal at home in Qatar in 2019.

Tamberi is a former world indoor champion.

Maksim Nedasekau of Belarus won the bronze medal. He also cleared 2.37 for a national record.

Barshim added a coveted Olympic gold to his list of accolades.

At the 2012 London Games Barshim won a bronze, which was later upgraded to silver. He picked up another silver in Rio de Janeiro four years later and then won two successive world titles in 2017 and 2019.

His personal best of 2.43m is the second-highest jump of all time and is only behind Javier Sotomayor's world record mark of 2.45 set in 1993.

South Korean Woo Sang-hyeok and Australian Brandon Starc, the younger brother of cricketer Mitchell, both cleared 2.35 to finish fourth and fifth respectively.

Both men were clean at every attempt to 2.37 meters and missed all three attempts at 2.39.

The pair looked more than happy to share the glory, with Tamberi howling in delight and rolling around the track, having missed out on competing in Rio five years ago due to injury.

The decision to share the medal was overwhelmingly well received on social media.

Team GB athlete Eilish McColgan tweeted: 'Such an incredible moment. Two of the nicest people in our sport sharing gold.'

British high jumper Emily Borthwick added: 'I'm not crying, you're crying.'

Athletics performance coach Steve Magness said on his Twitter account: 'The sharing of the Olympic gold from Barshim and Tamberi and emotional outlet right after from both is what it's all about. What a moment in the high jump.'

USA Track and Field tweeted: 'Love the sportsmanship from Italy and Qatar in the men's high jump final!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@South Africa produced a dominant, physically imposing performance to outpower the British and Irish Lions in the second Test in Cape Town.

The Springboks secured a 27-9 victory after last week's 22-17 Lions win, setting up a mouth-watering series decider in the third match.

Makazole Mapimpi and Lukhanyo Am scored the tries before fly-half Handre Pollard kicked them out of sight, with Eben Etzebeth and Pollard coming to the fore as Duhan van der Merwe and Stuart Hogg wilted under the Boks' aerial bombardment.

Here, Sportsmail's Mike Brown rated the players on a sobering day for Warren Gatland's side.

LIONS

WARREN GATLAND - 6

Not selecting Liam Williams in the 23-man squad was a mistake. The Lions lost the aerial battle, which was always going to be a threat from South Africa.

Gatland had nothing to fall back on the bench to win the game in the air. His game-plan had too much kicking, and was too slow, which played into South Africa's hands.

15 STUART HOGG - 4

Aerially was awful under the high-balls South Africa put up all night – look uncertain from the start – which the Boks picked all their scraps off. Liam Williams must play the decider so the Lions can win the aerial battle.

14 ANTHONY WATSON - 5

Threw his only first-half carry out of play and poor in the air like the rest of the back-three. Only touched the ball twice in the whole 80 minutes – the second of which was right at the end of the game.

Scottish pair Stuart Hogg (left) and Duhan van der Merwe (right) were poor for the Lions

13 CHRIS HARRIS - 6.5

Does the basics so well every time – hit opposite number Am brilliantly first up to set the tone – and was far more solid than Daly was last week, so should stay for the 3rd Test next week. Quiet but did his job.

12 ROBBIE HENSHAW - 6.5

Should have scored his first-half try, but denied incredibly by Kolisi's tackle. Tried to carry hard in the midfield – with 27 metres made from six attempts, and completed eleven tackles without missing a single one.

11 DUHAN VAN DER MERWE - 4

Silly yellow card for the trip on Kolbe in the first-half. The back-three was the Lions' weakest point, where Gatland must make changes. Only touched the ball once. I would bring in Josh Adams for him.

10 DAN BIGGAR - 6.5

Array of varied kicks – high and low - had South Africa under pressure, executing the Lions' gameplan. Missed one penalty before Farrell replaced him, which he'd usually get and would have kept the pressure on South Africa.

British and Irish Lions fly-half Dan Biggar (third right) had a mixed game, missing a key kick

9 CONOR MURRAY - 6.5

Did exactly what he was brought in to do – kick well, control the tempo. Nearly set up Henshaw try with a lovely chip. Needs to increase the tempo at times and vary the Lions' attacking game, which Ali Price could have brought.

1 MAKO VUNIPOLA - 8

Solid in the scrum against Malherbe, and was the Lions' main carrier to get them over the gainline on eight occasions, making inroads every time in the loose. Seven tackles and none missed in defence.

2 LUKE COWAN-DICKIE - 7.5

Far better throwing in the lineout and nine physical carries as we've come to expect from the Cornishman. The main focal-point for the Lions' forward carrying game in the first half with nine charges.

Alun Wyn Jones (left) and Maro Itoje (right) did well at first but were outgunned after the break

3 TADHG FURLONG - 7

Kept the scrum solid until Sinckler came on before the hour mark, against Steven Kitshoff, and defended well, making all six of his tackles. The South African bench props did well after Furlong went off.

4 MARO ITOJE - 7.5

The Lions' talisman led from the front in every respect – exactly as he did last week. Two first-half lineout steals in the first half but struggled to make an impact once the Bok pack took over the game with their replacements.

5 ALUN WYN JONES - 7

Nuisance all over the field, riling up the Boks, but like Itoje was overpowered when the 'Bomb squad' came on to beat the Lions up. His leadership will be key this week for the decider in the third Test. He has done it before in 2013, though.

The Lions' hopes of sealing a famous Test series triumph were buried under an aerial onslaught

6 COURTNEY LAWES - 6.5

Banged the Boks in defence and carried so physically. He's a great lineout option too, but was quiet in the second-half like the rest of the Lions' front-five as de Jager dominated off the bench. Nine tackles from the back-row.

7 TOM CURRY - 7

Smashed South Africans in defence in the first-half, putting pressure on South Africa with quick line-speed. But the breakdown became a mess in the second half, which is a concern for the Lions going into next week.

8 JACK CONAN - 6

Needs to have more impact on a big Test match from No 8. He made just three metres from seven carries. I'd be tempted to go with the experience of Faletau in the 3rd and final Test next Saturday.

SOUTH AFRICA

JACQUES NIENABER - 8

His game-plan was spot on. The Springboks had far more variations in attack than last week and they exposed the Lions back-three so well. He didn't make the same mistake of changing the front-row too early like last week either.

15 Willie Le Roux - 7.5

Full-back pulled the strings in attack to add variation and width. Covered the back-field well and was right at the heart of a number of scraps between the teams too. His relationship with Pollard is key for the Boks.

Cheslin Kolbe (No 14) was lucky to escape a red for taking out Conor Murray (top) in the air

14 Cheslin Kolbe - 6

Lucky to get away with just a yellow for taking out Murray in the air, and was not penalised for a head-clash with Curry. Still yet to see his dazzling feet in this Test series where he's touched the ball only five times.

13 Lukhanyo Am - 6.5

Very quiet, in my opinion, apart from finishing the key try, collecting a wonderful kick from de Klerk. He made only three carries and did not gain a single metre with ball-in-hand, but was the Boks' top defender in the backs with nine tackles.

12 Damian de Allende - 7.5

Eleven strong carries to give South Africa go-forward all evening. The big centre cleaned up a lot of loose balls and defended well with Am, in what is a great partnership. Beat three defenders in his 80 minutes too.

Handre Pollard floated a fine chip over the top for wing Makazole Mapimpi, who finished well

11 Makazole Mapimpi - 7

Finished his try after half-time well, taking the cross-kick from Pollard. Gave away three penalties on his own in the first half though, but was good in the air and chased kicks well to pressurise the Lions back-three.

10 Handre Pollard - 8

Couple of dodgy kicks for goal, missing five points from the tee, but provided a world-class assist for Mapimpi's try. Strong in defence and so solid under the high ball, many of which he launched from his massive boot.

9 Faf De Klerk - 8

Busy all game as ever, and was a nuisance, although may have been lucky when hitting Murray high in the second half. Super kick into the dead-ball area for Am's try which sunk the Lions, pushing the Boks into a nine-point lead.

1 Steven Kitshoff - 8

Kept the scrum strong for the South Africans during his hour on the field as he won his 50th Springbok cap. Nyakane was incredible off the bench as his replacement, playing on the loose-head side when usually a tight-head.

Outside centre Lukhanyo Am then extended the lead with a controversial second try (pictured)

2 Bongi Mbonambi - 8

Itoje stole a couple of his lineouts in the first half, but he was perfect after that. The best scrummaging hooker the Boks have. His replacement Marx was part of the epic second half from the 'bomb squad'.

3 Frans Malherbe - 7.5

The 20st tight-head was a rock in the set-piece to give South Africa a good platform to play off. When Koch came on for him the Lions scrum dismantled with Sutherland in it.

4 Eben Etzebeth - 8.5

An absolute beast who smashed the Lions in defence, making 12 massive tackles. He is the talisman for South Africa and enjoys his battles with Itoje so much. It will be another epic battle between them next week.

Pollard kicked three late penalties to rub salt in the Lions wounds as the match finished 27-9

5 Franco Mostert - 7

Great partner for Etzebeth, a physical presence both in defence and in attack, which is exactly what you'd expect from a South African lock. De Jager added even more off the bench as the Boks physically turned the screw.

6 Siya Kolisi - 8

Said he thought he was disrespected in the first Test and this week worked tirelessly all game with carries, breakdown contests and tackling everything he could.

Top Bok tackler with 14 hits, including an unbelievable try-saver on Henshaw, and made 22 metres.

7 Pieter-Steph Du Toit - 5

Unfortunately injured by van der Merwe and went off early having hurt his shoulder which could rule him out of next week. If he is out of the final Test it could be a huge loss for South Africa, who will hope Duane Vermuelen can come back.

8 Jasper Wiese - 6

A few errors, like dropped catches, but carried and tackled hard – the joint most hits with Kolisi on 14. In the back-field he improved in the second-half catching a lot of Murray's box-kicks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nuno Espirito Santo has left the door open for Harry Kane to feature in Tottenham’s season opener against Manchester City on Sunday.

Spurs boss Nuno was due to speak to star striker Kane for the first time in person yesterday after his delayed return to training following the Euros and his summer break — a wait which has coincided with his attempts to force a move away from Tottenham this summer.

The chances of Kane being involved against City — his main suitors and the club the England captain wants to join — are in doubt with his future up in the air.

Tottenham expect all first team players to be available for the opening day, including Kane

Nuno, though, has put the ball in Kane’s court by insisting that all the players in regular training will be in contention for a place in his squad for City’s visit.

Nuno said: ‘All the players who work on a daily basis will be options for us, then it’s up to us to decide.’

Kane was originally expected back at Spurs at the beginning of last week but only returned on Saturday to begin his preparations for the new campaign.

He is currently isolating having holidayed in the Bahamas and Florida — which has so far prevented him from being part of Nuno’s pre-season plans.

New boss Nuno Espirito Santo has stressed that all first team players will remain available

Kane is staying at The Lodge, the hotel at Spurs’ training ground. He has been able to begin preparing for the season by training alone but is not due to join Nuno’s first-team group until Thursday.

He could then have up to three days of full training before Spurs host champions City. Although a week may seem insufficient, Kane has shown previously that he is capable of starting a season despite minimal build-up.

Following the 2018 World Cup in Russia, Kane started Spurs’ opener at Newcastle, playing the full 90 minutes only five days after returning to training.

Kane made clear his desire to leave Tottenham before heading off with England for Euro 2020

City remain determined to land Kane despite signing Jack Grealish for a British record £100m

Whether he is now willing to be involved against City given the backdrop to his pre-season and desire to move remains to be seen.

On his discussions with Kane, Nuno said: ‘We hope to solve all the situations. It’s not about that (Kane’s late return), it’s about what we have to do to solve the situation — this is important.

‘We have to solve it together, everybody involved has to solve it together — speaking, having a nice conversation and putting our opinions, but everybody together.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Aston Villa have lost a second member of their coaching team in less than three weeks with Richard O’Kelly announcing his departure less than 48 hours before their opening game of the season.

After former England captain John Terry left his role on manager Dean Smith’s staff on July 26, to pursue a career in management, Smith’s long-time assistant O’Kelly has followed him out of the door.

Villa’s official statement gave no explanation for O’Kelly’s choice, saying simply that he had ‘decided to leave’.

Aston Villa have not given a reason why Dean Smith's assistant, Richard O'Kelly, has departed

Sportsmail understands that with O’Kelly and Terry now gone, Smith will look to add to his coaching team, with candidates who have experience of overseas football – rather than the traditional English No 2 – of particular interest. O’Kelly had moved from Brentford with Smith when he took the Villa Park post in October 2019.

The club had always expected Terry to go at some stage as they knew his desire to follow his former Chelsea and England team-mate Frank Lampard into management, and never planned to stand in his way when the time came.

Yet O’Kelly’s move comes with Smith in the final stages of preparation for Saturday’s Premier League meeting at Watford, with Villa having sold captain Jack Grealish to Manchester City for £100million and spent the money on playmaker Emiliano Buendia and forwards Leon Bailey and Danny Ings.

O'Kelly was also with Smith (centre), who recently lost coach John Terry (right), at Brentford

It is thought that while O’Kelly played a valuable role for Smith, he was not as prominent as he had been when the club won promotion in 2019, and in their first campaign back in the top flight.

In a statement posted on Villa’s website, Smith said: ‘Richard has worked with me for the best part of a decade and we have always had a really close relationship. We are friends as well as colleagues and I will miss him.’

Smith brought Craig Shakespeare, who worked with Claudio Ranieri when Leicester won the title in 2016, as he wanted more Premier League experience on his staff. Earlier this month, Smith also added Austin MacPhee as a specialist set piece coach.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Everton manager Rafael Benitez has promised there is more to come from his side after a confidence-boosting victory over Southampton in his first match in charge.

The Spaniard, a controversial appointment as a former Liverpool boss, managed at the first attempt what predecessors Carlo Ancelotti and Marco Silva struggled to achieve in their combined three years in charge in getting the players to successfully respond to adversity.

Silva famously failed to win any of the 28 Premier League matches in which his Toffees side went behind, and took only five points from those games.

Rafa Benitez has stressed there's more to come from Everton after they beat Southampton

Ancelotti lost nine home league matches last season - admittedly without the presence of fans - and won just one fixture at Goodison after March 1.

Because of his association with the red half of the city Benitez still has to win over sceptical fans, but he has at least got off on the right foot.

'We need to understand it is too early, we have just arrived after six weeks and you cannot expect the players will understand everything we are trying to do,' said the 61-year-old, who was without six first-team players for his opening fixture.

'After time they will improve but overall the reaction of the players, everyone on the pitch, everyone in the stadium, has been so positive I will take that.

'The way we were fighting for every ball, this is what the fans were expecting.

Benitez had no hesitation about calling upon Richarlison following his return from Tokyo

'There were a lot of positives from the first game of the season but don't forget that we have some players coming back late but it is good to start with three points.

'In the end the players understood what we are trying to do. Hopefully in the future we won't see them suffering so much.'

Benitez was fortunate he was able to call on Richarlison, an Olympic gold medal winner with Brazil just a week ago, who scored the crucial equaliser and set up Dominic Calvert-Lewin's diving header either side of Abdoulaye Doucoure's fierce strike.

Prior to Tokyo the forward had been a Copa America finalist so is deserving of a break, but an agreement between player and club means he was back in action after just a couple of days.

'It wasn't a gamble to play him. He told us he wanted to play, I told him he had to score, he did it and everybody is happy,' said the Toffees boss.

Southampton boss Ralph Hasenhuttl was pleased with the performance of Tino Livramento

'We knew people would say he could be tired. The reality is that his match fitness is good. We gave him one day off to be sure he was fine.

'We will try to bring the best from him in the next couple of weeks and after give him some time to recover fully for the rest of the season.'

Saints boss Ralph Hasenhuttl looked for the positives after a ninth defeat in 14 matches and aside from new £15million signing Adam Armstrong scoring the opener on his debut, fellow new arrival Tino Livramento - a £5m buy from Chelsea - impressed.

'It wasn't an easy decision for me but I was looking for his physical one-against-one qualities and I think he did fantastic against Richarlison,' he said.

'Immediately he is a player who can play in the Premier League and that is a positive for us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Former Manchester United director Maurice Watkins CBE, who brought Sir Alex Ferguson to the Premier League club in 1986, has passed away aged 79.

Watkins spent 28 years at Old Trafford before retiring in 2012 and was involved in some of the biggest decisions the club made in that period.

Not only was Watkins crucial in appointing Ferguson, who went on to become the most successful manager in United's history, to the club - but he also convinced the Scot to stay on as manager when he threatened to retire after the 2001-02 season.

His final role in sport saw him take up the role of British Swimming chairman, with Team GB enjoying their most successful Olympic Games campaign in Tokyo this summer, just before his passing.

Former Manchester United director Maurice Watkins has passed away aged 79

Watkins (second right) helped to hire Sir Alex Ferguson (left) to Manchester United in 1986

Educated at Manchester Grammar School, Watkins became a director at United in 1984 - on the day Sir Bobby Charlton was appointed to the same role - and also held the position of club solicitor.

He represented former United and England defender Rio Ferdinand at the hearing which saw the defender banned from playing for eight months and fined £50,000 for failing to take a drugs test, as well as Eric Cantona at his assault trial when the striker performed a 'kung fu' kick on Crystal Palace fan Matthew Simmons in January 1995.

But his most important role with the Red Devils was helping to keep Ferguson at the club when the Scot revealed in the summer of 2001 that he wanted to quit the club after the upcoming season due to personal reasons, against the board's wishes.

Watkins (right) represented Rio Ferdinand (left) when the defender was handed a drugs ban

He also represented Eric Cantona at his assault trial over his 1995 kung fu kick at Crystal Palace

Watkins worked with the United hierarchy to try and convince Ferguson to stay longer, with the manager deciding in February 2002 that he had reversed his decision. He would go lead United to six more Premier League titles and one more Champions League crown before he eventually retired from management in 2013.

Current United owner Malcolm Glazer tried to remove Watkins from the club's board at a 2005 AGM, but he remained in his board and lawyer roles after the attempt.

The Premier League club posted a statement on Twitter, saying: 'All at Manchester United are deeply saddened by the loss of our former Director, Maurice Watkins, who served the club with such distinction for over a quarter of a century. We send our heartfelt condolences to his loved ones at this time.'

In 2002, Watkins convinced Ferguson to remain at United for over a decade longer as manager

Ferguson decided to quit after the 2001-02 season but Watkins changed the manager's mind

Around the time of Watkins' resignation from Manchester United, he took up roles as interim Rugby League Football chairman, Barnsley FC chairman and director of Lancashire County Cricket Club.

He was appointed as British Swimming chairman in December 2012 and oversaw Team GB's Olympic and Paralympic cycles for Rio 2016 and Tokyo 2020.

UK Sport chief executive Sally Munday said in a statement: 'I was so saddened to hear about Maurice. My thoughts are with his family and friends.

'Maurice was so well known in the sporting community and the sheer variety of sports that he was involved in throughout his life goes some way to showing the impact he had on the British sporting landscape.

Watkins' final role was chairman of Briitsh Swimming, while he also was chairman at Barnsley

'As Chair of British Swimming, he must have been immensely proud of the success that Britain's aquatics athletes had in Tokyo in the recent weeks. He will be sorely missed.'

British Swimming CEO Jack Buckner added: 'I have been fortunate to experience Maurice's personal dignity and humility. He has been a leader of deep wisdom and patient intelligence, the wise steward at the heart of the sport.

'Even in his last days, his total focus was on Tokyo and the great events which unfolded there. Maurice, a piece of these medals belong to you.

'Thanks for your massive contribution to British Swimming and everything you have done for British sport.'

Watkins was also known for his charity work, helping the NHS Royal Manchester Children's Hospital Charity for a decade-and-a-half and led the group's campaign to raise £20million for equipment and family accommodation during that time.

He was then appointed a CBE on the Queen's Birthday Honours list in 2011 for his services to charity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United captain Harry Maguire has hailed Raphael Varane's 'winning mentality', claiming his arrival will lift the squad - but warned that every player needs to be ready to fight for their place.

The Frenchman was officially unveiled on the pitch to a standing ovation before United got Old Trafford rocking with a 5-1 opening day thriller against Leeds on Saturday.

The defender's £42million arrival means United find themselves with a surplus of centre-back options - including Maguire, Victor Lindelof, Eric Bailly and Phil Jones - and will force players to improve.

Harry Maguire claimed Raphael Varane's arrival at United brings a 'winning mentality'

The 28-year-old is expected to partner Maguire at the heart of United's defence, bumping Lindelof, who started against Leeds, to the bench.

Axel Tuanzebe and teenager Teden Mengi are expected to play their football away from Manchester this season, while Jones has not played in almost 18 months but is still contracted to the club until 2023.

Speaking after the 5-1 win, Maguire said: 'To bring players into this club, obviously of his calibre as well, it's going to be really, really exciting.

Harry Maguire claimed Varane's arrival at United is 'great for the competition for the squad'

'Everyone in the squad is obviously looking forward to working with him. I think one thing that it does is it boosts our defensive options.

'We've got an amazing number of centre-backs now at this club, all international players who are all proven in the Premier League. You've seen again how well Victor played [against Leeds].'

With six first-team centre-backs on offer for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer to select, tensions are already said to be running high amongst the squad.

Varane held up his No 19 shirt to the expectant Red Devils fans on Saturday but he reportedly had been targeting the No 4.

Varane held up his No 19 shirt to the expectant Red Devils fans at Old Trafford on Saturday

The centre-back had been targeting the number four but Phil Jones retained the number

However, according to the Manchester Evening News, Jones refused to relinquish the number, despite not making an appearance for United since January 2020.

The World Cup winner also wore 19 on his back during his first season with Real Madrid before switching to No 2 and then settling on five

No 4 had been reserved for Sergio Ramos at the Bernabeu and Varane had hoped to finally wear it in England.

Solskjaer has failed to bring any silverware to Old Trafford so far during his three-season tenure but the United boss will be hoping the four-time Champions League and World Cup winner could help his side clinch a trophy this season.

The defender has won the Champions League four times and the 2018 World Cup with France

'I think you've seen what he's won over his career. He's played in some of the top teams about - the French squad and the Real Madrid team - and he's won absolutely everything,' Maguire added.

'I think he'll bring that winning mentality to the club and he'll also bring his footballing ability to the club. Like I said, bringing players in is great for the squad. It lifts the squad, it's great for the competition for the squad - not just as a centre-back but just in any position.

'We thrive off it, that's how we play. At one of the biggest clubs in the world you don't expect to have an easy ride and have no competition for places.'

Victor Lindelof produced an assist for Bruno Fernandes to secure his opening day hat-trick

Lindelof was named captain of the Sweden national team this week but Varane's arrival is likely to spell the end of the his time as a regular starter.

However, Lindelof made a strong case to retain his spot as he provided an assist for Bruno Fernandes to seal his opening day hat-trick.

'Victor has not just shown today [how good he is], but he's shown over the last two seasons while I've played with him,' Maguire said.

'He's an excellent footballer so, like I say, to have this amount of top centre-backs is great for the competition for places. It'll make people push further, push harder and it's exciting.'

Varane will have been impressed by his new club on Saturday, as he watched a searing victory inspired by Fernandes and Paul Pogba, who notched four assists, from the stands but could make his debut when United lock horns with Southampton on Sunday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal defender Hector Bellerin is eager to leave the club before the closure of the transfer window.

Bellerin has grown frustrated with what he sees as a reluctance from Arsenal to let him leave and is willing to take a pay cut to secure a move away, as reported by The Athletic.

The right-back was the subject of interest from Inter Milan but the move failed to materialise, with Arsenal having only been open to a sale or a loan with an obligation to buy.

Arsenal defender Hector Bellerin is eager to secure a move away from the club this month

Bellerin has made it clear to Mikel Arteta he wants to leave but nothing has materialised so far

The report indicates that Bellerin, who has two years remaining on his contract, has made it clear to Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta and technical director Edu that he wishes to depart.

Bellerin was an unused substitute for Arsenal's defeat to Brentford in the opening Premier League game of the season, and Arteta has other right-back options to call upon including Calum Chambers and Cedric Soares.

Bellerin was an unused substitute versus Brentford and wants to get back into the Spain squad

Ainsley Maitland-Niles is also capable of playing at right-back, while against Brentford Arteta brought on Nuno Tavares in that position despite the new signing being a left-back.

Capped by Spain at senior level on four occasions, Bellerin is determined to break back into his country's squad in time for the 2022 World Cup.

There have been suggestions that Bellerin could be involved in a swap deal with Barcelona's Emerson or Atletico Madrid's Kieran Trippier but at present nothing is advanced.

Bellerin joined Arsenal ten years ago and has proceeded to make 239 senior appearances for the club but is now eager for a fresh challenge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday.

The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist - turning 47 on August 17 - donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels.

Giuliana - a self-described 'ultimate passionista' - founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago.

On the mic again! Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday

'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall,' Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried.

'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

The trade show runs through Wednesday at the Las Vegas Convention Center's West Hall.

Speaking of Las Vegas, the breast cancer survivor and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022.

Turning 47 on August 17! The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels

Self-described 'ultimate passionista': Giuliana founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago

Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried: 'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall'

The breast cancer survivor continued: 'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

It will mark the RPM restaurant partners' sixth restaurant after opening franchises in Chicago and Washington, D.C.

Giuliana and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1.

Rancic (born DePandi) originally met Bill when she interviewed him on the E! Network in 2005 after he won NBC's The Apprentice in 2004.

'Vegas, baby!' Speaking of Las Vegas, Giuliana and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian restaurant franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022

July 4 family portrait: Rancic and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1

That was quick! The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox (R) just three days after she resigned from the cable network

The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox just three days after she resigned from the cable network.

Giuliana inked a new development deal with E!'s parent company NBCUniversal where she will 'produce and bring stories to life.'

Rancic famously got into trouble on the job in 2015 when she made racist comments about Emmy winner Zendaya's dreadlocks, for which she apologized.

Little guy! Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer

Werrrk! The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants

Glam: Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event

Outfit change! McCord (pictured Tuesday) hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer

Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer.

The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants.

Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event.

McCord hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears and her boyfriend Sam Asghari were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines.

In the clip, the 27-year-old actor and fitness professional was seated in front of a chocolate shake while the 39-year-old Lucky singer encouraged him to ditch his strict dietary regimen for a sweet treat.

'You know, to be or not to be, that is the question I ask myself everyday - to eat or not to eat, that is the question,' he said, as Spears was heard laughing in the background.

The latest: Britney Spears, 39, and her boyfriend Sam Asghari, 27, were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines

'Should I do it, should I not?' Asghari said, mentioning he want to stay in great shape for any potential jobs - to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

Asghari donned a yellow T-shirt and had his hair combed to the side and a beard in the cozy exchange with the Grammy-winning pop star.

Asghari, who's been seen on the BET+ show Family Business, initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter.

The lighthearted clip came after Los Angeles Superior Judge Brenda Penny denied a request from Spears' legal team to expedite a hearing in the conservatorship case ahead against her father Jamie Spears.

Back and forth: Asghari said he didn't want to drink the shake to stay in great shape for any potential jobs, to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

History: Asghari initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter

Spears' lawyer Mathew Rosengart also requested that Jamie Spears' power in the conservatorship be suspended after the institution Bessemer Trust resigned from involvement in the case, NBC News reported.

Rosengart also requested a probe into how Jamie Spears is dispersing the funds in the conservatorship.

In legal filings, Spears' legal team said the Toxic singer 'continues to suffer ongoing harm each day that Mr. Spears remains in place as the Conservator of the Estate - emotionally, psychologically, and financially.'

Happy couple: The pair were seen kissing at the Once Upon A Time...In Hollywood premiere in LA in 2019

Hot topic: Fans congregated in Miami Beach, Florida last week to show their support for the singer in her legal battle

In his retort, Jamie Spears said in court docs that the singer is 'mentally sick' and that he sensed she 'was spiraling out of control.'

She spoke in a June 23 hearing about her hopes to end the arrangement, which was initially implemented amid a pileup of personal problems.

'I just want my life back,' she said. 'And it’s been 13 years. And it’s enough. It’s been a long time since I’ve owned my money. And it’s my wish and my dream for all of this to end without being tested.'

The issue is set to come before the court in a September 29 hearing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The family of Spider-Man actor Alfred Molina, 68, have described his marriage to Oscar-winning Frozen director Jennifer Lee as being like a 'fairy tale ending to a film.'

The couple tied the knot last week a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020.

His new bride Jennifer, 49, posted a gallery of photos from their sunlit garden ceremony to Instagram on Monday with the sweet caption: 'We did. We do.'

'It's a fairy tale ending': Alfred Molina's family share their joy as Spider-Man star, 68, marries Frozen director Jennifer Lee, 49... 16 months after wife Jill Gascoine died aged 83

In one snap, Alfred was seen overcome with emotion and holding his hands to his face as he watched his bride walk down the aisle.

His sister-in-law, Lyn Molina told MailOnline: 'Alfred has gone through a lot over the past few years and this is like a fairy tale ending to one of his films.

'It's absolutely lovely and we are delighted for them. They are a wonderful couple who are really in love.'

First marriage: The couple tied the knot last week a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020 (pictured in 1994)

Lynn, who lives in in Surrey and is married to Alfred's brother Roberto revealed that he and Jennifer had been together for around five years.

During this time, Alfred remained legally married to wife Jill, but shared in 2016 that the actress was in the 'final stages' of the debilitating disease.

He went public with his romance with Jennifer in November 2019.

Lynn added: 'We met Jennifer about three years ago when she came to London with Alfred. She's lovely and is very down to earth, with no airs and graces.'

Loving family: Alfred's sister-in-law, Lyn Molina (pictured) told MailOnline, Alfred has gone through a lot over the past few years and this is like a fairy tale ending to one of his films'

Sweet: In the wedding pictures, Alfred was seen overcome with emotion and holding his hands to his face as he watched his bride walk down the aisle

She added that she and her husband had been invited to the wedding in the States but decided not to travel because of COVID.

Lynn revealed: 'Of course we were invited but unfortunately, because of all the restrictions around travel at this time, we decided not to go. We would have loved to have been there to enjoy their beautiful day with them.

'We look forward to seeing them soon but don't know when that's going to be.'

Wow: Jennifer, who is the Chief Creative Officer at Walt Disney Animation Studios, looked sensational in a tulle dress with an A-line skirt and sequins dotted throughout

Jennifer, who is the Chief Creative Officer at Walt Disney Animation Studios, looked sensational in a tulle dress with an A-line skirt and sequins dotted throughout.

Her groom donned a grey suit, light pink shirt and sunglasses with a white rose placed in the lapel of his smart ensemble.

Also present at the ceremony as officiator was actor Jonathan Groff, 36, who famously voiced Kristoff in the Frozen films.

Sweet: Also present at the ceremony as officiator was actor Jonathan Groff, 36, who famously voiced Kristoff in the Frozen films

In a subsequent post from Jennifer, she shared further details of how Jonathan was involved in her nuptials to Alfred.

Captioning a photo of herself and Jonathan talking at the reception, she wrote: 'This beautiful, generous soul is the reason Fred and I met. We owe him the world.'

Jennifer and Jonathan worked on Frozen together and he also worked with Alfred on a 2012 production of John Logan's play Red.

Both Alfred and Jonathan starred in 2019's animated Frozen II — with Alfred as the voice of Agnarr, Elsa and Anna's father, and Jonathan reprising his role of Kristoff.

Going public: Roberto andJennifer have been together for five years, during which time he was legally married to Jill, and went public with his romance with Jennifer in November 2019

Alfred was first married to Z-Cars star Jill who he met when they were both working in the same theatre production.

They married in Tower Hamlets, London, in 1986 when she was 49 and he was 33. He had a daughter, Rachel, now 41, from a previous relationship.

Jill was first married to Dundee hotelier Bill Keith - tying the knot in 1965 and divorcing in 1972 - during which time they had two sons Adam and Sean, but they did not stay in contact with Bill after the divorce and Jill raised them as a single mother.

One to watch: Jennifer and Jonathan worked on the animated film Frozen together (pictured: an image from the film)

The actress rose to fame as Detective Inspector Maggie Forbes in The Gentle Touch and appeared in the spin-off series, C.A.T.S Eyes, before building a career in America.

While Jill lived until 2020, four years prior in 2016, Alfred shared that Jill was already in the 'final stages' of the debilitating disease.

He told The Radio Times: 'Alzheimer's is a cowardly disease. It creeps up on you from behind and by the time you realise you've got it you're probably not realising much else. It's a stinker'.

In other interviews, he also admitted to undergoing counselling to deal with her illness and joining an Alzheimer's support group.

Friends had previously revealed how Jill started noticing problems with her memory in 2010. She was diagnosed in 2012 after her memory loss became more significant.

Jennifer, meanwhile, was previously married to Robert Joseph Monn, with whom she shares daughter Agatha. Agatha, 18, was the voice of nine-year-old Anna in the first Frozen film, from 2013.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Drake's three-year-old son looked cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, which was shared to Instagram on Friday.

In the sweet photo the mom-of-one lovingly wrapped her arm around her son as they both smiled softly.

The brunette beauty captioned the picture, 'My most precious,' adding three blue emoji hearts, and tagging her baby daddy's handle, @champagnepapi.

Time with mom: Drake's three-year-old son looks super cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, shared to Instagram Friday

She wore pearl earrings and a white tank top, while her tot had on a navy blue Tommy Hilfiger shirt with graphics of athletes. A clear, blue sky was their backdrop.

It's the first image of her son she has posted on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message.

'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Flashback: She hadn't posted her son on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message

Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017.

The French native, 31, is fairly private about her young son with the famous rapper, only selectively posting about their bundle of joy.

Brussaux, a visual artist, has made a name for herself in the art world, and has been featured in some major exhibitions by blending surrealism, symbolism and pop art.

Mom life: 'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Just hangin': Drake and Sophie share three-year-old son, Adonis

The pair reportedly met when they were among a group of friends dining at a Japanese restaurant in Amsterdam in January 2017, according to The Sun.

This was around the time the singer-rapper, born Aubrey Drake Graham, was alleged to have been spending time with Jennifer Lopez.

By May, about four months later, Brussaux went public and claimed she was carrying Drake's baby.

Sharp: Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017; Drake appears at the 2013 GRAMMY Awards in LA

He did not acknowledge the existence of his child until the release of his album Scorpion in June 2018.

Since Adonis became public knowledge, Drake has talked about wanting to be on good terms with Sophie, who he claimed to have only met twice before they conceived the child.

Despite initially keeping him out of the public eye, the superstar father has warmed up to regularly sharing outtakes of his life with young Adonis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He hasn't eased up on his intense fitness regime, despite retiring from football in 2013.

And a shirtless David Beckham showcased his eclectic selection of tattoos and athletic prowess to Instagram on Saturday as he performed ab wheel rollouts at the gym for Inter Miami CF.

The athlete, 45, displayed his washboard stomach as he utilised his impressive core strength to extend his body above the workout room's floor.

Wow: A shirtless David Beckham showcased his selection of tattoos and athletic prowess to Instagram on Saturday as he performed ab wheel rollouts at the gym for Inter Miami CF

David was seen sporting Adidas shorts with pink stripes, perfectly matching his pink trainers.

He skillfully balanced on his knees while leaning forward and maintaining control through the use of an ab roller.

His silver locks were styled in a short hairdo as he rocked a rugged stubble.

David captioned the upload: 'When I'm not doing F45 on my day off I'm here [laughing emoji]' referencing the functional full-body workout franchise which he is now an ambassador for.

Sportsman: The athlete, 45, displayed his washboard stomach as he utilised his impressive core strength to extend his body above the workout room's floor

The post comes after David and his wife Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday.

The former footballer took to his Instagram Stories and shared a recent heartwarming snap alongside Cruz, 16, where they wrapped their arms around each other.

The proud father wrote: 'Cruzie so proud well done big boy'.

Victoria, 47, shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Attention to detail: David was seen sporting Adidas shorts with pink stripes, perfectly matching his pink trainers for the workout

Record numbers of top grades were awarded to pupils doing their GCSE's this year, with 30 per cent of entries in England gaining grades 7 and above - equivalent to A and A*.

David and Victoria are also parents to sons Brooklyn, 22, Romeo, 18, and daughter Harper, 10.

On Tuesday, David was hard at work at his football club Inter Miami and he decided to bring Harper along with him.

Taking to Instagram, David revealed that he was enjoying a kickabout on one of the club's pitches with his daughter and shared sweet footage of their game.

Heartwarming: The post comes after David and his wife Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday

Proud: Victoria, 47, shared a photo of her son, 16, going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Filming Harper as she kicked a ball towards him, David could be heard commentating: 'Beckham, to Beckham, yeah!' before kicking the ball into the net.

He then passed the ball back to Harper, saying: 'Yes, pass it back. Nice. Get set - Beckham, to Beckham, woohoo!' as she also scored a goal.

David captioned the post: 'Daddy daughter day at work @intermiamicf BECKHAM to BECKHAM GOOOOAAAAALLL.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram – before swiftly removing the interaction days later.

The England footballer, 25, currently in a relationship with model Sasha Attwood, also 25, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's glamorous photos by liking the snaps from his verified profile.

Lillie, 22, was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her wearing a skimpy white bikini that was shared days after she entered the rival Love Island villa.

'Flattered': Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram before swiftly removing the interaction days later

A source told MailOnline: 'Lillie couldn't believe Jack even knows who she is, let alone took the time to like her uploads on Instagram.

'It was disappointing he unliked the photos days later, but it's possible he didn't want his girlfriend finding out.

'She was complimented nonetheless, and hopes one day they'll cross paths so she can ask him about it.'

The footballer liked a photo of Lillie in a bikini that was shared while she was in Casa Amor on July 26, as well as a snap of the reality star enjoying a glass of bubbles to celebrate her 'freedom' after returning from Mallorca and quarantining for five days.

MailOnline has contacted Jack and Lillie's representatives for comment.

'Stunner': The England footballer, who's in a relationship with Sasha Attwood, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's photos by liking the snaps from his profile

Undo: The likes on Lillie's photos were from Jack's verified Instagram profile, and were captured in the days before he removed the interaction from her account

Jack, who completed his record British transfer from Aston Villa earlier this month, recently admitted he's a 'big fan' of Love Island, even saying if he wasn't a footballer, he'd be a contestant on the ITV2 dating show.

In April, Jack joked during an interview alongside ex-Villa teammate John McGinn, 26, he'd be 'on Love Island or working as a promotor or DJ' if he failed as a sportsman.

He also shared an image of him and the England lads watching Love Island on a large screen in a communal room inside the team's Euro accommodation last month and joked dumped Islander Hugo Hammond, 25, looked like the spit of defender Ben White, 23.

Jack has previously shown his admiration for former Love Island contestants, after he was caught hitting on reality star Natalia Zoppa, 22, by her boyfriend.

In a video shared on TikTok 2020 Islander Natalia's partner Hass Saleh claimed: 'As if today couldn't get any weirder, the best player in the Premier League tried to chat up missus,' while sharing the alleged Instagram message from Jack, a waving hand emoji.

Couple: Jack is in a relationship with model girlfriend Sasha Attwood after the childhood sweethearts reportedly reconciled in June following a brief split (pictured in Croatia in August)

It was reported in June that Jack and his childhood sweetheart Sasha had got back together following a brief split, and he considered the model his 'secret weapon' off the pitch.

The couple, who were pictured on holiday together in Croatia last month, met while they were teenagers at St Peter's Roman Catholic Secondary School in Solihull, West Midlands.

Lillie found fame on the current series of Love Island when she lured Liam Reardon, 21, away from partner Millie Court, 24, during his stay at Casa Amor.

Millie was faced with Liam's betrayal when she met Lillie for a catch-up arranged by producers, where she didn't hold back on the gory details.

Days later, Millie forgave Liam for passionately kissing Lillie on multiple occasions, with the couple still going strong ahead of the upcoming Love Island final.

'First day of freedom': Lillie was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her smiling while enjoying a glass of bubbles on a night out earlier this month

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The first major European tie of the new season will herald in the return to action for both Chelsea and Villarreal on Wednesday night.

Held in Belfast, the UEFA Super Cup clash will pit the Champions League and Europa League winners against each other, with another coveted trophy up for grabs.

Chelsea are competing in the final for a fifth time, having beaten Manchester City in Porto in May to seal their second triumph in the world's biggest club competition.

Chelsea will look to win the first major European trophy of the season in the UEFA Super Cup

Standing in their way is Villarreal, who will play Chelsea next after winning the Europa League

After tasting defeat against Atletico Madrid, Bayern Munich and Liverpool respectively over the last decade or so, Chelsea will be keen to go one step further.

They are almost certainly favourites to get the better of Villarreal, who are making their first Super Cup appearance.

Unai Emery steered his team to a memorable victory over Manchester United after a marathon penalty shootout, and he will want more silverware for his collection.

The Europa League signalled their first ever major trophy, and Emery's fourth success in the tournament, and the Super Cup is next up in their sights.

It promises to be an enthralling encounter just days out from the beginning of the new top-flight campaign, and here, Sportsmail looks at the key clashes...

Thomas Tuchel (left) and Unai Emery face each other in an intriguing tactical encounter

Sportsmail's predicted line-ups Chelsea: Mendy, Azpilicueta, Zouma, Rudiger, Hudson-Odoi, Kante, Kovacic, Alonso, Ziyech, Werner, Havertz Villarreal: Asenjo, Pena, Albiol, Torres, Pedraza, Foyth, Trigueros, Yeremy, A. Moreno, G. Moreno, Nino Advertisement

TIMO WERNER VS PAU TORRES

Last season was far from plain sailing for Timo Werner, and the pressure is now firmly on his shoulders to justify his £53million price tag.

Finding his scoring boots in the Super Cup will go a long way towards aiding his cause, especially in light of Romelu Lukaku's imminent arrival.

However, this will be no easy task. He will once again be fielded in the No 9 spot, meaning that standing in his way will be Pau Torres.

Timo Werner is under pressure to perform from the off and will hope to net in this week's final

Torres, formerly a target for Manchester United before they snapped up Raphael Varane, was one of the standout defenders in Europe in the last campaign.

Strong in the tackle, cool on the ball and equipped with a good reading of the game, Torres will be a formidable foe for Werner.

Werner will have to be near his best to get the better of his opponent. There is no doubting his ability, with his struggles seemingly born out of his little confidence.

Pau Torres enjoyed a fine season with Villarreal and comes into this clash after the Olympics

He needs to draw on the lethal, clinical nature from his days with RB Leipzig and become the assured frontman he used to be.

Once he re-finds this, his fleet-footedness and darts in behind will begin to cause Villarreal problems. And if a goal comes from this, another may follow.

It has been a long, long season for Torres, who also played in the Olympics final with Spain, and a Werner brimming with danger may well be his worst nightmare.

JUAN FOYTH VS MATEO KOVACIC

There are slight question marks over Juan Foyth, admittedly, after he picked up a poorly-timed injury on Monday. He will be assessed before the Super Cup.

If he does indeed start, then it looks likely that he will be forced to step in in midfield once again as a result of Villarreal's injury crisis.

Despite starring at right back towards the end of last season, Foyth is one of the more versatile players in the squad, and he is capable of starring in a holding role.

Juan Foyth may be forced into holding midfield again, where he will face up to Mateo Kovacic

Provided that is where he lines up against Chelsea, then he will be tasked with halting their momentum and playing deft passes through the lines and out wide.

That area of the field, where the anchor for teams usually sits, is one of the most demanding, and Foyth will have to be in top form when cleaning up.

Chelsea have added dynamism to their play since Thomas Tuchel replaced Frank Lampard, albeit over time. This has seen them improve tenfold centrally.

Kovacic will be tasked with controlling the pace of the game, as well as creating more chances

Mateo Kovacic has been heavily favoured in a double pivot, typically alongside N'Golo Kante, and is renowned for his metronome-esque play style.

It would be of little surprise to see him look to set out his stall early on, whether that be with incisive passing or sprints through the middle.

Foyth will have little choice but to stop those at source and try to dominate in midfield, otherwise the tie will surely slip from Villarreal's grasp.

N'GOLO KANTE VS MANUEL TRIGUEROS

The battle to gain supremacy in midfield is shaping up to be a very promising one indeed - and N'Golo Kante will be absolutely crucial in this.

Tuchel has heaped praise on his evergreen enforcer in the lead-up to the Super Cup, and described him glowingly as a 'coach's dream'.

'For years, I was fighting to have him (Kante) in my team and now we did it the other way around – I came to his team (Chelsea),' Tuchel said.

The evergreen N'Golo Kante was recently hailed as a 'coach's dream' by an enamoured Tuchel

'It's a coach's dream to have N'Golo (Kante) on your side, because he makes things easy for everybody on the pitch.'

Despite now being 30, Kante has defied his advancing age to dominate most midfield partnerships in the top-flight and across Europe.

And it is this seemingly limitless energy that may see him prevent Manuel Trigueros from taking control in the middle for Villarreal.

Manuel Trigueros is a regular in midfield for Villarreal and is not afraid of a crunching challenge

Dani Parejo and Francis Coquelin are both ruled out for the clash, and with Vicente Iborra and Etienne Capoue not ready to start, the onus is on Trigueros to perform.

A reliable player under Emery, Trigueros is difficult to handle and not afraid to throw himself into a challenge, as seen during a horror crunch on Lionel Messi last season.

Adept at scoring from distance, too, Trigueros will certainly give Chelsea a headache if Kante is not able to get a grasp on him in Belfast.

ALBERTO MORENO VS CALLUM HUDSON-ODOI

Injury-hit Villarreal will be very thankful that Alberto Moreno is capable of playing anywhere down the left-hand side.

Formerly of Liverpool, Moreno can play at full back or further down the flank, and it is in the more advanced position that he seems likely to line up against Chelsea.

Boasting a decent delivery and impressive pace, Moreno will want to find his way in behind Chelsea's five-man backline and cause problems.

Alberto Moreno, who is capable of playing down the left-hand side, could line up at left wing

Standing in his way at right wing back may be Callum Hudson-Odoi. Shoehorned into the position by Tuchel, he will have to be aware at both ends of the field.

He has even been fielded on the other flank of Chelsea's backline in pre-season, with chances fairly limited either side of Werner.

As a result of his relative inexperience there, Moreno will hope to use all his years of experience and guile to wave his way beyond him.

Callum Hudson-Odoi is in contention at right wing back and will look for an energetic showing

Of course, then picking out Gerard Moreno in the centre is a different proposition altogether, but Moreno has the ability to help Villarreal to another shock result.

Tuchel does have other options for this clash - namely Reece James or Cesar Azpilicueta, but both players have only recently returned from their holiday break.

As a result, Hudson-Odoi is the favourite to keep his spot from the 2-2 friendly draw with Tottenham, and his focus will be on delivering another energetic showing.

GERARD MORENO VS KURT ZOUMA

The announcement that Gerard Moreno has penned a new six-year contract was bizarre, but underlined Villarreal's faith in their leading frontman.

Adorned in a costume to be presented to a crowd in the city centre as the 'masked singer', Moreno cut a hilarious figure - but he will be deadly serious against Chelsea.

Given Moreno is already 29, the length of the extension is a staggering one, which effectively ties down the rest of his playing days to the club.

Gerard Moreno will want to kickstart his new six-year deal in style by winning the Super Cup

And they will want to kickstart the beginning of a new adventure together in perfect fashion, by beating Chelsea and winning the Super Cup.

Chelsea look likely to field Tuchel's favoured five-man defence, and Kurt Zouma - despite the club fielding offers for him - is set to start once again.

West Ham hold an interest in Zouma and Chelsea have looked to include him in a swap deal for Jules Kounda, but the defender, for now, looks set to stay put.

Kurt Zouma may find himself shipped out of Chelsea this summer, but he is likely to start the tie

There would be no better way for him to justify why he should remain at the club by shackling the dangerous Moreno.

Moreno cut his holiday short to ensure he is ready for the Super Cup, and will look to trouble Chelsea's backline on Wednesday.

Blessed with that rare ability to turn half-chances into goals, Moreno is in red-hot form, and Zouma will have to be at his very best to contain him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Memphis Depay continued his impressive start at Barcelona by netting his second goal in two games during Saturday's pre-season friendly.

The Holland forward, signed on a free transfer from Lyon during the summer, opened his account when he came off the bench and scored a penalty in the 3-1 victory over Girona.

Depay was handed his first start against Stuttgart on Saturday and opened the scoring in the 21st minute.

New signing Memphis Depay netted his second goal in two games for Barcelona on Saturday

Depay brought down a lofted pass with a sublime touch and turned inside his marker before firing a volley past Stuttgart goalkeeper Fabian Bredlow.

Austrian starlet Yusuf Demir, signed on a season-long loan from Rapid Vienna, doubled Barcelona's lead in the 36th minute.

Midfielder Riqui Puig slotted home the third in the 74th minute.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Karriss Artingstall rued her sluggish start in a razor-thin split decision defeat to Japan's Sena Irie but the Macclesfield featherweight will use her Olympic bronze as motivation to go all the way at Paris 2024.

Artingstall, who had guaranteed herself a medal by edging out Australia's Skye Nicolson last time out, lost the first round of this absorbing semi-final contest in the women's 57kg category on every scorecard.

Irie was the busier fighter early on but Artingstall upped the tempo thereafter and the pair went into the final three minutes with four of the five judges scoring the bout one round apiece at the Kokugikan Arena.

Irie Sena (right) beat British boxer Karriss Artingstall to advance to the featherweight final

Artingstall was left with the bronze medal after judges gave the first and third rounds to Sena

Both fighters landed eye-catching blows and while there was little to split them, Artingstall's work found favour with three of the officials. But it was Irie who advanced to the gold medal match when the scores were totted up.

Three of the judges gave Irie the nod at 29-28, with the other two swaying towards Artingstall by the same scoreline. After her involvement in Japan was ended, the Briton reflected with some regret at how she started on Saturday.

"Playing catch up is an absolute nightmare," she said. "If you ask any boxer in the world dropping that first round and having to catch up in the second and the third is absolutely horrible.

"I tried my best, I managed to pick it back up in the second and (in the third) I felt I was giving her three in return for one of hers. But I'm not going to moan about the decision, it was very, very close."

Artingstall, a gunner in the British Army who has also won bronze at world and European level, was the last of the Team GB boxers to qualify for Tokyo 2020, rebounding after a loss to Stanimira Petrova by beating Stephanie Thour.

She has excelled in the Japanese capital, cruising past Botswana's Keamogetse Kenosi and third seed Jucielen Romeu of Brazil, before a much closer contest in a bout that could have gone either way against Nicolson.

"My goal out here was to get myself on that podium and just correct a few wrongs I'd done wrong in (the qualifiers in) Paris, just to show the people around this world at 57kg that I'm not to be messed with," Artingstall said.

Artingstall was guaranteed at least bronze after narrowly beating Australia's Skye Nicolson

"I know I can beat all the girls at my weight on my day. They're going to be very, very close fights, don't get me wrong, but I know on a good day of mine I can edge them, edge every single round and I can win the fights.

"Unfortunately today wasn't my day but I've been on GB for two and a half years and I've left with an Olympic medal. I'm a world medallist, I'm a European medallist, come Paris in 2024 I'll be taking that top spot.

"I want to go to the Olympics when it's not in the presence of a pandemic. I want to experience it at its best."

British team-mate Lauren Price guaranteed herself a women's middleweight medal with a unanimous decision victory over Panama's Atheyna Bylon, who lost 30-26 on four of the judges' scorecards and 29-27 on the other.

The Welsh fighter, who takes on Holland's Nouchka Fontijn in her semi-final, said: "It hasn't really sunk in yet. It was my dream since I was eight years of age just to be an Olympian, let alone win a medal.

"I can't put it into words what it means to me. It is an amazing feeling to have medalled, but I always want more, no matter what tournament it is in. I am just loving the journey and trying to let it sink in."

Galal Yafai knows improvements must be made before his men's quarter-final against Cuba's Yosvany Veitia after the Birmingham flyweight edged out the elusive Patrick Chinyemba by close split decision, winning on three scorecards.

Yafai landed some eye-catching blows, with his Zambian opponent taking a standing eight count in the second round, but he was also frustrated for large spells. He said: "If I box like that again I don't deserve a medal, do I?"

Luke McCormack bowed out in the last-16 of the men's lightweight competition after a unanimous decision defeat to Cuba's Andy Cruz, a two-time world champion whose movement and ramrod jab confounded his Sunderland rival.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said.

Jean Todt, who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery.

Schumacher, 52, has not been seen in public since suffering severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 with his then 14-year-old son Mick, who is now an F1 driver himself.

Todt, 75, said Schumacher, who won 91 Grand Prix races before retiring from Formula One in 2012, only survived thanks to the work of the doctors and Corinna, 52, who 'wanted him to survive'.

Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said. Pictured: Schumacher and Corinna in 2006

Jean Todt (right with Schumacher in 2002), who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret.

Todt told Sport Bild: 'I've spent a lot of time with Corinna since Michael had his serious skiing accident on December 29, 2013. She is a great woman and runs the family.

'She hadn't expected that. It happened suddenly and she had no choice. But she does it very well. I trust her, she trusts me.'

He added: 'Thanks to the work of his doctors and the cooperation of Corinna, who wanted him to survive, he survived - but with consequences.

'And right now you are fighting the consequences. We hope that things will slowly but surely improve.'

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret. Pictured: Schumacher skis in Northern Italy in 2005

Todt also said that Schumacher's son Mick, 22, who is now competing for F1 team Haas, has a 'special place in his heart'.

He said: 'Mick is one of those people who [will] always have a special place in my heart and that of my wife Michelle Yeoh.

'The Schumacher family is very special to us. I wrote a great story with Michael and built a wonderful relationship. And then the children were there.'

Todt revealed that he only partially recognises Mick in his father. He claims Michael had to build his own life whereas Mick was able to receive 'a very good education in a more comfortable environment'.

'[But] of course, Michael and Mick are of the same blood and have the same goals, but the conditions [they faced] were completely different.'

Updates on Michael Schumacher, who won five world titles for Ferrari and his first two with Benetton, have been scarce since the accident in 2013.

In 2019 the family released an update on his 50th birthday assuring his millions of fans they are doing 'everything humanly possible' to help him recover.

Last year it was suggested he was set to undergo stem cell surgery which was cancelled because of the Covid 19 pandemic.

Michael Schumacher suffered devastating brain injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 and his condition has been a closely guarded secret ever since

In September Zurich-based neurology specialist Professor Erich Riederer told a documentary for French TV channel TMC he doubted the racing legend would ever fully recover.

He said: 'I think he's in a vegetative state, which means he's awake but not responding.

'He is breathing, his heart is beating, he can probably sit up and take baby steps with help, but no more.

'I think that's the maximum for him. Is there any chance of seeing him like he was before his accident? I really don't think so.'

Former Ferrari teammate Felipe Massa admitted Schumacher was in a 'difficult place' adding: 'I know how he is, I have information.

'The main thing about all this is that we know his situation is not easy. He is in a difficult phase but we need to respect him and the family.'

A documentary about Schumacher featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix on 15 September.

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features exclusive interviews with Corinna, his two children Gina and Mick and brother Ralf.

It also features interviews with who worked with or raced against Schumacher, including Jean Todt, Bernie Ecclestone, Sebastian Vettel, Mika Hakkinen, Damon Hill and David Coulthard.

A documentary about Formula One legend Michael Schumacher (pictured celebrating winning the Grand Prix at Silverstone in July 1998) featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix

The documentary does not focus on Schumacher's health after he suffered severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 (pictured L-R brother Ralf, mother Elisabeth, Schumacher, and father Rolf)

The documentary retraces the life and career of the German driver and promises unseen archive material that shows the 'many facets of his multi-layered personality'.

The portrait of the racing legend is 'the only film supported by his family', the platform said in a press release.

Schumacher's manager Sabine Kehm describes the film as the 'family's gift to their beloved husband and father'.

'The greatest challenge for the directors was certainly to find the balance between independent reporting and consideration for the family,' said Vanessa Nocker who directed the film along with Hanns-Bruno Kammertons and Michael Wech.

'Corinna Schumacher herself was our greatest support in this.

'She herself wanted to make an authentic film, to show Michael as he is, with all his ups and downs, without any sugar-coating.

'She was great and brave enough to let us do what we wanted, and so we respected and kept her boundaries. A very inspiring, warm woman who made a lasting impression on all of us.'

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features interviews with his wife Corinna, (pictured together) children, and past and present F1 drivers

Schumacher was most famous for his career at Ferrari between 1996 and 2006, where he won five consecutive championships.

He retired in 2006, but returned to racing four years later with Mercedes. He retired for a second time in 2012 after two unsuccessful seasons with the team.

Following an unsuccessful two year stint, Schumacher once again retired.

The documentary was set to be released in 2020 following filming in 2019, but was delayed several times by producers because of the volume of material they had to edit.

It is set to air on Netflix in Europe on September 15 - weeks after the anniversary of Schumacher's F1 debut in Belgium 30 years ago.

It is not yet known if the documentary will be added to Netflix in the UK on the same date.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ECB chief executive Tom Harrison has asked the Australian government to show ‘leniency’ towards England’s Ashes tourists and their families this winter —and insisted the players are ‘not asking for anything unreasonable’ as discussions continue about Australia’s Covid-19 protocols.

While there seems little doubt the series will take place, starting in Brisbane on December 8, England’s Test players remain concerned about the strict nature of Australia’s biosecure bubbles.

Olympic athletes returning from Japan to South Australia were recently told to quarantine for 28 days before being allowed out of their homes. And while that is twice as long as in other states, Harrison is determined to place the players’ and their families’ welfare at the forefront of discussions with Cricket Australia.

ECB chief executive Tom Harrison has asked the Australian authorities to show 'leniency' with their Covid-19 protocols when England players tour for the Ashes this winter

England's players could be four months away from their families and be forced to live in bio-secure bubbles during this winter's tour of Australia

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison has enforced Draconian Covid lockdown laws

'Australia have a certain perspective with respect to how they deal with these things, both at state and federal level,’ he said.

‘That is a concern given the 18 months our players have been through.

‘We are raising those concerns and expect the right conversations to be had over the coming weeks to get us to a place where we and the players can get on the flight to Australia knowing that, when the families arrive, they can have a positive experience.’

Australia celebrate winning the last Ashes series to be held Down Under back in 2017-2018

The Aussies then retained the Ashes in England in 2019 after the series was drawn 2-2

England are currently playing their 16th Test since the start of the pandemic (Australia have played just four, all at home), and the players do not want their families to spend 14 days in a hotel room.

Harrison said: ‘These are very reasonable requests we are asking the Australian government to give some leniency towards.

‘It’s going to be important for us to ensure we can give comfort to players and that those quarantine conditions for families will be reasonable to enable the players to be at their best.'

England's supporters won't be allowed to tour Australia and watch the Ashes this winter

Ashes 2021-22 schedule FIRST TEST December 8-12, Brisbane SECOND TEST (D/N) December 16-20, Adelaide THIRD TEST December 26-30, Melbourne FOURTH TEST January 5-9, Sydney FIFTH TEST January 14-18, Perth Advertisement

Meanwhile, in the week the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a ‘code red for humanity’, Harrison said bilateral tours need to be arranged on a more sustainable basis, and admitted cricket boards around the world had placed finances ahead of environmental concerns when planning schedules.

‘As a sport, the thing that shines out is the amount of travel and flights we take,’ he said. ‘Addressing that question is probably the single biggest impact we can make. That’s a difficult one for cricket, but we have to get into it at ICC level.

‘We owe the world an explanation of the game’s global sustainability strategy.’

Harrison said little consideration had been paid to minimise flying within tours — a factor especially relevant in Australia and India.

‘We’ve probably taken a cost-effective approach to those kinds of debates, as opposed to one which has carbon footprint and air miles at its heart,’ he said. ‘The time is now to address it.’

Harrison also said the Hundred had exceeded expectations, with the ECB claiming to have sold 90 per cent of their ‘pre-Covid capacity’ — 30 per cent higher than their target.

‘We’ve sold about 20 per cent of tickets to kids, 20-odd per cent are female buyers. The data we’re getting is that we are being able to reach that broader audience.’

He blamed rowdy incidents at Hundred matches on ‘people coming out of 18 months of restricted living conditions’.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jurgen Klopp has vowed there will be a resolution to Jordan Henderson's contract situation as he celebrated a new deal for Virgil van Dijk.

Henderson, Liverpool's captain, has entered the final two years of his contract and was frustrated at the beginning of the summer when talks about extending his stay petered out.

The impasse led Atletico Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain to believe there was a chance of prising him away.

Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp has vowed to tie Jordan Henderson (above) to a new contract

The Reds boss (pictured) has admitted he fully expects him to follow Virgil van Dijk's example

Liverpool have been busy renewing the terms of a number of key players and Van Dijk on Friday followed the lead of Trent Alexander-Arnold, Fabinho and Alisson Becker, as well as rising star Harvey Elliott, of committing his future.

Mohamed Salah, Roberto Firmino and Sadio Mane are also in a similar position to Henderson but more talks were held recently with Fenway Sports Group, Liverpool's owners, and progress is being made for a suitable outcome.

Klopp would never have allowed Henderson – a player who performs a huge role for him on and off the field – to leave in this window and the German made it clear that he expects the 31-year-old to follow Van Dijk and Company at some point.

Key Netherlands defender van Dijk put pen to paper on a new four-year deal expiring in 2025

Liverpool are also working on deals for Sadio Mane (L), Roberto Firmino (C) and Mo Salah (R)

'It is important (to find a solution) but it will happen,' said Klopp. 'We will sort it, however it will be. We will sort it. No doubt about that. It will get sorted. I spoke to him (on Thursday) and it looked like that (he was in good spirits), yes.'

Van Dijk's new deal runs to June 2025 and Klopp – who sanctioned his £75million acquisition in January 2018 – put his progress and reputation into perspective when simply saying: 'wow! Imagine what it would cost to buy him now!'

The Netherlands international is fit to start at Norwich on Saturday and Klopp added: 'After that obviously very difficult last year that he is back on track, trains with the team and prepares for hopefully a very successful future at this club. Absolutely great, great news.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David Moyes indicated that a club would have to bid at least £100million to convince West Ham to part with Declan Rice.

Jack Grealish's move to Manchester City broke the transfer record for an English player, but Rice could command a higher fee, according to the Hammers boss.

Rice, who started all of England's games at Euro 2020, has been heavily linked with Manchester United all summer and Chelsea have also been reportedly interested.

David Moyes insisted West Ham would not sell Declan Rice (above) for less than £100million

The Hammers manager (pictured) says clubs would need to offer a nine-figure fee for Rice, 22

Moyes feels Grealish's £100m fee will be topped and stressed clubs can now reject mega-moves for their top talent.

'Well it has been proved that they can,' said the Scotsman. 'Teams can do that and I would have to say that if it is going that way now I think it will keep rising.

'I don't see it coming down really, the next bunch of good players will probably be worth more than £100m in the future.

Jack Grealish (pictured above) became the most expensive English footballer of all time earlier in August when he transferred from Aston Villa to Manchester City for a whopping £100million

'It will probably continue but maybe those clubs have realised they can only buy one big player and not add lots more after that.'

Ahead of West Ham's Premier League opener at Newcastle tomorrow, Moyes refused to talk about a move to bring Jesse Lingard back.

But he backed Said Benrahma to fill the void, saying: 'If Said can get into the team and do anything as well as Jesse did then that would be great. I think he is certainly more ready than he was last year.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel has told Romelu Lukaku not to worry about the critics who refuse to rate him world class.

Chelsea's club record £97.5million signing complained during Euro 2020: 'When people talk about Lewandowski, Benzema or Kane, they call them world class. But when it comes to me, it's just considered good form. I belong in that list.'

On Friday Tuchel said: 'I think it's best to simply accept it and don't worry about it. The data is that he delivered. He is in the spotlight because he likes it, because he is good, because he has the personality and he is happy to carry responsibility.'

Thomas Tuchel says Romelu Lukaku should not worry about what his critics say about him

Chelsea boss Tuchel believes Lukaku has the personality to deal with being in the spotlight

Lukaku is quarantining and will miss Saturday's clash with Crystal Palace, but could make his debut against Arsenal next Sunday.

With Hakim Ziyech out with the shoulder injury picked up in Wednesday's Super Cup victory over Villarreal, Tammy Abraham could make a rare start.

New Palace manager Patrick Vieira will be missing Ebere Eze and Nathan Ferguson (both achilles), and loan signing Conor Gallagher can't face his parent club. Captain Luka Milivojevic will also be absent for personal reasons and Michael Olise is out with a back injury.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Massimiliano Allegri has hinted that Juventus will not sign Arsenal and Liverpool target Manuel Locatelli this summer because the club already has Aaron Ramsey as a key player in midfield.

The Sassuolo midfielder - who starred for Italy at Euro 2020 this summer - is being chased after by some of Europe's top clubs, with Locatelli's club revealing Arsenal made a bid for the 23-year-old in the last week of July.

Juventus is Locatelli's first-choice option should he leave Sassuolo this summer, but Allegri revealed Ramsey's excellent performance in a defensive midfield role in their friendly win over Atalanta on Saturday means the Old Lady have cover in the centre of the pitch.

Massimiliano Allegri (left) has hinted Juventus will not sign Manuel Locatelli (right) this year

Allegri says Juventus can count on Aaron Ramsey (above) in a defensive midfield role this term

The Juventus manager told Sky Sports Italia after the 3-1 win over Atalanta: 'Locatelli is a Sassuolo player. I think Aaron Ramsey played a good game tonight, he's an intelligent player.

'I think he has a future playing just in front of the defence. Tonight it wasn't easy against Atalanta and it's just the second time he has played in that role, he went to cover lots of aerial balls.

'When he gets used to it more, he will make fewer mistakes because he'll have the structure laid out in his head. He is a player I can count on a lot.'

Allegri was delighted by Ramsey's display in Juventus' 3-1 friendly win over Atalanta this week

Locatelli is valued at around £35million by Sassuolo, following the Italian's excellent displays at Euro 2020 this summer.

The midfielder scored twice against Switzerland in the group stages and was a regular substitute in the knockout rounds, including in the semi-final and final victories over Spain and England respectively.

Sassuolo chief executive Giovanni Carnevali revealed in late July that Arsenal put in a bid for Locatelli, while another English club expressed an interest in the young midfielder.

Carnevali told Sky Sport Italia at the time: 'Tomorrow we'll have a direct contact with Juventus for Locatelli. He wants to join Juve.'

Locatelli (above), who starred at Euro 2020 for Italy, wants to move to Juventus this summer

The 23-year-old scored twice for Italy in their victorious Euro 2020 campaign earlier this year

'We'd be happy to sell Manuel (Locatelli) to Juve... but they need to pay the right fee.

'Arsenal made a bid to sign him and also a new English club is now in the race'.

Liverpool have also been strongly linked to signing Locatelli after Jurgen Klopp's side let Gini Wijnaldum join Paris Saint-Germain on a free transfer earlier this summer.

The Merseysiders played Naby Keita, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and James Milner in their 3-0 victory over Norwich to start their Premier League campaign, with Fabinho and Harvey Elliott coming off the bench at Carrow Road.

Mikel Arteta's Arsenal (right) and Jurgen Klopp's Liverpool (left) are linked to signing Locatelli

Arsenal, meanwhile, have already bolstered their midfield with the signing of Albert Sambi Lokonga from Anderlecht, while Granit Xhaka has snubbed a move away to Roma and is set to stay in north London for the coming season.

Ramsey, who has been linked with a move to Newcastle and Tottenham, made just 22 appearances for Juventus last season, scoring twice and registering five assists.

The 30-year-old has won the Serie A title, the Coppa Italia and the Italian Super Cup since joining Juventus on a free transfer from Arsenal in the summer of 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leeds reportedly want to tie Patrick Bamford down to a new long-term deal to ward off interest from Tottenham.

Bamford is in the last year of his of his contract at Elland Road and is reportedly a target for Spurs as they look for a suitable understudy for Harry Kane.

According to the Telegraph their primary target is Dusan Vlahovic but Nuno Espirito Santo's side are keeping their options open as Fiorentina want the Serbian striker to sign a new deal.

Leeds striker Patrick Bamford (right) has been liked with a move to Tottenham this summer

Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic has also been linked with a move to the north London club

Bamford scored 17 Premier League goals last season with only one coming from the penalty spot, Kane was the only English player to score more.

The 27-year-old striker has yet to sign a new deal at Leeds since joining from Middlesbrough in the summer of 2018 on a four-year contract.

However, his form dictates that his value has significantly increased from the £7 million they paid for him during Marcelo Bielsa first season in charge.

Bamford was signed during Marcelo Bielsa's first season in charge at Elland Road

Spurs want to sign a new striker to bolster their attacking options and support Harry Kane

Bamford made 38 league appearances last season and was under consideration for a England call-up, however Gareth Southgate opted to include Aston Villa striker Ollie Watkins in his provisional squad for the Euros instead.

Southgate was in attendance at Old Trafford on Saturday when Bamford lead the line against Manchester United but struggled during their 5-1 defeat.

Spurs have had to deal with constant speculation regarding Kane's future with Manchester City linked with a move for the striker, but sporting director Fabio Paratici is committed to strengthening their attacking options this summer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Graeme Souness and Micah Richards were embroiled in a heated discussion about Paul Pogba and Harry Kane after Tottenham beat Manchester City 1-0 on Sunday night despite Kane's absence from the squad.

While disagreeing on Pogba's contribution to debates regarding his Manchester United future, the pair raised their voices, gesticulated passionately to defend their standpoint and talked over each other.

Souness turned his back on the camera to calm himself down, and when the debate continued abruptly asked presenter Dave Jones, who was struggling to keep control, to move on and talk about something else.

Graeme Souness (above) and Micah Richards were embroiled in a heated debate on Sunday

He and Richards (above) disagreed about transfer sagas involving Paul Pogba and Harry Kane

Last year Pogba's high-profile, controversial 'super agent' Mino Raiola publicly stated Pogba would leave Old Trafford and that his career there was over, on the eve of a crucial Champions League game against RB Leipzig, which United lost 3-2 and were subsequently eliminated - in a move which angered fans and former players.

However, Pogba has rarely spoken so openly on the topic, and it seems not to have affected his recent form on the pitch, with a stellar performance and four assists in a 5-1 drubbing against Leeds in United's first Premier League game of the season - a point former Manchester City defender Richards was quick to make.

He said: 'His agent might have done the talking, but he's not done anything. He's just gone out there and tried to do the best he could - and Kane the same, that's what players want to do' but Souness interjected: 'Do you think the agent speaks without the permission of the player? Do you think the agent just talks out nonsense?'

Richards replied immediately: 'I actually do, I actually do, definitely' with Souness responding: 'Not a chance, not a chance. He's echoing the thoughts of the player.'

Paul Pogba's controversial 'super agent' Mino Raiola publicly stated he would leave last year

Pogba himself has remained tight-lipped but laid on four assists in the win against Leeds

The 33-year-old jumped back in, adding: 'Even if he is-' before Souness, visibly frustrated, said: 'Can we move on from Manchester United? We haven't got much time left, can we talk about Liverpool?' As Jones laughed, Souness turned in a circle, facing away from the camera to compose himself, as Gary Neville spoke up.

Neville said: 'Let's put it this way. If your agent comes out and says three or four times 'I want to get Paul a different club', Paul does enough interviews to say 'My agent's out of order, he's got that wrong' - he's never said that either, has he?'

Richards replied: 'He's not going to do that though, is he? You wouldn't do that with your agent,' and Neville continued: 'I didn't have an agent. My strings weren't being pulled by anyone, I wasn't a puppet' as Richards and Jones giggled.

Richards then compared Pogba's situation to Spurs striker Kane, who was left out of the squad, reportedly for fitness reasons only despite City's serious and long-held interest in signing the England captain.

And Richards questioned the criticism of Pogba compared to Tottenham striker Harry Kane (above), absent from the club's win against Manchester City amid transfer links to the Cityzens

The ex-England man added: 'I'm only mentioning it because it's similar to the Kane situation. Kane's not turned up for training and we're calling him a saint. Pogba's never said he wants to leave but he's getting abuse! What's the difference?

An angry Souness shot back: 'My information about Kane, it's not that he didn't turn up for training, there's another story behind that. Can we move on and talk about Chelsea or Liverpool please?'

Jones, playing mediator, concluded: 'Shall we park that there?' but Richards had the last word, saying: 'We're meant to be neutrals'.

That final comment could have been a reference to Souness, who has criticised Pogba in the past and claimed Mason Greenwood was the 'star of the show' against Leeds rather than Pogba, insisting his four-assist performance should be 'expected.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York.

The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37, and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Developer's representative Dan tasked Steve with selling the $8,995,000 four-bedroom apartment in the Zaha Hadid Building before gaining a lucrative listing for a $29.5 million penthouse duplex in Hudson Yards.

Pandemic pricing: Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York

Steve invited Ryan who had a buyer from California at $6.5 million to lunch in order to negotiate more and purposefully served him wine.

'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional.

Ryan stood firm on his offer and noted that it had been a long time since property in that area sold for more than $4,000 a foot.

He pretended to snooze as Steve praised the quality of the home by Pritzker Architecture Prize-winning architect Zaha Hadid.

Wine time: The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37 and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic

'It's her only residential project in New York. Quality of construction there surpasses most developments in the city, if not all,' Steve said.

'Sorry, I just woke back up. Can someone get me coffee, please? Keep talking, Steve. I'm here for you. I can tell who you work for. I get it. I get it. It's also on a block with a significant amount of competition. It's also Covid, and there's also the strip club a couple blocks down, and they're coming here for their kids,' Ryan countered.

Steve said that he could go as low as $8.5 million, but Ryan assured him that his buyer would walk away at that price.

Tightly wound: 'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional of his plan to serve wine during their negotiations

Ryan in a confessional noted that Steve was still negotiating with him and figured there was room to bargain, while Steve claimed Ryan was being 'super aggressive' and putting him in a position of power.

Steve called Dan and shortly later received a text saying the bottom line offer was a flat $8 million.

Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building.

California buyer: Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building

The buyer agreed and Ryan then renegotiated his commission with Steve to bring it up to $320,000 from their even $240,000 split.

'You know what? Let's get the deal done,' said Steve as he agreed to the smaller commission.

'Big sale, smaller commission, but I'm glad there's some wine, because I am celebrating something way bigger,' Steve said in a confessional.

Lower commission: Steve agreed to lower his commission by $80,000 to complete the deal

'I'll even finish my wine for you. Cheers. To selling a four-bedroom during Covid, Steve Gold, Ryan Serhant, 8 million bucks,' Ryan said as he took a triumphant sip.

'You know what, Ryan? You've just gotten me the f***ing penthouse at 15 Hudson Yards!,' Steve informed him.

Ryan then playfully cursed Steve as he finished his glass of wine.

Higher commission: Ryan renegotiated to raise his commission from $240,000 to $320,000

Hands shook: The guys shook hands after agreeing to the deal that also gained Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards

Lucrative listing: Dan earlier offered Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards if he sold the four-bedroom unit

Penthouse unit: Steve was given a tour of the penthouse going for $29.5 million

The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River.

The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months.

Sofia worked on the original renovation and her insight helped Ryan showcase the space.

Masks on: The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River amid the pandemic

Fresh look: The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months

Empty pool: An empty pool wasn't helping Ryan sell the place

Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project.

The bi-coastal broker pledged to sell the 2,766 square foot penthouse that featured $750,000 worth of custom furniture, chef's kitchen and a 1,200 square foot wrap-around terrace.

Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical.

Fredrik in a confessional said that Ryan should be honest with him and stated they did not have to be friends.

Million Dollar Listing New York will return next week on Bravo.

Penthouse unit: Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project

Reached out: Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lottie Tomlinson looked sensational in a blue mini dress as she attended the Ghost fragrance launch at the Mandrake Hotel in London on Thursday evening.

The make-up artist, 23, made sure to put on a leggy display in the thigh skimming zig-zag patterned halter-neck number.

The revealing outfit had a low-cut neck line with an o-ring detail in between the bust, as she completed the ensemble with netted cream heels.

Stunning: Lottie Tomlinson, 23 looked sensational in a blue patterned mini dress as she attended the Ghost fragrances launch at the Mandrake Hotel in London on Thursday evening

Her ultra-long dark blonde locks were swept back off her face in a half-up-half-down style as she attended the event for the launch the new perfume Orb of Night.

The hairdo revealed a glamorously made up face, complete with fake eyelashes, golden eye shadow, and nude coloured lipgloss over her full pout.

Accessorising the look, she slung a dark blue denim baguette bag over her shoulder and opted for a Dior necklace and chunky gold hooped earrings.

Wow: Putting on a leggy display in the revealing number, which had a low-cut neck line with an o-ring detail in between the bust, and she completed the ensemble with netted cream heels

In other snaps, she posed with the Love Island star Harley Brash who looked chic in a cream patterned crop top with matching jeans.

Harley, 22, topped off the look with bright orange heels, and slicked her hair back into a very sleek up-do.

Lottie was later seen leaving the event with a tote-bag full of goodies.

Gorgeous: Lottie's ultra-long dark blonde locks were swept back off her face in a half-up-half-down style as she attended the event for the launch the new perfume Orb of Night

Friends: In other snaps, she posed with the Love Island star Harley Brash, 22, who looked chic in a cream patterned crop top with matching jeans

Lottie and her boyfriend Lewis Burton, 29, recently packed on the PDA for the influencer's 23rd birthday earlier this month.

Lottie and former tennis player were revealed to be seeing each other last July - five months after Lewis' ex Caroline Flack tragically took her own life.

In December, the influencer spoke about wanting kids during an interview with PrettyLittleThing: 'Yes I definitely want kids, I want five!'

Sensational: Later in the evening, she stepped out with a glamorously made up face, complete with fake eyelashes, golden eye shadow, and a pink lipgloss over her full pout

The details: Accessorising the look, she slung a dark blue denim baguette bag over her shoulder and opted for a Dior necklace and chunky gold hooped earrings

Other glamorous stars in attendance included Ferne McCann, 31, who looked typically glamorous in a thigh-skimming black shirt dress.

Teaming the gorgeous piece with a chic pair of open-toe heels, Ferne wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a ponytail and carried her belongings in a stylish bright yellow handbag.

Cinching her dress in at the waist with a wraparound belt, the former TOWIE star layered the tailored piece over what appeared to be a silk black slip dress.

Wow: Ferne McCann, 31, was also in attendance, and looked typically glamorous in a thigh-skimming black shirt dress

Hair up: Ferne wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a ponytail and opted for a full face of expertly applied glam

Also stepping out on Thursday Love Island stars Yewande Biala and Harley Brash, Survival Of The Fittest star Mariam Musa and The Circle's Manrika Khaira.

Yewande, 27, put on a busty display in a low-cut black dress and added height to her frame in chic open-toe heels

Mariam, 26, looked typically stylish in a silk corset top that offered a glimpse of her taut midriff.

Cinched: Cinching her dress in at the waist with a wraparound belt, the former TOWIE star layered the tailored piece over what appeared to be a silk black slip dress

Happy: Doting mother Ferne appeared in high spirits while playfully posing for snaps with stylist Ellis Ranson

Meanwhile, Manrika, 25, teamed a show-stopping metallic dress with stylish heels.

Ferne's outing comes after she revealed she still wants her happily ever after and is 'such a sucker for love' after splitting from her marketing manager beau Jack Padgett in June.

She told The Sun: 'I am such a sucker for love - I love love so much, and of course I want to find my happy ever after.'

The blonde beauty only had positive things to say about Jack, 27, describing the breakup as 'mature'.

Chic: Yewande Biala, 27, put on a busty display in a low-cut black dress and added height to her frame in chic open-toe heels

Hair down: Yewande looked stunning with her glossy hair worn loose

'But it's been such a mature, grown-up breakup - and no one did anything wrong. I've learned so much from this relationship and from Jack, and we had some beautiful times,' she said.

Ferne and Jack moved in together amid the winter lockdown shortly after they began dating, and admitted that taking the next step in their relationship was its downfall.

'But in the end, it also accelerated our breakup, because coming out of lockdown and the world opening back up meant suddenly our lives were very different and we were like passing ships,' she explained.

Show-stopping: Manrika Khaira, 25, teamed a show-stopping metallic dress with stylish heels

Silk: Mariam Musa, 26, looked typically stylish in a silk corset top that offered a glimpse of her taut midriff

Working her best angles: Ferne made sure to work her best angles for photographers

High spirits: The star appeared in high spirits as she left the event

Luxury: On her right wrist Ferne was wearing a luxury watch

Phone: The mother-of-one clutched her phone as she went about her night

Swept back: Harley wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a bun

Hoops: The TV personality accessorised with large hoop earrings

Immaculate: Harley was sporting an immaculate white pedicure

Looking good: Manrika worked her best angles, looking back over her shoulder at a photographer
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to make a stylish display.

And Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening.

The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with a pearl detailing.

Stunning: Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening

The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings.

The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up.

Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event and were spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis.

The pair looked dapper in three-piece black suits with silk bow ties and white shirts.

Wow! The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with pearl detailing

Gorgeous: The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings

Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures.

Also joining the stylish stars was pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit.

The presenter looked sensational in the striking ensemble and posed up a storm as she joined Iris for a snap at the glitzy gala.

Earlier in the day Iris also attended the Formula E 2021 BMW i E-Prix, displaying her midriff in a quirky blue plaid print dress.

Pose: The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up

Beautiful: Iris Law posed for a snap with French racing driverJean-Eric Vergne

While last month, Iris looked sensational as she displayed her long slender legs in a slinky red and white summer dress on Instagram.

The model who debuted a blue buzzcut, looked the picture of confidence as she sat on the step of a rustic building to pose for the camera.

The midi dress perfectly highlighted Iris' tan and rode up a little in the warm breeze.

She wore a blue bra beneath her dress, almost matching the shade of her newly dyed hair.

Double trouble: Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event are where spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis (Centre)

Smile: Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures

Smile! Iris was joined by pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit, for a stunning snap at the event

Glam: Nicki looked sensational in her jumpsuit and wore her blonde locks down

Iris gazed off into the distance from behind her shades as she munched on an apple.

She accessorised with a simple gold chain necklace and matching bracelets on each wrist.

The London native debuted her buzz cut in British Vogue at the beginning of July and explained it was for her role in upcoming series Pistol where she plays Soo Catwoman.

All in the details: She accessorised with a selection of necklaces and bracelets
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The scale of Katarina Johnson-Thompson's devastation over her Olympic heartbreak was spelled out on Thursday and then compounded by a heptathlon leaderboard that is less than formidable.

In a statement raw with honesty, the 28-year-old detailed the 'miracle' she required to get to Tokyo in the wake of her ruptured Achilles last year, before telling of her belief that she was within reach of a medal when her right calf failed in the 200m.

Her breakdown wrecked that unexpected possibility, and it can only have added to the world champion's frustration that the scores through six of seven disciplines have indicated a bronze medal would have been well within reach.

Katarina Johnson-Thompson has made an emotional statement after her Olympic heartbreak

The Team GB star collapsed in the middle of her heptathlon bid with an Achilles problem

'I don't know where to begin in trying to explain how I feel,' she wrote on social media. 'Only a handful of people understand what I have been through. Even a smaller amount understand the mental and physical challenges I've faced trying to make it back in time through a pandemic after my Achilles rupture the back end of December.'

In emotive scenes at the Olympic Stadium on Wednesday, Johnson-Thompson refused a wheelchair when she was stricken on the track, and instead insisted on finishing under her own steam before withdrawing from the competition.

She explained: 'I started the year in a wheelchair and I was not willing to end my Olympic campaign the same way.

'To make it to the line was a miracle, not only to do that but to be on my way to putting a decent score together is heartbreaking. I truly believed I was capable of winning a medal despite having up to half a year of missed training.

The 28-year-old's emotional statement comes around 24 hours after she pulled up with injury

The 28-year-old picked herself to bravely hobble over the 200m race line after the injury

'More than ever I'm proud that I showed up, put myself out there and tried. It would have been very easy to shy away and pull out, to say I wasn't ready and blame the injury, but I'm not that type of athlete or person. I am a fighter. I'm gritty and I find it extremely hard to give up.

'I've sacrificed so much, moving my entire life to France five years ago, away from my family and friends. I've lost heart knowing that the work my team and I have done for this last eight months was for this outcome and I hate that my story has played out in more heartbreak.

'I've been knocked so many times and got back up, but it will take a lot of time for me to process this reality.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bukayo Saka was greeted by a wall of supportive messages from Arsenal fans after he returned to his club for the first time since receiving racist abuse during England's Euro 2020 campaign.

The 19-year-old starred for the Three Lions this summer and played a key role in Gareth Southgate's side reaching the final, but the teenager missed the decisive penalty against Italy in the final and was racially abused alongside other England stars.

Saka was handed an extended holiday by Arsenal because of his international exploits this summer, with the Gunners collecting messages from fans while he was away to show him on his return.

Supporters wrote letters to the winger which Arsenal then placed on a wall in their training ground, while the Premier League club also donated flags and portraits in support of Saka, while one person gifted him a small bear wearing an England shirt, which the player claims he will be taking home.

England star Bukayo Saka was presented with a wall of messages from Arsenal fans after he was racially abused on England duty at Euro 2020

Saka, 19, starred for England this summer but missed the vital penalty in the final loss to Italy

💬 "How do I even say thank you for all of this?"



Just look at the incredible love and support from our fans to @BukayoSaka87



Thank you ❤️ pic.twitter.com/vznIV7Ubmn — Arsenal (@Arsenal) August 4, 2021

When the 19-year-old first saw the large wall of messages, Saka told the club's official channel: 'Oh my God. It's getting bigger as I get closer.'

Saka took time to read some of the messages, including one from a child who wanted to buy the Arsenal and England star an ice cream using his pocket money.

After reading that letter, Saka said: 'He said we would play football in the park and he would let me in.'

When he finished reading the messages, Saka said: 'How do I even say thank you for all this? Can I just pick it all up and take it home? Can you help me though?'

Arsenal fans donated flags, portraits and wrote letters to their teenage attacking star

Arsenal published a statement immediately after Saka received the abuse on July 11, saying they were 'proud' of their player and told him to 'hold your head high'.

The statement read: 'Bukayo has been with us since he was seven and the whole club couldn’t have been prouder to see him represent England throughout the tournament. You could feel it right across the club.

'We witnessed the leadership and character we’ve always known and loved in Bukayo. However, this feeling of pride quickly turned to sorrow at the racist comments our young player was subjected to on his social media platforms after the final whistle.

'Once again, we are sad to have to say we condemn the racism towards a number of black players. This cannot continue and the social media platforms and authorities must act to ensure this disgusting abuse to which our players are subjected on a daily basis stops now.

One fan also gave Saka an England bear which the 19-year-old will take home with him

'We have processes in place internally at Arsenal to ensure our players are supported both emotionally and practically on this issue but sadly there is only so much we can do.

'Our message to Bukayo is: hold your head high, we are so very proud of you and we cannot wait to welcome you back home to Arsenal soon.'

Saka published his own statement after receiving the abuse, claiming he knew he would receive the racist comments immediately after missing the penalty against Italy.

'I knew instantly the type of hate that I was about to receive, that is a sad reality,' Saka wrote on Instagram.

Saka said he knew he was going to be racially abused as soon as he missed the penalty

Saka was consoled by Gareth Southgate and the player said he felt he let England down

'There is no place for racism or hate of any kind in football or in any area of society and to the majority of people coming together to call out the people sending these messages, by taking action and reporting these comments to the police and by driving out the hate by being kind to one another, we will win.'

Saka's England team-mates Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho - who also missed from the spot in the defeat to Italy - were racially abused in a similar fashion and the Manchester Untied duo published their own statements condemning the racism.

Sancho, 21, said: 'I'm not going to pretend that I didn't see the racial abuse that me and my brothers Marcus and Bukayo received after the game, but sadly it's nothing new. As a society we need to do better, and hold these people accountable.

'Hate will never win. To all the young people who have received similar abuse, hold your heads up high and keep chasing the dream.

Saka's England team-mates Jadon Sancho (middle) and Marcus Rashford (right) were also racially abused after they missed penalties against Italy

Rashford saw his Greater Manchester mural defaced before fans covered the vandalism with positive messages

'I am proud of this England team and how we have united the whole nation in what has been a difficult 18 months for so many people. Much as we wanted to win the tournament, we will build and learn from this experience going forward.'

Rashford, who saw his mural in Greater Manchester vandalised after the final, added: 'I've grown into a sport where I expect to read things written about myself. Whether it be the colour of my skin, where I grew up or, most recently, how I decide to spend my time off the pitch.

'I can take critique of my performance all day long, my penalty was not good enough. But I will never apologise for who I am and where I came from. I've felt no prouder moment than wearing those three lions on my chest and seeing my family cheer me on in a crowd of 10s of thousands.

'I'm Marcus Rashford, 23-year-old black man from Withington and Wythenshawe, south Manchester. If I have nothing else I have that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Riyad Mahrez insisted that Manchester City will not suffer from complacency as they bid to retain the Premier League title.

City finished 12 points clear last season and have been installed as favourites ahead of starting their defence at Tottenham on Sunday.

Mahrez also claimed they have unfinished business in the Champions League after the 1-0 defeat by Chelsea in May's final.

Riyad Mahrez says Manchester City have the 'right mentality' to retain the title this season

City go into the new campaign as favourites after winning the league last year by 12 points

'A normal human being always becomes complacent when you start winning things,' Mahrez said.

'That's human nature. We are here because the club chose us - they think we have the right mentality. The manager pushes us every day, every season. He never takes it easy.

'Every season they say it's going to be tighter and tighter and this season it will be to be fair. This season will be tough, Chelsea are very good - Liverpool, United, Arsenal, Tottenham, Leicester too. We are ready.

Mahrez says City will take more confidence after their Champions League final defeat

'We'll take more confidence into Europe. We showed how good we are but that is no guarantee this year.

'We deserved to win it. With the team we have and the football we were playing, we didn't deserve to lose. I don't think anyone spoke afterwards. Everyone was very sad. It was difficult to speak about anything.'

Meanwhile, Phil Foden confirmed he will miss the first month of the season with a foot injury sustained at the European Championship. 'Hopefully it flies by and I can just get back out on the pitch,' Foden said.

Riyad Mahrez was speaking ahead of the release of ‘Together’, available exclusively to City+ members from Thursday 12th August before being released globally on YouTube on the 19th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shaun Wright-Phillips has boldly claimed that Ben White is a better signing than Raphael Varane as the former Man City star excited at the £50million man's arrival at Arsenal.

White, 23, sealed his mega-money move to the Gunners following the Euros this summer, having impressed at Brighton last season and under Marcelo Bielsa at Leeds in 2019-20.

Eyebrows have been raised, however, at the huge fee Arsenal have shelled out for the Englishman, particularly given the backdrop of Manchester United signing four-time Champions League winner Varane for £42m.

Shaun Wright-Phillips claims Ben White (L) is a better signing than Raphael Varane (R)

White, 23, sealed a £50m move to Arsenal from Brighton this summer in a statement transfer

But Wright-Phillips, whose father Ian is hailed as an Arsenal legend, believes that Mikel Arteta has landed the better defender, lavishing praise on White's 'old-school mentality'.

‘One thing I thought Arsenal missed was a defender like him,’ Wright-Phillips told talkSPORT via Metro. ‘He’s got old an old-school mentality but he can play football as well.’

Asked if White will do better at Arsenal than Varane at United, he added: ‘Yes I personally do. I know it’s a big statement, but he is used to the Premier League and he is used to defending a lot for Brighton, week in, week out.

The Englishman's fee has been questioned given United have paid £42m for Varane of Madrid

‘Varane has come into a whole new league and he is going to put under immense pressure.’

Asked which of the two defenders he would rather sign, if he had the choice, Wright-Phillips claimed: ‘At this moment, I would definitely say Ben White.’

White arrives in North London with big expectations to help fix Arsenal's leaky and, on occasion, calamitous defence.

Yet Wright-Phillips claims that White's 'old-school mentality' makes him a better signing

Despite boasting one of the best defensive records in the league last season, comical defending proved to be the Gunners' undoing as Arteta's side finished in eighth position - failing to qualify for European football of any kind.

Meanwhile, Varane is the missing piece of United's defence that Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has long sought, with Victor Lindelof proving to be an unreliable partner for £80m man Harry Maguire.

Varane's vast experience - in which he has won all there is to win at club level, as well as the World Cup - is hoped to help United finally win silverware under the Norwegian.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Lineker and Piers Morgan have led the applause for Brentford fans for their standing ovation given to Arsenal star Bukayo Saka.

The Gunners youngster came off the bench on the 59th minute of their Premier League season opening game to a huge reception from supporters of newly promoted Brentford.

It comes after the teenager was subject to shocking racist abuse following his decisive penalty miss in England's Euro 2020 final defeat to Italy.

Former England star and television pundit Lineker led the praise for the Bees, tweeting: 'That really is a beautiful reception for @BukayoSaka87 from the @BrentfordFC fans. Well played.'

Gunners fan Piers Morgan said it was a strong message against racism, which England stars Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford like Saka were also subject to after their penalty shootout defeat.

He tweeted: ' Wow. That was quite something. A rousing prolonged standing ovation from Brentford fans for #Saka when he came on - what a stunningly emphatic repudiation of racism.'

Brentford supporters gave Bukayo Saka a standing ovation when he came on as a substitute

The Arsenal star was subject to shocking racist abuse after England's Euro 2020 final defeat

Tottenham fans also applauded Saka in a pre-season friendly and displayed this banner

It's not the first time since the Euros that football fans have come together to show their support for the teenager.

Tottenham fans put their bitter rivalry with Arsenal aside in their pre-season friendly against the Gunners last week.

Saka replaced replaced Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang in the second half and was greeted with a standing ovation and a round of applause.

The Tottenham fans also displayed a banner which read: 'North London stands with Bukayo Saka and all players against racism and discrimination.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Kane is planning to make his return to action for Tottenham in Thursday's Europa Conference League fixture away to Pacos de Ferreira.

Kane wasn't involved on Sunday as Tottenham started their Premier League campaign with a 1-0 victory over Manchester City, who have been pursuing the England captain all summer.

As reported by The Athletic, Kane is eager to feature for Tottenham either on Thursday or away to Wolves on Sunday.

Harry Kane is planning to make his return for Tottenham against Pacos de Ferreira this week

Kane has been included in Tottenham's list of eligible players for the game in Portugal but Tanguy Ndombele and Serge Aurier have been left out.

Having yet to be fully integrated back into training with the Tottenham squad, Kane wasn't considered fit enough to play against City.

Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo stressed that Kane remains part of his plans

City's need for a striker was re-emphasised by their display against Tottenham but there are now just over two weeks for Pep Guardiola's side to get a deal done for Kane.

After the game Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo stressed that Kane is part of his plans despite the persistent speculation surrounding him.

He said: 'Yes, Harry, like Bryan (Gil), Cristian Romero, they joined us later.

'Harry is preparing himself and when he's ready he'll join the group and help the team.'

The play-off round first-leg fixture against Pacos de Ferreira could represent an opportunity to ease Kane back into action as he looks to build up his match fitness.

If he doesn't face Pacos de Ferreira Kane could be involved against Wolves next weekend

Kane remains wanted by Pep Guardiola and Manchester City but a deal has yet to materialise

Kane made himself available for the game against City despite his delayed return to training following his involvement at Euro 2020.

Despite not being deemed fit enough to play, Sky Sports reported that Kane was at the stadium to watch the game on Sunday.

Tottenham are not expecting to sell Kane this month, with the striker having three years left on his contract, but the situation could still change.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pep Guardiola insists Jack Grealish had an 'incredible debut' for Manchester City – despite not being able to prevent a 1-0 defeat by Tottenham on the opening day of the Premier League season.

City's new £100million signing made his Premier League bow for the club on Sunday and was even named in the starting XI by Guardiola, completing the full 90 minutes at White Hart Lane.

The 25-year-old was ultimately powerless in preventing defeat on his debut, with Son Heung-min scoring a superb winner in front of a capacity crowd at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium.

Pep Guardiola (right) insists Jack Grealish (left) had an 'incredible debut' for Manchester City

However, Guardiola was left mightily impressed by the former Aston Villa skipper's performance and is sure the England international will go on to play a key role this season.

When asked what impressed him most, Guardiola told reporters after the game: 'His personality and influence. He got three or four fouls in the first minutes and immediately he woke up and showed himself.

'He has incredible continuity, he is so dangerous close to the box, when we have the ball he always has an extra pass.

'He got three or four fouls in the first minutes and immediately he woke up and showed. He has incredible continuity, he is so dangerous close to the box, when we have the ball he always has an extra pass.

City fell to a 1-0 defeat and Grealish was booked in the second-half for a tackle on Lucas Moura

Grealish couldn't make an impact on the game as City struggled to break Tottenham down

'He had an incredible game and incredible debut and will be so important for us. I congratulate him for having the personality to try and try until the end.'

Raheem Sterling was also left impressed by Grealish's impact, and believes there's plenty more to come from his Three Lions team-mate.

'I played with Jack a few times,' he said on the club's official website. 'It's a good partnership but it's still early days with me and him.

'We will learn each other's game more as the season goes on and hopefully build a better partnership for the rest of the campaign.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's set to make a grand return Channel 4's upcoming Changing Rooms reboot

But Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen has revealed that he's glad that original host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the helm as he feared the reboot would look like 'Jurassic Park'.

In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation'.

Honest: Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen revealed that he's glad that original Changing Rooms host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the reboot as he feared it would look like 'Jurassic Park'

So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003.

On whether he would have liked Carol to return as the show's host, he told The Sun: 'No, and hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention.

'And to be fair, I resisted it for a long time. I was very keen that they really should look at finding possibilities with other people.

'Otherwise, it would just be a revival, actually it always needed to be a reboot.'

No going back: In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation' (Carol pictured in 2015)

The new series will instead be hosted by Naked Attraction star Anna Richardson.

Laurence also likened Changing Rooms to the X Factor in the fact that it was one of the first reality shows, adding that pal Simon Cowell would 'adore' being compared to him.

It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come.

The home makeover show, which previously ran from 1996-2004, follows a terrifyingly trusting format in which two sets of neighbours swap keys to their homes to create each other's 'dream room' in just two days.

Way back when: So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003 (pictured the Changing Rooms cast in 1998)

Opinion: 'Hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention'

The trailer for the new series of the cult 90s show sees contestants gasping, screaming and crying - with one simply uttering: 'I really am scared'.

First look footage shows Anna and Laurence getting stuck in with helping the public refurbish their neighbour's homes, alongside their designers Jordan Cluroe and Russell Whitehead.

'Friends for 25 years? Not for much longer,' jokes Anna as the neighbours get started painting each other's homes with no idea if they'll approve their decor decisions.

Tears and tantrums: It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come

Nervous: The show is set to return on Wednesday August 18 and will be hosted by long-term star Laurence, as well as newcomer Anna Richardson (pictured)

The series is a long time coming, after it was announced in August last year that Channel 4 would be re-launching the much-loved BBC show.

Davina McCall was originally slated to host, but after filming was rescheduled twice due to coronavirus lockdowns, she could not longer commit to the dates.

Despite the upheaval, long-term host Lawrence exclaims in the trailer: 'It's like we were never away!' as decorating chaos reigns around him.

The first episode of Changing Rooms will take place in Swansea, South Wales and airs on Channel 4 at 8pm on August 18.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrea Spendolini-Sirieix is targeting an Olympic medal in the city of love after celebrating her superb seventh-place finish with her matchmaker father Fred.

The 16-year-old Team GB diver was in tears as she spoke to her dad – the maître d' on Channel 4’s - on the poolside screen following the final of the 10m platform.

Spendolini-Sirieix admitted she had exceeded all of her expectations with her performance on her Games debut at the Tokyo Aquatics Centre.

Andrea Spendolini-Sirieix came seventh in her Olympic debut in women's 10m platform final

She spoke to her family and father Fred, host of First Dates, via video link after the final

But now she wants to push for a podium place at Paris 2024, where she hopes to be cheered on by the French half of her family, including her father.

‘It definitely gives me confidence for Paris,’ said last year’s BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year.

‘That is very close to my grandparents so my whole family can come. Hopefully, Covid has gone because I want my family to come and watch. I am very, very excited.’

Hongchan Quan of China, aged 14, won the gold medal in the women's 10m platform final

Spendolini-Sirieix said Quan was 'amazing'. 'She’s 14 and she’s doing stuff like that'

Back in England, Fred was supporting his daughter throughout the final with multiple posts on social media.

And he could certainly be proud of the girl he calls ‘mon canard’, who took to the Olympics like a duck to water as she qualified for the final in eighth and then increased that by a place with a solid five dives.

‘I saw my dad, my mum, my cousins and my aunties on the Athlete Moment screen and I started crying,’ admitted the teenager, who won two medals at May’s European Championships.

‘They said they were very proud of me and that I should be proud as well.

‘I’ve definitely exceeded my expectations. I couldn’t ask for a better first Olympics.’

Andrea is the daughter of Fred Sirieix, the maitre d' on hit Channel 4 show First Dates

Spendolini-Sirieix, 16, was named BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year in 2020

Spendolini-Sirieix’s team-mate Lois Toulson, 21, finished ninth, but the gold went to China’s incredible 14-year-old Hongchan Quan, whose dominant display included two perfect-10 dives.

She became the youngest women’s Olympic diving champion in 29 years, with the silver going to her 15-year-old team-mate Yuxi Chen.

‘She’s 14 and she’s doing stuff like that, I don’t know what to add,’ admitted Spendolini-Sirieix. ‘When we were warming up and we were waiting to be called out, she was dancing, she was laughing, it looked like she had no nerves. She’s amazing.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bayern Munich's sporting director, Hasan Salihamidzic, has confirmed the club is interested in signing Borussia Dortmund striker Erling Haaland.

The 21-year-old has become one of the most sought after players in the world recently with some of Europe's elite clubs including Chelsea, Manchester City, Manchester United all interested in the forward.

Bayern Munich have now become the latest club to be linked to the Norwegian with Salihamidzic claiming they would be 'amateurs' to not go after him.

Erling Haaland is a man in demand with likes of Chelsea, Real Madrid, Manchester City linked

Hasan Salihamidzic has confirmed that Bayern are interested in buying Haaland

He told German TV channel Sport1: ' This is a top player that probably the whole world wants. Of course we are looking there. Otherwise we would be complete amateurs.

Haaland has a £68million release clause which becomes active from next summer but it has been reported that Dortmund are demanding £150million from any team looking to acquire him.

The striker was heavily linked with a move to Chelsea this summer but he distanced himself away from the reported £150million fee - insisting that he is happy to stay at Dortmund.

Sporting director Sebastian Kehl has claimed that Haaland is eager to remain at Dortmund

He said: 'I have three years left on my contract, I'm enjoying my time here. I hope it's only rumours because it's a lot of money for a person.'

Following Saturday's first round German Cup win, Dortmund's sporting director Sebastian Kehl confirmed Haaland's intends on remaining with the club: 'Erling (Haaland) feels incredibly comfortable with us.

'He wants to achieve something with this team - and I don’t have the feeling at all that he wants away.'

Haaland had an outstanding campaign last season, scoring 41 goals in all competitions - helping Dortmund land a place in the Champions League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away,' the 34-year-old reality star said in her 11-minute vlog on The Pratts' YouTube channel.

Heidi prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away!' The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs.

'I can have intercourse in two days,' the Colorado-born blonde smiled.

'Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see. I'm just so happy I had this done. I'm feeling good. I have no cramping and the anesthesia felt great.'

Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers.

Vlogger: The 34-year-old reality star prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2

'All done!' A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs

The Colorado-born blonde said: 'I can have intercourse in two days. Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see'

'Thank you!' Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers

On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted via Instastory that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery.

That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought.'

'Part of me was a little disappointed like, "Aw man is that not the reason that I'm not getting pregnant?"' Heidi - who boasts 3M social media followers - lamented over Instastory.

'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out...

Oops! On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery

'Part of me was a little disappointed': That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought'

Heidi continued: 'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out'

'I'm so thankful for the child I have. I'm going to have faith. I'm meant to have another one. I'm gonna have another one. Let it go. I have a beautiful house, food, water, a husband I love, a healthy son. What else can you do?'

Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday.

The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4.

July 8 family portrait: Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe': The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe,' Spencer said on the Unpopular with Jacques Peterson podcast on July 12.

'They would have to use another production company. This production company wouldn't even do it. They won't even mess with this cast. There's no way. I think it would be like Gossip Girl with a new cast of kids. That's the only chance.'

Back in 2006-2010, the Laguna Beach spin-off was frequently criticized for fabricating storylines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta clashed with Tottenham midfielder Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg during Sunday's pre-season friendly.

Hojbjerg slid to attempt to keep the ball in play but ended up almost catching Arteta.

After Hojbjerg told Arteta to get back into his technical area the Arsenal boss responded by telling the Tottenham player to stop talking by making a shush gesture.

Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta clashed with Tottenham's Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg during a friendly

Hojbjerg told Arteta to return to his technical area and the Spaniard made a shush gesture

Mikel Arteta has an altercation with Tottenham midfielder Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg on the touchline, before Arteta shushes him. 😂 #afc pic.twitter.com/Hbcklt9yXK — afcstuff (@afcstuff) August 8, 2021

The pair exchanged words, with Arsenal midfielder Granit Xhaka coming across to intervene.

The Tottenham supporters in attendance expressed their frustration with Arteta by booing him.

Tottenham prevailed 1-0 at home to the Gunners, with Son Heung-min scoring the only goal of the game in the 79th minute.

The pair continued to exchange words as the rivalry continued despite it being a friendly

Despite it being a friendly there were still some rather forceful challenges during the north London derby, some of which went unpunished.

Arteta will surely have been concerned with Arsenal's lack of ruthlessness in attack going into their Premier League opener against Brentford.

Spurs meanwhile will hope the win will give them momentum ahead of a huge opening day clash against defending champions Manchester City
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Diogo Jota has been training with former sprinter Francis Obikwelu as he looks to get himself in peak physical condition ahead of the new season.

The Portuguese star has already found his scoring boots for Liverpool in pre-season, having returned from his time off following his involvement in the Euros over the summer.

But with his focus now back on Liverpool, Jota has brought in some help in the form of 42-year-old Obikwelu in an attempt to bring the best out of himself and keep up with the pace of his teammates Mo Salah and Sadio Mane.

Diogo Jota has been training with former Portuguese Olympic sprinter Francis Obikwelu

The pair discussed speed and recovery as the footballer looked to pick up some helpful tips

Jota will be hoping the advice helps him keep up with speedsters Sadio Mane and Mo Salah

Obikwelu was born in Nigeria, but became a Portuguese citizen in 2001 and decided to compete for them from that point onwards.

The sprinter won silver at the 2004 Olympics in Athens - his time of 9.86 seconds remained his personal best for the duration of his career and is still the European record over the distance.

Obikwelu also won three European Championship golds during his career, and so few are better placed than him to help Jota gain that extra bit of speed.

'In football, we do a proper pre-season and then there are so many matches until December,' Jota said.

Jota spoke of how difficult he finds it to cope with the hectic fixture list in the Premier League

'But then there's still half a season to go, and sometimes we're dealing with some fatigue and we could use some time to switch off.'

But Obikwelu believes he has the answer to that issue of tiredness and dealing with a hectic schedule of fixtures.

'I can tell you why you have that issue,' Obikwelu said. 'Your nervous system isn't activated. It's the body's engine.'

Jota will be hoping all this advice helps him become a regular in Jurgen Klopp's side this season.

A mixture of injuries and his manager's rotation faith in the front three of Mane, Salah and Roberto Firmino meant the 24-year-old only started 12 Premier League matches last season.

But Jota still scored nine league goals for the Reds, and will be hoping more opportunities leads to more goals throughout the upcoming campaign.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham striker Harry Kane will take his five-day PCR coronavirus test ahead of potentially joining in group training on Friday.

The England captain has been in self-isolation at the club's training complex since Saturday, five days after Spurs expected him back from his holiday to the Bahamas.

Kane, who has been training individually, will take a coronavirus test on Thursday as part of the test-and-release scheme following his return from an amber list destination and if he is negative he will be clear to join group training on Friday.

Harry Kane is due to return to Tottenham training on Friday if he tests negative for Covid-19

Kane is self-isolating after his much-publicised delayed return from a post-Euro 2020 break

Kane, pictured here on a different break, went on holiday to the Bahamas after Euro 2020

That would leave him just two sessions before the season opener against champions Manchester City on Sunday - a game boss Nuno Espirito Santo had previously said he would be available for.

Whether that is the case after such a short period of time with the squad remains to be seen, while there will also be huge question marks over Kane's frame of mind, having been linked with a move to City this summer.

Kane and Nuno were due to hold talks earlier this week for the first time since the latter's appointment last month, with the Portuguese keen to 'solve all the situations'.

Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo (centre) has said Kane will be available against City

City boss Pep Guardiola admitted their interest in signing Kane last week, but said unless Spurs were willing to negotiate then it was 'finished'.

The north London club have remained insistent throughout that their star striker is not for sale and it would need a fee north of £150million to even get them to the negotiating table.

Kane was expected back at the club's Enfield training base for pre-season testing last Monday but did not show and it later emerged he was still on holiday in the Bahamas before making a pitstop in Florida.

The 28-year-old broke his silence last Friday by revealing he would return to the club the following day 'as planned' and insisted he would never refuse to train with the club.

Pep Guardiola (left) said a Kane deal needs Spurs chairman Daniel Levy (right) to negotiate

New signing Bryan Gil trained with his new team-mates for the first time on Wednesday following his return from the Olympics.

The 20-year-old, who signed from Sevilla, won a silver medal with Spain in Tokyo but has already integrated into the squad after Covid checks following his arrival in London.

Meanwhile, goalkeeper Alfie Whiteman has joined Swedish side Degerfors on a season-long loan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mauricio Pochettino admits he is 'very happy' with Kylian Mbappe's commitment after the Paris Saint-Germain forward was booed by some of his own supporters on Saturday.

On the day PSG presented Lionel Messi to the Parc des Princes fans, Mbappe was jeered by sections of the Paris home crowd before kick-off in his side's 4-2 league win over Strasbourg - which the French forward scored in.

Mbappe has been linked with a move away PSG with the Frenchman still yet to commit to an extension on his contract that ends in ten months from now, but PSG boss Pochettino claimed he did not hear any booing.

Mauricio Pochettino (left) is happy with Kylian Mbappe (right) despite PSG fans booing him

Mbappe was jeered by some of the PSG fans before kick-off when his name was read out

'I did not hear the whistles,' the Argentine said after the game. 'I am very happy with him. He's focused on what he needs to do and had a really good game. He must continue on this path.

'It is very important for us to have our supporters around us. It's extraordinary and we missed them dearly. Football is completely different with the spectators.

'With the presentation of the newcomers, it was a great evening for PSG. Now, we have to prepare them (the new signings) gradually, without taking too many risks, whether it is Leo Messi or the others.'

The French forward reacted by scoring in PSG's 4-2 win over Strasbourg on Saturday night

As well as Messi, PSG introduced fellow new signings Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Gini Wijnladum and Achraf Hakimi to their supporters, with the latter two playing in the victory over Strasbourg.

Mbappe, meanwhile, has continually been linked with a move to Real Madrid and will walk away from PSG for free next summer should he not agree a new deal at the club.

The 22-year-old was also the villain of French football earlier this summer when he missed the crucial spot-kick in France's Euro 2020 last-16 exit to Switzerland in June.

Before the match, PSG presented their new signings to the fans, including Lionel Messi (right)

But PSG have remained confident in keeping Mbappe at the club, with club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi insisting he will stay in the French capital.

Speaking at Messi's press conference: 'Everyone knows the future of Mbappe. He is a PSG player.

'Kylian is very competitive, he wants to win, he has publicly said that he does not want to leave the team and there are no doubts or excuses of any other kind. Mbappe stays'.

PSG continued their 100 per cent start to the Ligue 1 season by comfortably beating Strasbourg on Saturday night.

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi (above) claimed Mbappe will remain a player at the club

Pochettino's men raced into a three-goal lead after just 27 minutes with Mauro Icardi, Mbappe and Julian Draxler firing home.

Kevin Gameiro and Ludovic Ajorque pulled two goals back for Strasbourg after half-time to make matters nervous for PSG.

But a red card for visiting defender Alexander Dijku was followed by Pablo Sarabia's points-clinching fourth goal with four minutes to go.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British light heavyweight Joshua Buatsi knocked out Ricards Bolotniks in the 11th round at Matchroom's Fight Camp on Saturday night.

Unbeaten Buatsi has now won all of his 15 professional bouts and is closing in on a world title opportunity after the 13th knockout victory of his career.

It looked as though the 28-year-old Brit had won the contest when he floored his opponent with a vicious left hook in the sixth round.

Joshua Buatsi knocked out Latvian Ricards Bolotniks at Matchroom's Fight Camp on Saturday

Bolotniks was knocked out with a devastating right hand in the 11th round of the contest

However, the Latvian bravely fought his way back into the contest and the fight looked to be heading to the judge's scorecards, until Buatsi finished his opponent with a devastating right hand in the 11th round.

'He pushed me every round. He's a great champion,' said Buatsi.

'It was a good hard fight and I'm glad I managed to close the show.'

After the fight Buatsi took to Twitter, writing: 'When the opportunity presents itself, be ruthless. Respect to @LionBolotnik, a true fighter.'

Buatsi is closing in on an opportunity at a world title following his 15th successive victory

Andre Ward - the former pound-for-pound king who reigned supreme in the light-heavyweight division - hailed his 'great finish' and tipped him for bigger fights.

'Good win for Joshua Buatsi!' Ward wrote on Twitter. 'Everything that took place before the knockout is what he needed, to get him ready as he faces tougher competition. He needed to be able to go the rounds to prove to himself he could do it. Great finish!'

The 28-year-old who won a bronze medal at the 2016 Olympics is managed by world heavyweight champion Anthony Joshua.

Buatsi can now focus on bigger challenges that lay ahead as he prepares to face the leading light heavyweights in world boxing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amelia Hamlin wore a necklace with the letters L O R D encrusted in diamonds in an Instagram stories post. 'Lord' is boyfriend Scott Disick's nickname.

In the photo a bit of her hair is showing as well some of her black shirt that allows for cleavage.

The beauty, 20, wrote a cheeky caption along the bottom of the pic: 'Let the lord be with me.'

Spell it out: Amelia Hamlin wore a necklace with the letters L O R D encrusted in diamonds in an Instagram stories post

Cool couple: She has spent much of the summer documenting her sunny days with her 38-year-old boyfriend Scott and his three kids; seen in Malibu in July

Amelia's beau Scott has referred to himself as 'Lord Disick' for quite some time now, going as far as including the moniker in his Instagram handle.

She has spent much of the summer documenting her sunny days with her 38-year-old boyfriend and his three kids he has with ex Kourtney Kardashian.

They are Mason, Penelope and Reign.

Though they first began dating in October, Scott and Amelia made their relationship Instagram official earlier this year, with the couple often paying tribute to one another on their respective pages.

Before Amelia he was with Lionel Richie's daughter Sofia Richie, 22, who is also a model.

This comes after the social media sensation posted a pair of new pictures on Monday in a cute pair of Boux Avenue underwear.

It's love wrapped in a Hermes blanket: The pair have 18 years between them; seen this summer

Lisa Rinna's younger daughter complemented the cute undies with a white, cropped vest as she looked inside a stocked refrigerator.

She wore a gold watch on one wrist, a bracelet on the other, and a simple necklace.

In one photo she struck a pose holding a refrigerator door open and staring into the camera while her long, brunette hair fell down her back.

The next shot showed the influencer from the chin down with a bottle of water in her hand as she showed off her taut abs.

Boux Avenue dropped three fire emoji in the comments under the post.

Working up an appetite: The looker posted a pair of new pictures on Monday in a cute pair of Boux Avenue underwear

Quenched thirst: One shot showed the influencer from the chin down with a bottle of water in her hand as she put her taut abs on display

The young model is the new face of the UK clothing label as it expands to the North American market, according to Fashion Network.

She has been rolling out content in the stylish undergarments for several months.

Amelia's stuck to a theme of domestic simplicity, as most of her posts for the line of intimates have taken place in different parts of the home.

Body shot: The young model, who's dating Scott Disick, is the new face of the UK clothing label as it expands to the North American market
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid gushed about the latest addition to her shoe collection on Wednesday.

The 24-year-old supermodel shared snaps of herself trying on the new 'Superstuffed' Adidas trainers - which are designed to make the wearers feet look five times bigger than they actually are.

Bella flashed her waist in a crop top adorned with lips and baggy black jeans, as she tried on the sneakers amid a mass of other shoes in dressing room.

New kicks: Bella Hadid gushed about the latest addition to her shoe collection on Wednesday

She wore her dark locks loosely around her shoulders and appeared to have come straight from a blood test, with a bandage in the crook of her arm.

She thanked the designer Kerwin Frost in the caption, penning on Instagram: 'Hey thank you so much Kerwin for my new Super Stuffed Adidas I love them soooo much!!! I am always so proud of everything U do!! ❤️‍ [sic]'

Frost’s inaugural Adidas collab has additional padding on the tongue and ankle collar but the shoe still runs true to size.

She thanked the designer Kerwin Frost in the caption, penning on Instagram: 'Hey thank you so much Kerwin for my new Super Sfuffed Adidas I love them soooo much!!! I am always so proud of everything U do!! ❤️‍ [sic]'

Fancy footwear: The 24-year-old supermodel shared snaps of herself trying on the new Superstuffed Adidas trainers - which are designed to make the wearers feet look five times bigger than they actually are

Lithe: Bella flashed her waist in a crop top adorned with lips and baggy black jeans, as she tried on the sneakers amid a mass of other shoes in dressing room

Model behaviour: She wore her dark locks loosely around her shoulders and appeared to have come straight from a blood test, with a bandage in the crook of her arm

Otherwise, the shoe wears the traditional white-based color scheme combined with black overlay panels while 'Superstuffed' branding is printed on the lateral sides.

The shoe is part of a larger collection that will be arriving soon.

Bella is currently with her boyfriend, Marc Kalman, in New York City.

The two were first romantically connected this past July, although they have reportedly been seeing each other for well over a year.

Prior to becoming romantically involved with the art director, Hadid was in a long-term relationship with The Weeknd, which ended for good in 2019.

The now-couple went Instagram official with their relationship this past July with a now-deleted post made to the model's Instagram page.

However, a source recently spoke to Page Six and noted that the two had been seeing each other ever since last summer, with the insider noting that the two 'hid it well.'

Going public: Hadid and Kalman went public with their relationship with a now-deleted post that was made to her Instagram account in July

The individual also elaborated on the pair's methods that they used to keep their relationship a secret in its early stages.

'If they went out, he would come out first, get the car, and then she would get into the car. They would drive to a location, and he'd drop her off but not get out and go park the car,' they specified.

The insider went on to note that the pair 'were very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time.'

The source expressed that the two kept things toned down in public and opted for dates that included her friends.

Keeping it secret: A source recently spoke to Page Six and expressed that the couple was 'very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time

According to the individual, Hadid and Kalman never shared 'any PDA...and most of the time they were with other people, which of course made it difficult to prove that they were dating.'

However, the source noted that many people began speculating that the model was seeing her now-boyfriend when his car began being regularly seen at her residence.

They said: 'This new guy [at the time] was driving her around in his Porsche, and then the Porsche was [at her place] overnight multiple times...So it was like, "She's got to be hooking up with this dude."'

The insider concluded by speaking about their Instagram picture, which was later deleted, and noted that the two waited a year before going public with their romance.

Suspicious minds: The insider expressed that many of Hadid's friends speculated that she was seeing Kalman when his car began being seen outside of her residence; they are pictured in July

'They basically came out on their anniversary — or somewhere around it,' the source noted.

Hadid's older sister Gigi notably left a smiley face emoji in the post's comments section, while the model's other friends reacted similarly.

On Monday afternoon, the fashion industry figure shared a selfie to her Instagram Story, where she was seen posing in a packed dressing room.

Letting the world know: The source also expressed that Hadid and Kalman went public about their relationship 'on their anniversary — or somewhere around it'

The social media personality sported a revealing yellow bikini top and a dark miniskirt for the sizzling snap.

Her hair remained tied in a braid and she accessorized with numerous bracelets worn on both arms.

Hadid wrote that she was 'packing for fricking vacation' and that she 'can't wait' to embark on her summer getaway.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season is upon us with all the giddy excitement and optimism that brings.

We can expect the usual drama from the self-styled 'best league in the world' where, as we've seen time and time again, anyone can beat anyone.

Manchester City will be looking to defend their title but can expect to be pushed hard by Manchester United, Liverpool and European champions Chelsea.

Arsenal feature in the first part of our Premier League new season report cards

FA Cup holders Leicester City will be again trying to crack the top four, leading a cluster of sides with designs on qualifying for Europe.

And towards the bottom, the three newly-promoted clubs - Watford, Norwich and Brentford - will be hoping their Premier League experience isn't a brief one while the likes of Burnley, Brighton and Newcastle battle to keep heads above water.

Ahead of the big kick-off on Friday night, we will preview the new Premier League season in four parts, assessing the prospects for all 20 teams. Part One covers Arsenal through to Burnley.

ARSENAL

Was last season's eighth-placed finish just a blip or are Arsenal facing long-term decline to mid-table mediocrity and more mockery of their 'big six' status?

We're about to find out with the burden now heavily on Mikel Arteta to show he is making tangible progress after several years of drift at the Emirates Stadium.

Arteta has been striking an optimistic tone, underpinned by surprisingly efficient transfer business, and he will hope the absence of European competition in midweek will allow more breathing space in the fixture schedule to properly impart his philosophy.

With no European distractions, there really are no excuses for Mikel Arteta and Arsenal

Pressure to deliver a return to the top six comes not only from the point of prestige for Arsenal but financial necessity.

The club's net debt more than doubled to £108.2million as a result of Covid, they took out and repaid a £120m loan from the Bank of England, and their figures revealed £154m owed to other clubs in transfer fees. They can't be without European cash for too long.

Little wonder fans raged at the club's owners, the Kroenke family, amid the European Super League fiasco but all that hasn't stopped them spending this summer.

Defender Ben White is Arsenal's headline summer arrival, the defender costing £50m

£50m was spent on Brighton's Ben White to fix a notoriously leaky and error-prone defence, while the signings of defender Nuno Tavares and midfielder Albert Sambi Lokonga, both 21, confirmed Arteta wants a squad with a youthful complexion.

Arguably their best summer business, however, has been securing Kieran Tierney and Emile Smith Rowe to new long-term contracts.

Arteta must build his team around them - plus England's Euro star Bukayo Saka and, they hope, an injury-free Thomas Partey - as well as praying Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang starts scoring again after a barren run in the second half of last season.

Securing Emile Smith Rowe (left) to a new long-term contract is also a summer positive

Their summer transfer business is unlikely to be finished but the team's core is in place.

Defeats by London rivals Chelsea and Tottenham in the Mind Series have served as a reminder of how much ground Arsenal need to make up.

Games with Chelsea and Man City before the end of August mean that pressure on the manager is likely to increase very quickly. It could go very wrong, very soon but they do certainly look better-placed than last season.

Gunners fans will hope to see more from midfielder Thomas Partey in the season ahead

ASTON VILLA

Aston Villa made brilliant progress in finishing 11th last season and will want to kick on towards a top half finish and even European qualification.

The great unknown, of course, is whether they can achieve this without their departed talisman Jack Grealish.

Villa always knew, deep down, that this day would come and to have secured £100m from Manchester City for Grealish off the back of a positive Euro 2020 with England is about as much as they could have hoped to raise.

His seven goals and 12 assists from last season - which would have been much higher but for a shin injury - plus all those little creative intangibles must be replaced and, in fairness, Villa have made a decent stab at it.

Jack Grealish departed Aston Villa for Manchester City in a £100m deal sealed last week

New arrival Emiliano Buendia was the Championship's best player for Norwich last season

Emiliano Buendia, signed from newly-promoted Norwich for £33m, was the Championship's best player last season and should do better in the top-flight at Villa than on his last visit with the Canaries in 2019-20.

Speedster Leon Bailey, £30m from Bayer Leverkusen, has been scorching defences in the Bundesliga for the past few seasons.

And though the £25m purchase of Danny Ings from Southampton last week raised a few eyebrows he is a proven Premier League goalscorer.

Between them, they should compensate for the loss of Grealish and more cash from his sale could yet be reinvested. Villa may have lost an idol but it shouldn't stop them kicking on.

Danny Ings has also arrived from Southampton and is a proven Premier League goalscorer

BRENTFORD

Brentford become the 50th different club of the Premier League era as they prepare to play in the top division for the first time since 1947.

And they should be a breath of fresh air. Thomas Frank is a hugely likeable manager and favours an exciting and progressive brand of football that means Brentford will look to seize the initiative in games and certainly won't be cowed by more illustrious opponents.

Naturally, they will be listed among the relegation candidates but there are numerous factors to suggest the Bees, who can finally welcome full houses to their stunning new stadium, will stay up.

Brentford are in the Premier League for the first time after winning the play-off final in May

The first is that the stars from the side that won promotion by beating Swansea in the Championship play-off final remain.

Nobody swooped in for star striker Ivan Toney, nor Bryan Mbeumo, Christian Norgaard or Rico Henry, so there is a core of classy players determined to prove themselves on a bigger stage.

Secondly, they have strengthened at the back with a club record £12m paid to Celtic for the Norway defender Kristoffer Ajer. Brentford did occasionally play themselves into trouble at the back last season so reinforcement was needed.

Ivan Toney was top class last season and will be aiming to prove himself in the Premier League

Thirdly, Frank is flexible with his tactics, switching between three and four at the back, meaning there is a Plan B and Plan C if things don't go their way in matches. They certainly won't be left wondering.

Off the field, Brentford have turned themselves into the epitome of the 21st century football club. Recruitment is intelligent, with players signed cheaply, developed and sold on for large profit. This is supplemented from a B team structure unique in English football.

They will look at Leeds United last season as their example as they attempt to ensure it's not a brief stay in the Premier League. Whatever happens, it won't be dull.

Thomas Frank and his team will be determined to stay in the top-flight now they've made it up

BRIGHTON AND HOVE ALBION

Graham Potter's team finished 16th but comfortably above the relegation zone last season though the demoted trio of Sheffield United, West Brom and Fulham really were poor.

Brighton will want to push on towards mid-table but that's easier said than done and they could easily find themselves embroiled in a relegation scrap.

White's departure to Arsenal earned a £50m windfall but it remains to be seen how big a hole it leaves in defence.

Brighton's principal summer signing so far has been midfielder Enock Mwepu from Salzburg

It appears that if some of that cash is going to be reinvested this window it will be focused on addressing a shortfall of goals instead.

Brighton remain linked with Celtic's Odsonne Edouard, a prolific scorer in Scotland but untested elsewhere. He would cost about £18m but is attracting interest from elsewhere.

Efforts have been made to ease the burden on star midfielder Yves Bissouma with the signing of box-to-box Zambian midfielder Enock Mwepu, £18m from Red Bull Salzburg.

Midfielder Yves Bissouma (right) will once again be key if Brighton can hold on to him

Giant 6ft 8in goalkeeper Kjell Scherpen has come in from Ajax but is only 21 while England youth international Jeremy Sarmiento, from Benfica, is a talent but probably one for the future.

It leaves you wondering whether Brighton have enough. Enough creativity going forward and enough predatory instinct to put chances away. And there may yet be offers for Bissouma.

BURNLEY

There's a big element of deja-vu around Burnley entering the new season. Have they moved forward in any sense from 12 months ago?

They survived very comfortably in the end last season, finishing one place but 11 points above Fulham, but in a similar way to Brighton, it isn't sustainable to keep praying there are three worse teams.

As always, it will come down to Sean Dyche and the strong sense of camaraderie at Turf Moor to steer them to 40 points and safety.

Reaching the security of the 40-point mark is once again Sean Dyche's priority at Burnley

Defensive pairing Ben Mee and James Tarkowski are as integral as ever in keeping opponents out and Burnley can't afford any injuries to them.

Having said that, Nathan Collins has come in from Stoke and though only 20 years of age, should provide solid back-up.

At the other end, the goals of Chris Wood are just as important as ever. He netted 12 times in the Premier League last season, four times as many as anyone else.

Chris Wood scored 12 Premier League goals last season - four times the return of everyone else

Plenty of faith will be placed in the craft and creativity of 21-year-old Dwight McNeil again too.

But Dyche will enter the season frustrated at a lack of transfer business yet again. Twelve months ago, the Clarets were waiting for their takeover to go through but it seems little has changed.

Those classic Dyche-Burnley characteristics of grit, desire and fight will be just as crucial as ever.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's emotional farewell to his beloved Barcelona grabbed the attention of football fans worldwide on Sunday.

Messi's departure from the Nou Camp after 21 years has sent shockwaves throughout the world of football after the Spanish giants - in crisis mode amid a financial nightmare - failed to extend his stay when his deal expired at the start of last month.

Following his bombshell departure, Messi is now on the brink of signing for Paris Saint-Germain, who have reportedly offered the Argentine a two-year deal worth around £70million.

Lionel Messi was inconsolable as he said his goodbyes to his beloved Barcelona on Sunday

Messi's departure from Barcelona has sent shockwaves throughout the world of football

And following the confirmation of his shock exit, Messi held a press conference to say his goodbyes to everyone associated with Barcelona - in which he addressed to fans why his 21-year spell has come to a dramatic end.

But the six-time Ballon d'Or winner couldn't contain his emotions, and was inconsolable - while his family, former and current team-mates and media listened in - as he tried to explain the reasons behind leaving.

And with Messi clearly unsettled by it all, Gary Lineker led the tributes on social media to arguably football's greatest ever player.

Lineker wrote on Twitter: 'So sad watching a clearly very emotional Lionel Messi having to say goodbye to @FCBarcelona.

'No player in the history of the sport has given so much joy, so many unforgettable moments, so much success to one club.'

Many more of football's biggest names, and fans, flocked to social media to laud the Argentine - who has produced plenty of the most magical moments the sport has ever seen.

Gary Lineker paid tribute to Messi on social media following his emotional press conference

Piers Morgan insisted it will be 'so hard to imagine Messi' playing for another team

Former Barcelona and Liverpool forward Luis Garcia said his thank you to Messi on Sunday

Barcelona Women's player Andrea Falcon also hailed 'legend' Messi during his farewell speech

Piers Morgan was another high-profile name to have his say on social media on Sunday - insisting he can't quite believe Messi will be playing in another club's colours.

'Wow. Poor guy looks broken as journalists give him a prolonged standing ovation. So hard to imagine #Messi playing for another team. His heart is #Barca.'

Former Barcelona and Liverpool star Luis Garcia said his thank you to the Argentine star on Twitter too.

He wrote: 'Thanks Leo !! Can't say much more. All the best to you and your family in the next chapter of your career.'

Barcelona Women's player Andrea Falcon also revealed her immense 'pride' to have worn the same colours as Messi.

Falcon, alongside a picture of the pair wearing their Barcelona colours, said: 'You are a legend for this club and it is a pride to have defended the same colours as you. You have made us enjoy and you are and will always be a reference! Thanks, Leo.'

The Argentine is on the brink of joining French giants Paris Saint-Germain this summer now

Speaking out over his exit, Messi - who received a lengthy standing ovation from those in attendance - said he did everything he could to extend his illustrious stay with Barca having initially tied him down to a five-year deal agreed on a 50 per cent pay cut.

'Honestly, when the elections happened (in March), I spoke with (club president Joan) Laporta, we had dinner and after that I was convinced I would be staying,' he said.

'My contract was never the issue... What I know is that I did everything I could. The club say it could not happen because of LaLiga.

'I can guarantee you that I did everything I could to stay. Last year I didn't want to and I said that, but this year it was different.'

Messi has won it all for Barcelona, and bagged an astonishing 672 goals in 778 appearances
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British athlete Tom Bosworth has lashed out at the International Olympic Committee over the 'prison' conditions at the race walking venue in Sapporo.

In a series of angry tweets that he has since deleted, Bosworth criticised the 'slop' being served up in a 'sweaty school dining hall' at Sapporo Odai Park.

Ahead of his challenge in the 20km walk on Thursday, the 31-year-old from Sevenoaks wrote: 'Hey @iocmedia you know the millions of (dollars emoji) you make off the Olympics. Any chance, in the week of our race we could get some food?

Team GB athlete Tom Bosworth blasted the food selection in Sapporo in a now-deleted tweet

The 31-year-old posted a video walking through the cafeteria at the Sapporo accommodation

'Like meals? Not cold slop, steamed onions or partly cooked pasta? This is the "pinnacle of sport." Sapporo feels like a prison.'

An accompanying video showed the food being served.

Bosworth, who begins his Tokyo campaign this week and won the silver medal at the 2018 Commonwealth Games, clearly feels the current selection of meals is not adequate for a professional sportsperson.

He later added: 'Welcome to the sweaty school dining hall that a lifetime of hard work gets you. @iocmedia any chance you could be a little athlete focused? Any chance we could have somewhere to get some fresh air aside from the 900m training lap we have? A cup of coffee wouldn't go amiss.'

The 31-year-old asked for food other than 'cold slop, steamed onions or partly cooked pasta'

Some of those who initially replied to his tweet expressed sympathy for Bosworth's plight

Some on Twitter expressed sympathy, with one saying: 'Looks like the options available at a budget all inclusive holiday.

Another added: '#Japan, such great cuisine, #Tokyo the culinary capital of the world. Disappointed to see/hear that!'

However, others disagreed and felt the complaints betrayed a bad attitude on Bosworth's part.

One social media user responded: 'To describe the accommodation as "like a prison" is insulting. Japan is doing its best to hold an Olympics during the most difficult circumstances. If you have a problem with the food, why not say something to the local staff rather than posting offensive comments on social media?'

However, several others felt Bosworth's complaints about the food betrayed a bad attitude

A second asked: 'Have you tried prison food? Bit of a spoilt brat attitude, you are aware people are starving around the world and would love a meal like this. Get a grip.'

Another said: 'Any chance you could stop whinging? You're only going for a walk. It's not like you're an elite athlete!' while a fourth added: 'Food might (be) crap but feels like a prison? Come on.'

Bosworth finished sixth at the Rio Olympics in 2016.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wayne Rooney believes he can turn Ravel Morrison into a Premier League star after bringing the former Manchester United wonderkid to Derby on a one-year deal.

Now 28 and playing for his 12th club, Morrison has yet to fulfil his immense talent but gave another tantalising glimpse of his ability on his debut for the Rams with an outstanding long-range strike to help them knock Salford City out of the Carabao Cup.

Derby’s troubled financial situation means they can sign only free agents but in Morrison, boss Rooney is confident they have found a gem. The pair know each other from their time at Old Trafford and Rooney says Morrison, who had difficulties away from the game in that period, is judged wrongly.

Ravel Morrison showed a glimpse of his ability with a stunning goal against Salford City

Wayne Rooney believes Morrison could impress many and attract Premier League interest

‘He has that stability off the field,’ said the former England captain. ‘That is where people misunderstand him. I have seen him staying late at the training ground, helping our younger players.

‘The Ravel I knew at United was a kid. The Ravel I know now is an experienced player – even though he should have played more games than he has at this age – but he has been at a lot of clubs and he has seen how the game works.

‘I have seen a real maturity in him. I have no doubt in his ability and I have no doubt in my ability to get the best out of him.

‘If I can do that this season, it will be very difficult for us to keep hold of him. I am sure there will be Premier League clubs knocking at the door if I get what I want out of him.’

Morrison’s strike was his first in English football for more than seven years, following his goal for Queens Park Rangers in a 5-2 win over Nottingham Forest in April 2014.

When he left United for West Ham in January 2012, Morrison scored an outstanding goal in a 3-0 win at Tottenham in October 2013 and it seemed only a matter of time before he would earn full international honours. Yet the expected breakthrough never came and Morrison has never recaptured that form regularly.

Morrison has been staying in training late to help out younger players at Derby County

On a podcast with former United defender Rio Ferdinand earlier this year, Morrison admitted: ‘If I could go back in time, I would change 90 per cent of my life.’ However, Sir Alex Ferguson said: ‘The boy had a good heart.’

‘I’m 28 but it (negative judgement) still happens now,’ said Morrison earlier this year. ‘I’ve become immune to it. It’s a bit draining but it is what it is.’

As well as playing for seven clubs in the English system, Morrison has also spent time in Italy, Sweden, Mexico and Holland. He has broken his duck in front of goal and Rooney wants more, possibly starting on Saturday in the Championship at Peterborough. Posh were promoted last year and are managed by Sir Alex’s son Darren.

Rooney added: ‘Ravel has to score more goals and I have spoken to him about it. I want him on the ball and creating but I also want him in the box to score ugly goals. Not every goal can be a 25-yard screamer.’ That said, it's a good place to start.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Richard Cockerill is set to join a revamped England coaching staff, with the appointment of the former international hooker expected to be officially confirmed next week.

Last month, Sportsmail revealed that Eddie Jones had held talks with Cockerill, who had become available after leaving his post as head coach of Edinburgh — where he spent four seasons.

Sources indicated the 50-year-old was keen to join the England set-up if an offer was forthcoming and now it is understood that a deal is close to being finalised.

Richard Cockerill is set to join the England coaching staff after holding talks with Eddie Jones

Cockerill is poised to be brought into Jones's new management team with a remit to oversee the lineout and contact work — in a close alliance with forwards coach Matt Proudfoot. However, it is thought that remit may be expanded once he has become established.

The imminent appointment will follow confirmation that Martin Gleeson is taking charge of the attack and it will mean the arrival of another homegrown coach, soon after Simon Amor's ill-fated stint came to an end.

It also follows the sudden departure of Jones's senior assistant, John Mitchell, who has been released to take up a role at Wasps.

Cockerill is one of the most successful English coaches of the era. He guided Leicester to three Premiership titles and, during his eight years in charge, the Tigers were a fixture in the play-offs. They declined after his departure.

He then performed a salvage operation at Toulon before taking Edinburgh into the Pro 14 play-offs for the first time in his first season.

Meanwhile, Jones has scrapped plans for a trip to Tbilisi next week, due to the prospect of having to quarantine on his return to the UK.

Head coach Jones has scrapped plans to spend time alongside Georgia's management team

England's head coach was due to spend time with Georgia's management team next Wednesday, Thursday and Friday but the mission has been aborted after Georgia were placed on the Government's travel red list in last week's review.

A visit from Jones, to pass on some expertise, would have been a boost to Georgia's rugby team at a difficult time.

Their own head coach, Levan Maisashvili, is in a critical condition on a ventilator in hospital in Johannesburg, more than a month after contracting Covid-19 when his side played South Africa. The virus has left him with lung damage.

Rassie Erasmus, South Africa's director of rugby, has stirred the pot ahead of disciplinary action by World Rugby in relation to his outspoken attack on the integrity of match officials during the Lions series.

Charges are due to be announced next week but Erasmus was back on social media on Thursday with what appeared to be a swipe at his critics and the authorities.

He posted a fable about a row between a tiger and a donkey, which ends with the tiger being punished, even though he is right.

It ends: 'The worst waste of time is arguing with the fool and fanatic who doesn't care about truth or reality. Never waste time on arguments that don't make sense.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City fans slammed Manchester United stars Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho ahead of their clash with Tottenham, chanting that the pair 'let the country down' after missing their penalties in England's Euro 2020 final.

Footage on Twitter showed a large group of City supporters repeatedly singing 'Sancho and Rashford let the country down' on the concourses ahead of kick-off on Sunday.

It comes after Leeds fans chanted the same song at Old Trafford before their 5-1 defeat by Manchester United on Saturday.

Sancho, Rashford and Arsenal's Bukayo Saka, who also missed, were subjected to racist abuse online after failing to score their spot-kicks in England's penalty shoot-out defeat by Italy.

Rashford also had his mural in Manchester vandalised before thousands of fans left supportive messages to cover up the abuse.

The trio have received immense public support since, while Tottenham and Brentford fans gave Saka a standing ovation when he came off the bench during their clashes against Arsenal in the past week.

Manchester City fans chanted that Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho 'let the country down' ahead of their Premier League clash with Tottenham on Sunday

Rashford (left), Sancho (centre) and Bukayo Saka (right) all missed penalties in the penalty shootout which saw Italy beat England in agonising fashion

This weekend has seen capacity crowds return to Premier League grounds, with City fans filling out the away end at the Tottenham Hotspur stadium.

A crowd of 75,000 was inside Old Trafford on Saturday for Manchester United's first home game of the season but the build-up to the match was marred by violent clashes between supporters.

The two clubs are historical rivals and are playing against each other in England's top-flight with fans for the first time since 2004.

With the pandemic keeping fans away from stadiums last season, the two meetings between the two sides was without a crowd, keeping the rivalry on the pitch.

However, as fans made their way to the Theatre of Dreams on Saturday morning, tempers boiled over between the two sets of rival supporters resulting in violent clashes outside cafes and restaurants.

The 21-second clip, uploaded to Twitter, saw hooligans use bins and chairs as weapons as one lone police officer frantically tries to separate those involved using a baton.

A man standing inside the shop says: 'Good job we're in here. Oh my god.'

Greater Manchester Police confirmed on Saturday that no arrests have been made as of yet and that they are working with local premises to identify those involved in the violent clashes.

A spokesperson from Greater Manchester Police said: 'Patrols in the city centre have been made aware of some isolated incidents of disorder at premises in the area.

'We're working closely with those premises to support licensees at the early signs of any disorder and negate it as swiftly as possible.

'Our priority is to escort people to the stadium in a safe manner and to ensure minimal disruption for the wider public. No arrests have been necessary at this stage.'

Another video shared online shows the moment a police van arrives to a brawl which has spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

Manchester United and Leeds fans were involved in violent clashes in Manchester city centre

Footage shows fans using bins and chairs as weapons during the ugly scenes in Manchester

The groups of men eventually disperse as a police officers arrives to the scene

Men could be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the skirmish, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring.

Saturday was the first time in 17 months that Old Trafford was at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans.

But scenes of the brawl put a dampener on the otherwise celebratory return of the Premier League.

It came after police on Friday pleaded with fans to behave responsibly, announcing that 200 officers would be on duty across Manchester.

Chief superintendent Stuart Ellison, Greater Manchester Police's gold commander for public order operations, said: 'It feels like a long time since we last had capacity crowds, but we have worked on hundreds of events in the past and our priority this weekend remains the same.

'The Premier League starts with Manchester hosting the biggest game of the weekend, 70,000 fans returning to Old Trafford to see Manchester United hosting Leeds United.

'That's just one of four matches on our patch on Saturday afternoon.

'Our officers are working extended hours this weekend to help keep the public safe. All that we ask is that you behave responsibly so everyone can enjoy themselves.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christine McGuinness turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie.

The blonde bombshell, 33, posed in two different pieces, first working her best angles in a pink bra and matching briefs and then slipping into a chic black one-piece.

Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her and the Instagram snaps appear to have been taken in the home she shares with husband Paddy McGuiness and their three children.

Wow: Christine McGuinness, 33, turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie

Wearing her glossy blonde hair loose, Christine beamed from ear to ear in the sexy images.

The doting mother accessorised with a delicate necklace and on her left wrist donned a luxury watch.

Both pieces of lingerie featured delicate lace detailing and made sure all eyes were on Christine's enviable physique

It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative.

Peachy: Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her

In a new interview, the star discussed her brave decision to find out whether she has faulty genes after her mother Joanne - who is now in remission - was diagnosed with cancer in September.

'I'm just really relieved,' said an elated Christine, adding: 'Thank God it came back negative.'

Speaking to OK!, the mother-of-three shared: 'It doesn't mean I can't get cancer, but it means my chances are the same as anybody else's.'

Christine has a family history of breast cancer and decided to take the BRCA test after her mother's diagnosis last year.

Christine admitted she was initially hesitant to use testing company Myogenes as she feared the process would be invasive, but told the outlet it was straightforward and simple.

'It's sent in the post – it's just a saliva test and really quick,' she said, adding that results are sent directly to your GP.

Christine also revealed to the publication that if she had tested positive for the gene she would have considered 'a full mastectomy and breast reconstruction to make sure she's around for as long as possible for the children'.

She added that upon hearing the news of her negative test, husband Paddy gave her 'a huge hug' and said he was 'really, really pleased'.

Good news: It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@USA soccer captain Megan Rapinoe netted a goal directly from a corner to hand her side the opening lead in their entertaining 4-3 Olympics bronze medal victory against Australia.

Rapinoe scored just eight minutes into the contest when she opted to go for goal rather than try and pick out a teammate in the box from the corner.

The 36-year-old bent a delicious ball into the box and it was all too much for Teagan Micah in the Australia goal, who made a last-ditch attempt to claw the ball away.

Megan Rapinoe (left) netted directly from a corner to help USA beat Australia in their bronze medal match at the Tokyo Olympics

The pace and whip on her delivery was too much to handle for Australia keeper Teagan Micah

Micah made a last-ditch attempt to claw the ball away but could not prevent it from going in

But despite getting some of her hand to the ball, Micah could not prevent Rapinoe's whipped delivery from finding the far side of the net and handing the world champions the lead.

The Matildas brought themselves level nine minutes later after an uncharacteristic defensive error allowed Arsenal striker Caitlin Foord to slip in captain Sam Kerr.

And the Chelsea star stroked it home despite the acute angle, only for Rapinoe to restore USA's lead with a stunning first-time volley following a mix-up between Clare Polkinghorne and Alanna Kennedy.

Rapinoe's side then extended their lead before the break in the first minute of added time at the end of the first half, with Carli Lloyd providing an emphatic finish after Lindsey Horan's inch-perfect pass.

Sam Kerr (left) restored parity for the Matildas after a through ball from Caitlin Foord (right)

Rapinoe's first-time volley saw the USA retake the lead after an eventful opening 25 minutes

Lloyd then scored her second six minutes into the second half after rolling the ball past Micah after Kennedy's error heading back toward her own goal, before Foord pulled one back for the Matildas with a well-directed header.

Emily Gielnik then netted a screamer from distance in the 90th minute but Australia did not have enough time to score another and take the game beyond regulation time to hand Rapinoe and co a bronze medal.

It represents an improvement for the world champions, who were knocked out at the quarter-final stage by Sweden in Rio five years ago.

USA were competing in the bronze medal match at Tokyo 2020 after suffering a major semi-final upset at the hands of Canada on Monday via a penalty shootout.

Carli Lloyd extended their lead with excellent finishes either side of the half-time interval

Arsenal striker Foord then pulled one back for the Matildas with an excellent header

After the defeat, 2019 Ballon d'Or winner Rapinoe said she could not put determine why her side had not clicked into gear or 'had our joy'.

She added: 'It just hasn't flowed for us. We just didn't have that juice that we normally do.'

Australia - who beat Team GB 4-3 last week despite Ellen White's double - meanwhile missed out on a shot at the gold medal following a narrow 1-0 defeat by Sweden.

The two sides had already faced each other at these Games, with Australia holding the USA to a goalless draw in their final Group G match on Tuesday last week.

Emily Gielnik (R) netted a screamer in the 90th minute but could not prevent Australia's defeat

Stream every unmissable moment of Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 live on discovery+, The Streaming Home of the Olympics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Huddersfield, Middlesbrough and Bristol City are keeping tabs on AFC Wimbledon left-back Nesta Guinness-Walker.

The 21 year-old, a former Chelsea and Tottenham youngster, is rated as one of the best left-backs outside the second tier and being eyed by the Championship trio after featuring regularly for League One Wimbledon in the last two seasons.

Guinness-Walker – the great grandson of Star Wars actor Sir Alec Guinness – spent three years in the youth systems of Chelsea and Spurs before he was a teenager.

Nesta Guinness-Walker has caught the eye of Huddersfield, Middlesbrough and Bristol City

The leftback is the great grandson of Sir Alec Guinness, who played Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original Star Wars trilogy

He started his senior career at non-league Metropolitan Police and had a trial opportunity to re-join Chelsea’s academy in 2019.

But attacking full-back Guinness-Walker instead opted for AFC Wimbledon in order to continue playing first-team football and has racked up over 60 appearances since.

With one year left on his deal, Guinness-Walker’s Championship admirers have now identified him as a target who could be available for a cut-price fee.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season is upon us with all the giddy excitement and optimism that brings.

We can expect the usual drama from the self-styled 'best league in the world' where, as we've seen time and time again, anyone can beat anyone.

Manchester City will be looking to defend their title but can expect to be pushing hard by Manchester United, Liverpool and reigning European champions Chelsea.

Manchester City won the Premier League title last season and start as favourites once again

FA Cup holders Leicester City will again be trying to crack the top four, leading a cluster of sides with designs on qualifying for Europe.

And towards the bottom, the three newly-promoted clubs - Watford, Norwich and Brentford - will be hoping their Premier League experience isn't a brief one while the likes of Burnley, Brighton and Southampton battle to keep heads above water.

Ahead of the big kick-off on Friday night, we will preview the new Premier League season in four parts, assessing the prospects for all 20 teams. Part three covers Liverpool through to Norwich.

LIVERPOOL

Though they failed to win any silverware, Liverpool really did pull something satisfactory out of the fire last season.

An outstanding late season run of 10 Premier League games unbeaten, with eight wins, saw Jurgen Klopp's side finish in third, a highly improbably scenario in mid-March.

While the continuation of Champions League cash is obviously welcome post-pandemic, it also proved conclusively that the 'mentality monsters' fighting spirit Klopp has instilled at Anfield remained very much in tact.

Liverpool will be hoping for better fortune with injuries in order to challenge City for the title

Virgil van Dijk (left) and Joe Gomes (right) are on their way back to full fitness after injuries

LIVERPOOL FANS HAVE 'BEST ATMOSPHERE IN THE PREMIER LEAGUE' That is the opinion of a new YouGov survey, done along with Betfair, in which the Reds' passionate supporters came out on top among 1,003 fans polled. Liverpool fans edged out their rivals at Manchester United and Newcastle United in the top three. Jurgen Klopp will hope the famous Anfield atmosphere will be back in style this season - and will look to use that in a title challenge 1) Liverpool 2) Manchester United 3) Newcastle United 4) Leeds 5) Crystal Palace Advertisement

They fell a long way short of defending their title but given the debilitating blows of defensive injuries, round peg midfielders being jammed into square holes at the back and forwards well short of their best form, it was as good as could be hoped.

Klopp, who well and truly lost his pizzazz amid a string of mid-season defeats which came alongside his mother's passing and Covid restraints, will feel it can't be any worse this time.

Virgil van Dijk, Joe Gomez and Joel Matip are due to filter back into the team in the first weeks of the season, which will permit Fabinho and Jordan Henderson to return to more familiar duties.

But the departure of Georginio Wijnaldum, who joined for PSG on a free after failing to agree a new contract at Liverpool, will concern supporters.

Wijnaldum played in all 38 league games last season but his importance was apparently not reflected in the offer that was tabled.

Up front, Diogo Jota revitalised the established front three of Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mane and Roberto Firmino but everyone will need to go again to keep pace with Man City's Rolls Royce attack.

The £36m signing of Ibrahima Konate from Leipzig will prevent a repeat of defensive vulnerabilities if the worst should happen again.

But losing three first choice centre-backs to injury this season as last would truly be rotten luck.

If Liverpool can harness the winning momentum from the spring, they have every chance of keeping up with the team that stole their crown.

The strong finish to last season proved Jurgen Klopp's side have retained a strong mentality

MANCHESTER CITY

Can anybody stop them?

The champions have become even stronger with the £100million British record signing of Jack Grealish one hell of a statement of intent. And that's before you even consider Harry Kane.

Pep Guardiola's side finished 12 points clear last season for their third title in four years and it really is difficult to see beyond them again this time.

The hope is that Chelsea - who denied Guardiola and City's owners this long-craved Champions League glory back in May - Liverpool and Manchester United can challenge and make the title race more exciting.

Manchester City's £100million signing of Jack Grealish has laid down the gauntlet

But all the indications point to further City success and probably the crossing of that final European frontier as well (though PSG may have something to say about that).

City stand above their title rivals in having at least two top quality players in every position, combining a resolute defence, classy midfield and dazzlingly creative strike force.

When that is married to Guardiola's unsurpassed man management skills and the financial clout to buy almost anyone - City are approaching the £1billion spending mark in five years of Pep - they begin to look irresistible.

City will once again look to midfield talisman Kevin De Bruyne to inspire them this season

The one area they need to address is finding the long-term successor to Sergio Aguero up front. If they do land Kane at a cool £150m that settles the matter for the next four to five years.

And if you add the 30 goals a season Kane guarantees you, then City will dominate until Guardiola gets bored.

Pep Guardiola's appetite to success is undiminished and now Europe is the final frontier

MANCHESTER UNITED

Manchester United missed a decent centre half to firm up a vulnerable back line last season. They now have one.

United lacked a world class right-sided attacker who could score and create goals in abundance last season. They now have one.

So Ole Gunnar Solskjaer really has no excuses left. The arrivals of Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane, for a combined £114million, plus his own new contract, have seen the club back him to the hilt. Now he must deliver trophies.

Manchester United have splashed out £73m on Jadon Sancho as they launch a title charge

And United are certainly better placed than they were 12 months ago after summer transfer business that was surprisingly brisk and straightforward.

As a club legend, Solskjaer has more slack than most managers but another season finishing a distant second to City without winning anything else won't be acceptable.

With PSG splashing out on Lionel Messi, it looks like their pursuit of Paul Pogba is over as well so United should end up stronger in midfield as well even if a holding player is still needed.

What is clear is that Solskjaer cannot afford the kind of slow start that suffocated United's title challenge right away in the past two seasons.

There won't be any excuses for United not to win silverware in the season ahead

While Sancho and Varane will obviously need time to settle in, they must hit the ground running because City, Chelsea and Liverpool won't be hanging around.

A run deep in the Champions League will also be anticipated. United cannot crash out at the end of the group stage as they did last December, albeit going on to reach the Europa League final.

Solskjaer's tenure has seen slow and steady forward progress but always with the caveat that 'we need another player or two.'

That line of argument has now vanished with United's squad looking stronger than at any point post-Ferguson. Time to deliver.

United will once again look to Bruno Fernandes to produce the magic and score goals

NEWCASTLE UNITED

At no Premier League club will the return of fans to stadiums influence the mood as much as at Newcastle.

The St James' Park regulars, on the whole, continue to be seriously underwhelmed by manager Steve Bruce, who guided them to a wholly respectable 12th-placed finish last season.

There were plenty of times when Bruce sailed pretty close to the sun - especially during a bleak midwinter that at one stage saw six losses on the spin - and he maybe survived only because the Gallowgate wasn't there to vent its fury.

Steve Bruce is unpopular with many fans but guided Newcastle to a 12th-placed finish last term

Mike Ashley's loyalty to Bruce ultimately led to mid-table security but you don't have to go far to find Newcastle fans who vehemently believe they should be doing an awful lot better.

An impartial look at Newcastle's squad tends to come up with an opposite opinion and they have yet to get any transfers over the line.

However, news that a £22million fee for last season's loan star Joe Willock will help soothe anxieties ahead of the new campaign.

A fee of £22million has been agreed with Arsenal to make Joe Willock's loan permanent

The hope is that Joelinton finally comes up with the goods, that Willock, Miguel Almiron and Allan Saint-Maximin find enough defences to run through, and that the back line is less leaky.

A pre-season working under Bruce's assistant Graeme Jones - who improved matters when he arrived from Bournemouth in January and is fresh from helping Gareth Southgate's England to the Euros final - will hopefully help.

Ashley's arbitration case against the Premier League over the halted Saudi Arabian-led takeover of the club will be a sideshow to a season likely to feature much of the same.

Speedster Allan Saint-Maximin will be one of Newcastle's principal threats going forward

NORWICH CITY

Look who's back again.

Norwich once again bossed the Championship but now really is the time to cast off that yo-yo club reputation and establish themselves in the top flight.

Last time they were round this way, in 2019-20, they went down with just 21 points and barely a whimper, losing every single match after the post-lockdown restart.

Somehow, it has to be a lot better this time around but achieved without talisman Emiliano Buendia, who has moved to Aston Villa.

Norwich City are back in the Premier League again after domination in the Championship

At least the £40million raised from the Argentine's departure has been reinvested into new acquisitions for Daniel Farke's squad, giving the German more of a chance than last time.

Wide forward Milot Rashica has come in from Werder Bremen for £8m, while United States international Josh Sargent has followed him.

The loan signing of Billy Gilmour from Chelsea also looks an astute move and at the back, Ben Gibson has made his loan from Burnley permanent.

Talented Chelsea midfielder Billy Gilmour is an exciting addition for Norwich on loan

While we can expect Norwich to remain true to themselves and seek to play football that's pleasing on the eye, their latest Championship promotion was notable for a greater defensive steel.

You sense that will prove of greater value in the Premier League, where they shipped 75 goals last time but don't expect any change to the gloomy predictions of an immediate return to the Championship.

Norwich do look better equipped this time around to stay up but you have to say that would come as a surprise.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish has revealed a conversation with John Terry helped convince him to leave Aston Villa and join Manchester City.

The attacking midfielder, 25, became the most expensive English player of all time when he moved from hometown club Villa to the Premier League champions for a whopping £100million transfer fee on August 5.

And as reported by the Sun, Grealish took heed of Terry's words when the Chelsea and England legend emphasised the prestige of playing European football to him.

Jack Grealish (second left) has revealed the role of John Terry (left) in his move to Man City

Former Aston Villa attacking midfielder Grealish moved to City for £100million on August 5

He said: 'I remember speaking to John Terry at Villa and he said when you stand there and hear that Champions League anthem there is nothing better.

'It has been difficult watching (Champions League) games. I remember watching City v PSG last year and the first half was amazing. To be involved would be a dream come true.

When you see a club paying that much for a player it means they trust and value you highly and see so much potential. Now I just hope I can repay this football club by winning as many titles as possible — and winning that trophy we all want.

'The club were so close to winning it last year, they were one goal away. That is exactly why I have come here. I look around the changing room and there is so much talent and depth and I fully believe we can win it this year.'

The 25-year-old opened up on Terry's advice about the prestige of Champions League football

Terry won the Champions League in 2011-2012 as the Blues beat Bayern Munich in the final

Terry won the Champions League with Chelsea in 2011-12, four years after missing a crucial penalty in a final defeat to Manchester United on penalties.

He moved to the Midlands outfit in 2017 and spent one season at the club as a player, captaining them to defeat in the play-off final, before becoming assistant manager at the club, working alongside Grealish in both roles.

However, Terry left Dean Smith's side last month to focus on his own managerial career.

Grealish, who made his City debut as a substitute in Saturday's 1-0 Community Shield final loss against Leicester, and City will kick off their domestic campaign against Tottenham on Sunday August 15 looking to defend their title.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gareth Bale missed a penalty on his return to action for Real Madrid where he was bizarrely given the No 50 shirt.

Bale started for Real in their friendly against AC Milan in Austria on Sunday but missed a penalty, which was easily saved by Mike Maignan.

The winger won the penalty himself. However, he was unable to score and was one of a host of players who were substituted at half time, with the game ending in a goalless draw.

Gareth Bale missed a penalty as he returned to action for Real Madrid against AC Milan

Bale, who is back from his loan spell at Tottenham, bizarrely wore the No 50 shirt for Real

Real Madrid drew 0-0 against AC Milan, with Bale completing 45 minutes in Austria

Gareth Bale wins a penalty for Real Madrid...but then steps up himself and misses the spot kick! 😱



A weak effort and an easy save for Maignan in the Milan goal 🧤 pic.twitter.com/2hHbDRBmIT — Premier Sports 📺 (@PremierSportsTV) August 8, 2021

Bale is back at Real following his season-long loan spell at Tottenham.

However, the Wales international was given what seems like an unnecessarily high squad number. Bale previously wore the No 11 shirt for Real from 2013 to 2020.

However, before he headed to Tottenham on loan the shirt was given to Marco Asensio instead. Asensio wasn't involved against Milan as he played for Spain at the Olympics.

The likes of Luka Jovic and Martin Odegaard don't have permanent squad numbers after coming back from loan but haven't been given a temporary number as high as Bale's.

Bale wore No 11 for Real between 2013 and 2020 but that number was then given to Marco Asensio

The Wales international still has one year remaining on his contract with Real Madrid

The use of the number 50 may seem strange, but that was also the number that Eden Hazard wore when he made his Real debut in a friendly against Bayern Munich in 2019.

Hazard was later assigned a lower squad number and it is anticipated that the same scenario will occur for Bale if he remains part of the squad.

Bale is now into the final year of his contract with Real.

During his time at the club he has made 251 appearances, scoring 105 goals and providing 68 assists. He has won the Champions League four times, La Liga on two occasions and the Copa del Rey once.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid have furiously denied reports that Florentino Perez is studying the possibility of the club joining the Premier League after LaLiga agreed a £2.3billion deal with US private equity firm CVC.

Perez is currently at the centre of a heated row with LaLiga bosses over the proposed deal, which would see them hand 10 per cent of television revenue over the next 50 years to CVC – providing an instant cash injection for all 42 Primera and Segunda Division clubs a lifeline after being hit hard by the pandemic.

However, Real Madrid and Barcelona have vehemently opposed the idea which has led to Los Blancos to threaten with legal action.

Real Madrid issued a statement Tuesday saying they had decided to: 'carry out all legal action deemed appropriate to annul the possible agreement that La Liga adopts in its next assembly on August 12'.

Real Madrid deny reports Florentino Perez is considering moving the club to a different league

Reports in Spain claimed Perez was considering moving Real Madrid to the Premier League

Both clubs argue that it is unacceptable that the league signs away 10 per cent of TV revenue over such a long period of time when clubs only cede their TV rights for LaLiga to sell at periods of three years at a time.

Madrid threatened legal action at the time of LaLiga's announcement of the deal and Tuesday’s statement confirmed they would be pursing that course of action.

This led to reports from Mundo Deportivo that Perez has been weighing up the option of abandoning the Spanish league altogether and is considering joining one of the other major five European divisions.

The report goes on the claim that the Real chiefs have been exploring the possibility for some weeks now with the Premier League Perez's preferred destination.

It comes after LaLiga president Javier Tebas negotiated a £2.7bn deal with equity firm CVC

However, the Spanish giants distanced themselves from the reports almost immediately, issuing a statement that no such proposal of leaving LaLiga was on the table.

'Given the information published today by the newspaper Mundo Deportivo, in which it says that our club studied the possibility of moving from LaLiga to the Premier League, Real Madrid wants to assert that this information is completely false, absurd and impossible and it only intends to disturb, once more, the day to day of our club,' an official Los Blancos statement read.

The reports came off the back of Perez's desire to form a European Super League with the continent's powerhouses before it was quickly shot down following widespread fan protests back in April.

Perez's, who was the chairman of the now-defunct ESL, point-blank refusal to give up on the project has seen tensions grow between him a Tebas.

And with the threat of legal action on the horizon, further strain on the duo's relationship is only set to increase.

La Liga president Javier Tebas tweeted: ‘The threatening method that FP (Florentino Perez) has been using in private for years is now being transferred to the public (sphere).

Tebas and Perez have a long-running feud with the Spanish league constantly at loggerheads

‘Clubs and institutions have had to put up with their threats for years. Since 2015 against the centralised sale (of TV rights), the constant challenges of agreements, the Superliga. Real Madrid deserves better.’

As part of the agreement, CVC would have a share of about 10 percent of the league's revenues and a stake of 10 percent in a new commercial entity.

The clubs would receive 90 percent of the money paid by CVC, with 70 per cent aimed at long-term investments. Some of the money would also go toward paying off debts and increasing their spending limits on players and coaches.

The league said CVC will not have control of the management of the competition, or the sale of its broadcasting rights.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mario Gotze's brother Felix has left intensive care after fracturing his skull while playing for German third-tier side Kaiserslautern.

The 23-year-old clashed with team-mate Boris Tomiak in the 73rd minute of Sunday's 3. Liga game against Viktoria Berlin.

He was then taken off on a stretcher and rushed to intensive care where it was discovered he suffered a hairline fracture on his skull.

Mario Gotze's brother, Felix (pictured in 2017), fractured his skull playing for Kaiserslautern

Kaiserslautern revealed on Monday that Gotze is 'doing well' after being taken to a nearby Berlin hospital.

They tweeted: 'We would like to thank you for the many recovery wishes that we received from our environment, but also from the employees and supporters of @ViktoriaBerlin achieved.

'Felix Gotze is still receiving medical treatment in a Berlin hospital.

'The diagnosis of a hairline crack in the skull was provisionally made here.'

A further tweet from the German side revealed he would go on to make a 'full recovery' and would be leaving the Berlin hospital on Tuesday.

Felix (right) is the younger brother of former Borussia Dortmund forward Mario Gotze (left)

Felix (centre) poses for a picture with his older brother Mario (right)

'Good news: Felix Gotze is doing better according to the circumstances,' the tweet read. 'He is no longer in the intensive care unit & will probably be able to leave the hospital tomorrow. We wish Felix all the best & a full and good recovery!'

Felix, who plays in midfield, is the younger brother of former Borussia Dortmund forward Mario Gotze, who scored Germany's winning goal in the 2014 World Cup final.

The 29-year-old currently plays for Dutch side PSV after leaving Dortmund last summer.

Since the World Cup final, Gotze suffered a decline in form, as well as health problems, but has since gone on help the club win the Johan Cruyff Shield.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In scenes of farce and brilliance on Sunday, Britain’s boxers edged ever closer to the team’s best haul of medals at an Olympics.

Wins for Frazer Clarke, Pat McCormack and Ben Whittaker, added to Karriss Artingstall’s featherweight bronze on Saturday and Lauren Price’s forthcoming middleweight semi-final, have ensured Rob McCracken’s programme will take at least five podium finishes.

That will equal their record from London 2012, with Galal Yafai and Caroline Dubois also making progress towards the medal rounds.

It is adding up to a stunning performance from the team of 11.

Frazer Clarke beat Mourad Aliev after his opponent was disqualified...



The Frenchman was not happy 😳



Watch: https://t.co/ibywPS2NaQ



📲 Watch live on @BBCOne and @BBCiPlayer#bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/gJPqC4wkoW — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 1, 2021

Frazer Clarke (left) reacts after his victory is announced, while opponent Mourad Aliev is left with his hands on his head following his disqualification

The French fighter immediately approached a TV camera to show his disgust worldwide

Clarke attempted to ease the frustrations of his opponent with words of advice moments later

There was a surreal edge to the latest win for super-heavyweight Clarke, who has waited in the shadows of Anthony Joshua and Joe Joyce for the better part of 10 years to get his chance.

He won via disqualification in the second round of his quarter-final against Mourad Aliev, with the referee stepping in after Aliev repeatedly used his head, causing two cuts over the Brit’s eyes.

What followed was bizarre as the Frenchman sat on the ring canvas in protest and refused to leave for half an hour.

Team GB boxer Frazer Clarke is guaranteed a medal in the super heavyweight category

His opponent Mourad Aliev was disqualified for repeatedly using his head after being warned

Aliev engaged in a 30-minute sit-down protest on the ring-steps after his disqualification

Clarke, who attempted to cool Aliev during the saga, said: ‘I told him to calm down. I’ve been in those situations myself. Often you’re thinking with your heart and your emotions are all over the place.

'I’m not sure what he wants to do in the future but I didn’t want him to damage his reputation or be rude to the judges and officials.

‘I know it’s hard and he’s angry, but the best thing to do is calm down and go back to the changing rooms and vent your anger somewhere else.’

Whittaker moved into the light-heavyweight final after a highly impressive win over Imam Khataev. He lost the opening round but fought a classy fight to take a split decision against the Russian.

Aliev remonstrated with Clarke, who could be seen with blood pouring from his right eye

Aliev gets into a verbal confrontation with officials after refusing to leave his sitdown protest

He said: ‘Every Christmas my coach used to buy me a photo of Muhammad Ali standing on the podium at the Olympics with a gold medal. He said, “This is going to be you”.

‘I hadn’t even won the senior national title, but he told me, “Trust me, you will be there”. Just before I came to the arena he sent me the photo again. I’ve got the chance to do it now, it’s the dream of every amateur boxer.’

McCormack was given a walkover to Wednesday’s welterweight final after Ireland’s Aidan Walsh injured an ankle while celebrating his quarter-final win.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Swansea have signed Manchester United defender Ethan Laird on loan for the rest of the season.

Laird is reunited with Swansea boss Russell Martin after spending the second half of last season on loan at MK Dons.

The Swans said on their official website: 'The 20-year-old defender will spend the remainder of the 2021-22 season at the Swansea.com Stadium and will wear the number 27 shirt.

Manchester United defender Ethan Laird has joined Swansea on a season long loan deal

Swansea boss Russell Martin previously worked with Laird at his former club MK Dons

'Laird is in contention to make his Swans bow in Tuesday's Championship clash with Stoke City, with the deal having been registered in time.'

Laird is Swansea's sixth summer signing following the arrivals of Kyle Joseph, Liam Walsh, Joel Piroe, Jamie Paterson and Flynn Downes.

He has made two first-team appearances for United, both in the Europa League, against Astana and AZ Alkmaar, during the 2019-20 season.

Swansea named former MK Dons manager Martin as their new head coach earlier this month following the departure of Steve Cooper in July.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku's mural outside the San Siro stadium has been defaced by Inter Milan supporters ahead of the Belgian striker's imminent £98million move to Chelsea.

The Inter striker travelled from Milan to London on Monday night ahead of his return to Stamford Bridge having already completed the first part of his medical in the Italian city.

Inter fans are furious at their own club for allowing star forward Lukaku - who scored 30 goals last season as the Nerazzuri won their first Serie A title in 11 years - to leave especially after both the player and the Italian side claimed the Belgian would be staying earlier this summer.

Romelu Lukaku's mural outside the San Siro has been defaced by Inter Milan supporters ahead of the Belgian's £98million move to Chelsea

Inter fans also produced a banner attacking their club, saying: 'You have broken our balls'

The mural showed Lukaku pointing two fingers in the air towards the Inter Milan badge and the Italian flag, and most of the phrase 'Dear Milano, you're welcome' has been blocked out with black paint, barring the word 'Milano'.

Inter Milan's main ultra group in the Curva Nord are responsible for the vandalism of the mural, created for the Belgian when he first joined the club in 2019 from Manchester United.

And a message on the group's Facebook page to the departing Belgian striker read: 'Dear Lukaku, we expected more honest and transparent behaviour from you.

'But, despite the fact we protected you like a son, like one of us, you too proved yourself to be just like all the rest, going to your knees for money. We wish you the best, even if greed doesn't always pay.'

Lukaku was seen seemingly holding a Chelsea shirt as he travelled to London on Monday

The 28-year-old striker is poised to sign a Chelsea contract worth around £350,000 a week, with the salary moving down to £200,000 per week after tax. According to reports in Italy, Lukaku was on around £140,000 a week at the San Siro.

Meanwhile, a banner next to the mural directed towards the Inter hierarchy, led by Chinese club president Steven Zhang, 29, read: 'You have broken all our balls'.

Lukaku has two murals outside Inter's San Siro stadium, the one that has now been defaced and another of him alongside Zlatan Ibrahimovic after the pair clashed during a Coppa Italia quarter-final last season.

Lukaku, who just led Inter to the title, had a mural made for him after he joined the club in 2019

#Lukaku a Linate, prima della partenza per Londra: “Un saluto ai tifosi dell’#Inter che volevano rimanessi? Manderò un messaggio tra qualche giorno”



��✈️������#Chelsea @FcInterNewsit pic.twitter.com/79kBH5AK1K — Egle Patanè (@eglevicious23) August 9, 2021

The Belgian forward was set to stay at Inter for the forthcoming season as the striker was happy at the club, according to chief executive Bepe Marotta.

'From our side, we can yes absolutely, Lukaku is not for sale. Lukaku is an important piece on the chessboard available to Simone Inzaghi.' Marotta told Sportmediaset.

Lukaku himself added that he was looking forward to the new season with Inter when he came back from his summer break after the Euro 2020 campaign with Belgium.

He told the club's official website: 'We now have a few weeks to prepare as well as we can for the new campaign. We hope to do well and achieve even more than last year.

Lukaku scored 30 goals last season and was set to stay at Inter, but is now on his way out

'I'm thrilled to be back. We hope to continue down the path that we've started and to keep winning. All the players will work hard to make your dreams come true.'

The Inter fans are already livid with their club for allowing last season's title-winning head coach Antonio Conte to quit the club due to financial problems at the club.

Inter's finances are in tatters due to the coronavirus pandemic and a £250m loan from Oaktree Capital taken earlier this summer kept the club afloat. But player sales were still needed and Conte resigned when he heard the squad would be weakened.

Defender Achraf Hakimi was sold to Paris Saint-Germain for £60m and Lukaku is set to join the Moroccan out the door, while fellow forward Lautaro Martinez could move to Tottenham in a £77m deal, as revealed by Sportsmail last week.

Inter fans have shown anger towards owner Steven Zhang (centrre-right) via banners of fury

Inter have already let head coach Antonio Conte (left) and Achraf Hakimi (right) leave the club

Protests against Zhang's ownership have been commonplace amongst the Inter faithful this summer, starting at the end of May when Conte quit. Inter fans held up a banner outside the club's headquarters saying; ''Don't Touch Antonio Conte... Take Responsibility Or Leave'.

During Inter's 2-0 pre-season friendly victory over Parma on Sunday, the club's supporters were heard chanting: 'Zhang if you want to save Inter, then you have to leave.'

They were also heard singing: 'Zhang, the time is over', 'you have to sell' and 'we'll give you the money.' Protests are set to continue against the Inter president.

The 29-year-old businessman also pulled funding from his Chinese Super League venture Jiangsu Suning earlier this year, leaving fans of that club calling for him to 'Get Out of China' following that call.

Zhang has been told to leave Inter by the club's supporters on several occasions this summer

Lukaku, meanwhile, was recorded leaving Milan's Columbus clinic on Monday afternoon and appeared to be holding a Chelsea shirt in the back of the car as he was whisked away, in a video published on fcinternews.it.

Later that evening, Lukaku was filmed arriving by taxi at Linate airport ahead of his flight to the Blues, being greeted by reporters in the process.

When asked whether he had a message for Inter fans, the Belgian responded by saying: 'Greetings to the fans of Inter, did they want me to stay? I'll send a message in a few days.' His agent Fede Pastorello also revealed his reasons for leaving Inter will be released 'soon'.

Star striker Lukaku revealed he will give reasons for quitting Inter Milan in the coming days

Chelsea and Inter have now agreed a fee for Lukaku who told Italian champions Inter last week that he wanted to join Chelsea.

Lukaku is also set to overtake Neymar and become the most expensive player of all time in accumulated transfer fees.

His latest switch will take him ahead of the Paris Saint-Germain attacker in combined transfer fees, with the Belgian set to rack up an eye-watering total of £291m.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@