Sign up for the TravelMail newsletter and get the latest holiday news and deals direct!

We know just how much time and effort goes into researching a holiday and the editorial team at TravelMail keep this in mind with the articles that we write.



To have direct access the very best of the stories and deals we write about, sign up to our weekly newsletter and every THURSDAY we'll send you our latest updates with a message from TravelMail editor Joanna Tweedy.

Alongside the week's best features, breaking holiday news and blogs from your favourite writers, you'll also find Daily Mail special offers, holiday deals from around the web and competitions too.

TravelMail newsletter

WHAT'S IN THE TRAVELMAIL NEWSLETTER?



The latest travel articles from TravelMail writers

Holiday news - the stories affecting your travels

Our entertaining travel blogs

Fantastic promotions and competitions

Exclusive Mail Offers

Brilliant deals on flights, hotels and holidays HOW DO I SIGN UP?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thousands of British holidaymakers in Mexico are scrambling to get home after travel restrictions changed at short notice.

From 4am on Sunday, those returning home from Mexico will have to quarantine in a designated hotel for ten days.

The cost of a flight back to Britain was being sold for between £2,000 and £4,000 yesterday as many tried to beat the deadline.

Pictured: Claudia Rattray talks to BBC via video alongside her daughters. Claudia and her two daughters arrived in Mexico city today to learn the country had been upgraded to the red list

There are between 5,000 and 6,000 British holidaymakers in Mexico currently.

In a further blow, the cost of hotel quarantine will increase from August 12, with the price for single adult travellers rising from £1,750 to £2,285 and a second adult paying £1,430 – more than double the current rate of £650.

One couple have been forced to cut their honeymoon from two weeks to two days.

Student Joe Coward, 29, said: ‘We feel... incredibly sad and frustrated that the time that should’ve been spent enjoying being newlyweds has been ruined.’

British Airways said its teams had been ‘working through the night to arrange as many additional seats out of Mexico as possible to help get Britons home’.

But there is unlikely to be enough seats for all those desperate to return as is the case of trust officer Claudia Rattray.

Ayo Faley (left), a call handler of NHS Test and Trace in London, arrived in Cancun, Mexico, on Thursday morning for her holiday, and plans to continue her trip as planned and pay for quarantine when she returns to the UK. Aaron (right) is relocating his family to Edinburgh in late August and will now have to pay for them all to quarantine on arrival

Mrs Rattray, 44, told of ‘shock and devastation’ after landing in Mexico to discover the country had been placed on the red list while she was flying.

She and her daughters Ivanna, 15, and Summer, 14, had travelled from their home in Jersey in order to visit family.

She said: ‘My husband spoke to British Airways to see if we were able to get flights for tonight or tomorrow... and there’s no seats available, nothing.’

NHS worker Ayo Faley, 24, also only discovered she had just three days left to return home to avoid quarantine after landing in Cancun yesterday.

She said she was ‘absolutely distraught’ but plans to complete her holiday. She asked: ‘How are [the Government] planning to help individuals who have found themselves in a situation like this?’

Claire, 30, from south London, said: 'I had access to the Wifi so I found out in mid air.

'I just wanted to grab the tannoy and tell everyone because I could see all these families looking forward to their holiday and it was obvious they didn't know.

'It's crazy the lack of notice. I had no inkling Mexico was about to go on the red list.'

Another tweeted: 'Landing in Mexico to find out it's been added to the red list whilst I was up in the air, has got to be one of the worst things I've ever experienced.'

Those who have received both doses have unrestricted entry - meaning they do not have to quarantine or provide a negative test result - when travelling to Germany, France, Spain, Latvia, Romania and Georgia. But those who are not double-jabbed are still subject to some regulations upon arrival and, in the cases of Germany and Slovakia, can be denied entry

The price of the only direct flight from Mexico City to London before Mexico moves to the red list has soared to a staggering £6,878

Father-of-two David Hing, 40, arrived in Mexico with his wife and children aged four and seven on July 31. They were supposed to stay until August 21 - five days before the travel list is looked at again.

Mr Hing told MailOnline: 'We knew the risks and while at the moment it seems like a bad dream and is very stressful and I've been up all night looking at alternative options, we are just going to try to enjoy the holiday.

'It broke my heart when my two little ones said they wanted to stay on holiday and would lend us money if we needed it.

'The notice period doesn't really give long enough to make changes especially when it's hard to get through and talk to anyone at the airlines.

'The images of the food and hotels do not seem like they are worth the cost so that's why we are going to try and fly back somewhere else first. I feel sorry for the people who were already on the flight from the UK and hope they can make alternative arrangements.'

A young couple cut short their honeymoon in Mexico from two weeks to two days, after they discovered the new restrictions upon landing in Mexico early on Thursday morning.

Joe Coward, 29, said: 'Basically we touched down to find that our two-week honeymoon, which had already been rearranged several times, was going to be a two-day visit. We've arranged a flight for tomorrow and will be spending today getting ready to turn right around and go home.'

Mexico is in the grip of a third wave of Covid and on Wednesday another 611 deaths were reported – taking the total number of deaths due to the virus to 242,547.

Another 611 deaths were also reported and the country has recorded a total of 2,901,094 infections and 242,547 deaths.

The government has said the real number of cases is likely significantly higher, and separate data published recently suggested the actual death toll is at least 60% above the confirmed figure.

Seven European countries: Austria, Germany , Latvia, Norway, Romania, Slovenia and Slovakia will turn green from Sunday 4am.

India , Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates will switch from red to amber, meaning arrivals from those countries will no longer have to spend 11 nights at pricey quarantine hotels;

But Mexico, Georgia and the French overseas territories of La Reunion and Mayotte are joining the red list. Up to 6,000 Brits are on holiday in Mexico and now scrambling to get back this weekend to avoid quarantine hotels - with not enough seats to get them home;

Hotel quarantine costs are to soar to more than £200 a night from a week today. From next Thursday, the price will jump to £2,285 for a single person. Additional adults and teenagers will be charged £1,430 – more than double the current £650 rate;

The decision to place Mexico on the red list also reflects worries about a new variant which originated in Colombia and which has concerned British scientists.

Passengers arriving from Mexico City at Heathrow Terminal 5 today slammed the new rules.

Leidy Corrales, 35, a dental assistant, who was travelling back to Switzerland from Playa de Carmen in Mexico, said: 'I'm travelling back to Geneva with my two children Joshua and Carla and my husband.

'Putting Mexico on the red list is not logical because when you go there, everything is normal, they are taking all the same protections - masks, hand sanitisation and social distancing.

'The quarantine costs are just unreasonable - I think when people go on holiday, they should just have to do two tests and only quarantine if it's positive.

'Mexico is a tourist hotspot and people here like going to hot places, but the government doesn't want people to go on holiday, they want to control them.

'It's like a dictatorship of security in a democracy, because they keep changing the rules and no-one can afford that.'

Her husband Denys added: 'We're so happy to have been able to enjoy our holiday without having to pay for a hotel on the way back, thank God.'

Passengers arriving from Mexico City at London's Heathrow Terminal 5 today slammed the new rules, which come into effect on Sunday

Amy Perez, 39, a marketing director from Putney, south west London, has been travelling around Mexico with her family

Sofia and Gabriella Martinez were among the many passengers to arrive at Terminal 5 at Heathrow today from Mexico

Leidy Corrales, Denys Corrales, Carla Corrales and Joshua Corrales were also among the arrivals earlier today

Changing travel rules: What you need to know There have been more changes to the rules for international travel, with some popular destinations climbing the ladder to the green list and others sliding down on to the red. The Government has also hiked the price of hotel quarantine, meaning a trip to a red list country is a pricey affair. Here is the state of play for your summer holidays. Is there any good news? Seven countries will be added to England's green travel list from 4am on Sunday, the Government announced on Wednesday. Anyone returning from Germany, Austria, Slovenia, Slovakia, Latvia, Romania and Norway will no longer need to quarantine on arrival. France has also lost its confusing 'amber plus' status, which meant all travellers and not just those who are not fully vaccinated had to self-isolate for 10 days upon return. Our nearest neighbour had been in a category all by itself because of concerning levels of the beta variant of Covid-19 there. Is that it? Sadly yes, but it just got slightly easier to visit India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates as they have been downgraded from the red to the amber list, meaning arrivals will no longer have to spend 11 nights in a quarantine hotel. There are currently 24 countries on the green list, including the popular holiday destinations of Barbados, Croatia and Malta - unfortunately 16 of these are on the 'green watch list' meaning they could be suddenly be shunted up to amber. Australia and New Zealand are both unambiguously green - unfortunately neither are welcoming British travellers at the moment. Has anyone joined the red list? Yes - Mexico, Georgia and the French overseas territories of La Reunion and Mayotte are joining the red list. If you have a holiday to one of those destinations already booked and want to press ahead, bear in mind the cost for solo travellers in a quarantine hotel in England will be ramped up from £1,750 to £2,285 from August 12. The charge for an additional adult sharing a room will more than double from £650 to £1,430 to 'better reflect the increased costs involved', the Government said. Is my trip to Spain safe? There were fears in the travel industry that Spain - the most popular overseas destination for UK holidaymakers - could be added to England's red list. The Government announced it would keep its amber status, but urged travellers arriving in the UK from Spain to take a PCR test for the mandatory pre-departure test 'as a precaution against the increased prevalence of the virus and variants in the country'. Many travellers have been relying on the cheaper lateral flow test kits which are less reliable than PCRs. Things keep changing - what do I have to do when I get home again? There are different rules for countries on the red, amber and green lists that also differ according to a traveller's vaccination status. Passengers to England returning from a red list country must have proof of a negative Covid-19 test before departure and must book a hotel quarantine package including two Covid-19 tests even if they have had both jabs. They must also complete a passenger locator form. If you have come from an amber list country, you need proof of a negative test before travel and those who are not fully vaccinated must self-isolate 10 days upon arrival and take a PCR test on day two and day eight. You might be able to get out of quarantine early if you pay for a private PCR test to be taken on day five under the Test to Release scheme. Those with two vaccines only need to take a PCR test on day two of their arrival and can skip self-isolation - the same rules apply to those who are under the age of 18 regardless of their vaccination status. Anyone returning from a green list country need only have proof of a negative Covid-19 test before travel, fill in a passenger locator form and take a test on day two after arrival. Do these changes apply elsewhere in the UK? The devolved nations have control over their own amber, red and green lists of countries as well as the rules around quarantine upon return, and the recent changes have attracted criticism from some quarters. The Welsh Government is still advising against 'all but essential' travel abroad, and those who have been to a red list country cannot even enter until they have completed 10 days of quarantine in England or Scotland first. In a statement, a spokesman for the Welsh Government said: 'We have long called for a clearer system of rules regarding international travel. 'The ad-hoc nature of the decisions made by the UK Government on the issue does little to instil confidence or provide clarity for travellers. 'We continue to advise against all but essential travel abroad because of the continuing risk of infection, including with new variants of coronavirus which may not respond to our vaccines. 'We will consider the latest changes announced by the UK Government.' Advertisement

Amy Perez, 39, a marketing director from Putney, south west London, who has been travelling around Mexico with her family, said: 'It's inconvenient and expensive and there seems to be an entire industry surrounding Covid testing.

'We were on holiday for two weeks and are really chuffed that we don't have to quarantine for 10 days.

'We would have been locked up in a hotel with these two little monsters - Maxi, 18 months, and Emilia, who just turned four yesterday.'

Her husband Jorge said: 'The government wants people to get vaccinated, but then people don't see the benefits.

'It would have made more sense for us to take the fine rather than shell out thousands of pounds, not be able to work and be locked up with our children.'

Alejandro Seama, 42, a filmmaker from London, said: 'I think it's terrible and stupid, because it seems they just want rich people to be able travel.

'Look at my dad, he's 72, he's been double vaccinated, he's absolutely fine, but for some reason they don't accept his vaccines here.

'I had to spend £600 on mandatory Covid tests just to get my parents here.

'If the rules had already changed, they would not have been able to visit and I would have never left.

'I had no clue that Mexico was going on the red list, but thank God we came back today.'

Returning from Mexico after the deadline will see Britons face a steep hotel quarantine bill after the government raised the price to 'reflect increased costs involved'.

A single person will have to stump up £2,285 from next Thursday during their isolation - while additional adults and teenagers will be charged £1,430 – more than double the current £650 rate.

The price for children aged five to 12 will remain at £325, while under-fives will continue to stay for free.

It means that, for a family of four with two teenage children, the cost will jump from £3,700 to a staggering £6,575 – a rise of 78 per cent.

Mr Coward said if the couple do not receive a refund from British Airways for their holiday, based near Cancun, they will be 'several thousand pounds out of pocket'.

He said staying is not an option due to the cost of quarantine hotels - which from August 12 will rise to £2,285 for a solo traveller, plus an extra £1,430 for additional adults sharing a room.

Ayo Faley, a call handler for NHS Test and Trace in London, also landed in Cancun on Thursday morning but she plans to stay for her holiday as planned and pay for quarantine.

She is returning on August 11 so will pay the lower rate of £1,750, but said she is 'absolutely distraught'.

The 24-year-old said: 'I only found out (travel restrictions had changed) the minute I was able to connect to wifi at the airport... I went into a state of panic.

'(I tried) to locate other Brits and see whether they knew and what their next plan of action was... you could see the look of confusion, fear and regret all in their faces.

'I am absolutely distraught... I've decided to just stay and enjoy the time here... I'll just have to face the consequences when I arrive.'

Ms Faley works from home and had planned to do so on her return from Cancun, but said she will not be able to access her equipment in quarantine.

She added: 'How are (the Government) planning to help individuals who have found themselves in a situation like this?

'Leaving the UK thinking their country of destination was safe to then land and find out they better return ASAP or risk being stuck in a hotel for 11 days.'

Aaron, who did not wish to share his second name, is relocating his family to Edinburgh in late August and will now have to pay for them all to quarantine on arrival.

The 43-year-old arrived in Mexico in early July to witness the birth of his son, Aviv, and his wife, who is from Sinaloa, had her UK visa approved on July 28.

'(Aviv) was due to be born July by C-section, but they brought the date forward, so I arrived in the airport at 3am and just made it to the hospital before my wife went to surgery,' Aaron told PA.

Aaron is a self-employed data and audiovisual engineer and said he 'can't quantify' how much quarantining will cost his business.

'I have previously taken out a bounce-back loan to keep my business afloat,' he added.

'I have no idea why I should have to pay to isolate in a hotel when I've had both (Astrazeneca) vaccinations in Edinburgh, proof of vaccination, took a test on my way here and will take one on arrival in Scotland.'

James Dean, 38, from Bournemouth had already spent £8,000 on a fortnight in Cancun with wife Rebecca and their four children Lilly, 16, Jack, 13, Isabella, nine, and Fred, six.

The office manager told the Mirror: 'That has just shocked me. I'm gutted to be honest.

'I'm going have to pay for us all to go in to quarantine as well. I'm still digesting it. I'm just gobsmacked.'

John Soones, 62, from south west London, was travelling to Mexico with his wife and their 18 year old daughter.

He said: 'It's just incredible. It's terrible to get no notice that this is likely to happen and no time to change plans.'

In more positive news, it was announced that double-jabbed tourists returning from France will be spared quarantine from Sunday and seven European countries including Germany and Norway were added to the green list of destinations.

Spain has also been spared being given red status - potentially forcing thousands into £2,285-a-stay quarantine hotels - but the Government is urging travellers to take a PCR test before they fly home from the Iberian country.

Queues at St Pancras International this morning as France was opened up both ways for British tourists and people jumped on the Eurostar

Experts are predicting that there will be a flurry of bookings for France (St Pancras today) but there is already a battle for accommodation with French staycationers in particular

Grant Shapps said today that people can travel without 'looking over their shoulders' for the next three weeks as countries will not move lists 'unless something exceptional and unexpected happens'. But the Transport Secretary added that full vaccination for travel will be a feature for Britons 'forever more' and admitted that countries could turn red again by the end of the month.

Tens of thousands more Britons are now expected to head to France for August - although tourism chiefs have warned millions more Frenchmen are staying in the country this summer so there is serious a lack of accommodation if the traveller is without a second home.

There is a particular shortage of gites, camp sites and hotel rooms in the south of the country, especially near beach resorts such as Biarritz, Narbonne, Île de Ré and Saint-Tropez, while experts have said there are much larger numbers of tourists from Holland, Belgium and Germany in the country this year.

Not wearing a face mask on the Tube should be a CRIMINAL offence says Sadiq Khan Sadiq Khan has said that failing to wear a face mask on the Tube should become a criminal offence. The London Mayor has been pushing the the government to allow Transport for London (TfL) to impose a by-law requiring face coverings on the capital's transport network. Since the easing of restrictions on July 19 'Freedom Day', passengers have only been required to wear a covering as a 'condition of carriage' rather than a legal requirement. This means TfL staff can tell non-compliant customers to leave a bus or train but are powerless to impose fines. But Mr Khan now wants a bye-law put in place to effectively bring back the rule that was dropped on July 19. The rule change would also mean British Transport Police officers could be used to enforce it. Speaking to the BBC's Newscast podcast Mr Khan said: 'We are trying to lobby the Government to allow us to bring in a bye-law, so it will be the law again, so we can issue fixed penalty notices and we can use the police service and BTP to enforce this.' Advertisement

Austria, Germany, Latvia, Norway, Romania, Slovenia and Slovakia will all move to the quarantine-free tier at the end of the weekend, in a huge boost for those looking to book a late summer getaway on the continent.

But while there is no quarantine people will still have to take a negative test before returning and a PCR test on day two back in the UK.

Meanwhile, the status of India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates will switch from red to amber, meaning arrivals from those countries will no longer have to spend 11 nights at pricey quarantine hotels.

While Spain avoided joining them, those flying back will soon face higher testing costs after ministers urged holidaymakers to take a PCR for the mandatory pre-departure test, rather than the cheaper lateral flow alternatives, 'as a precaution against the increased prevalence of the virus and variants in the country'.

With the guidance being advice, rather than law, many travellers may feel entitled to refuse to take the gold-standard test, which can cost as much as £175 per person.

French tourism chiefs have welcomed the news that Britons can more freely come and go from Sunday - especially because Britons are by far the biggest spenders in the country but only around ten per cent of the usual number of UK tourists are in the country this summer.

But in the past month Mr Macron has enforced a 'high alert' covid-19 level hit in 37 departments in France because of rising cases of the Delta variant and increasingly busy hospitals.

In Occitanie, in south-west France, a 'white' alert has been imposed meaning medics on holiday can be forced to return to work because of increasingly packed covid wards.

Changes to the traffic light system are a 'positive step forward' but the Government needs to make faster progress in opening up international travel, industry experts have warned.

Four countries are being removed from England's red list as part of the latest update to the international travel system, while seven more, including Germany are being added to the green list.

It has also been confirmed that arrivals from France will no longer need to self-isolate, aligning the nation with other countries on the amber list, from which arrivals only need to quarantine at home if they are not fully vaccinated.

Scotland and Northern Ireland have followed England in introducing the same travel relaxations.

However, the changes have attracted criticism from the Welsh Government which has continued to advise against 'all but essential' travel.

Confirmation that France is joining the amber list is 'positive' especially during the 'critical' school holiday period, said Mark Tanzer, head of Abta, the travel association.

But he warned the Government is 'failing to capitalise fully on the success of the vaccine rollout' with a 'very cautious' approach to the green list and 'failure to relax restrictions on travel, including requirements for multiple tests even when visiting low risk destinations.'

Karen Dee, chief executive of the Airport Operators Association, said the extension of the green list is 'a positive step forward' but warned that the UK remains 'a long way off a full and meaningful restart of international travel'.

Covid cases in the UK and France look set to pass each other in the coming days as a wave of delta cases in Britain drops while it is on the rise across the Channel

Tim Alderslade, boss of Airlines UK, the industry body representing UK-registered carriers, described the announcement as 'another missed opportunity'.

He added that the travel industry has not had 'anything like the reopening it was hoping for'.

Meanwhile, Rory Boland, travel editor at Which?, welcomed the addition of more green list countries, but warned that the constant chopping and changing would cause further disruption for many.

'The cost for travellers can be significant,' he said. 'Some holidaymakers whose countries have now been placed in the red category will find that their airline or tour operator is unwilling to give them a refund. Other providers won't refund or even facilitate rebooking if a country is moved from green to amber.'

Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said: 'While there's some welcome progress, the Government is still being too cautious at a time when they should be opening up travel faster to help the sector's recovery.'

Johan Lundgren, chief executive of easyJet, said: 'Now summer is fully under way, this provides some reassurance to consumers by keeping the status quo for key holiday destinations, as well as adding some Green list destinations for last-minute bookers where there are still great flight and holiday deals available.

'But we remain disappointed at the double standards applied to travel versus the domestic economy. With infection rates remaining lower in much of Europe and the high vaccination levels in the UK, if not now, it is hard to know when the time is for much of Europe to genuinely turn Green.

'And Government urgently needs to tackle this expensive testing regime which is adding unnecessary cost, especially for the fully vaccinated. No one wants to see flying become a preserve of the rich again - particularly when so many need to get away or reunite after such a long time.'

Is pingdemic mayhem finally easing? Number of alerts sent by NHS Covid app plunged by 43% last week... and that was BEFORE software was tweaked

The number of alerts given out by the NHS Covid app fell by 43 per cent in a week before it was made less sensitive, official data has shown.

NHS figures show 395,971 alerts in England and Wales were sent in the seven days up to July 28, down from 690,129 the week before, in a sign that pingdemic mayhem may finally be easing.

Thousands of people have deleted the app in recent week to avoid the alerts, which tell people they have been in close contact with someone who had tested positive for coronavirus.

The alerts have forced millions into self-isolation across the country — despite not testing positive themselves — leading to chaos as supermarket shelves were left barren with workers having to stay home.

Earlier this week it was announced that the app is being updated so fewer contacts will be instructed to isolate.

Dr Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M) advising ministers, insisted the app is still 'incredibly useful', despite the swathes of people being asked to isolate.

But the changes were made after the latest data — suggesting another reason is behind the drastic fall in alerts.

Britain's Covid cases began falling on July 21 but did not reach the rate of the drop off in alerts until July 28, the last date included in the most recent data.

It comes after academics claimed Britain's Covid self-isolation sentence could be halved to just five days and be as effective.

Data suggests 98 per cent of transmission occurs either before people become ill, or within five days of symptoms starting.

NHS figures show 395,971 alerts in England and Wales were sent in the seven days up to July 28, down from 690,129 the week before

The number of alerts given out by the NHS Covid app fell by 43 per cent in a week before it was made less sensitive, official data has shown

The NHS data today showed the number of venue check ins made with the Covid app dropped from 6.6million to 2.3million in the most recent week — a drop-off of 65 per cent.

People are no longer required to use the app to check into venues since restrictions were lifted on July 19, but the trend gives an indication in the fall in usage.

Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M) advising ministers, described the app as 'incredibly useful', despite large numbers of people being asked to isolate

Earlier this week, Health and Social Care Secretary Sajid Javid said the 'logic' behind the app was tweaked, although the sensitivity and risk threshold will remain unchanged.

Instead of checking contacts for five days before a positive test, the app will only go back two days.

Dr Tildesley told Sky News: 'I know there have been some challenges in terms of particularly at the moment the so-called 'pingdemic', but in terms of being able to detect contact, it has been extremely valuable.

'Obviously the challenge with that is that a lot of people are going into isolation and over the last few days the app has been made less sensitive.'

Dr Tildesley said there is a worry that if too many people are pinged, fewer may be willing to comply, but he added that the tweak will 'hopefully guarantee higher levels of compliance'.

Fresh data from Oxford University's Pathogen Dynamics Group shows up to 40 per cent of transmission occurs before symptoms emerge.

But most of this happens during the two days before people fall ill, which prompted the alteration of how the NHS Covid app works.

Around 35 per cent of transmission occurs within the first two days of people having symptoms.

However, the data came from September — before the highly-infectious Delta variant took off.

Oxford University data suggests 98 per cent of transmission occurs either before people become ill, or within five days of symptoms starting

Ministers are keen to replace quarantine rules with daily testing, with scientists now investigating if it is safe to make the drastic move.

Dr Muge Cevik, an infectious disease expert at the University of St Andrews, told the Telegraph: 'Given most transmission happens very early on, the isolation period could be much shorter for the cases.

'Viral load peaks pretty quickly, so people are highly infectious within the first few days.

'Also importantly, many people have non-specific mild symptoms before developing more noticeable ones, like fatigue or myalgia, so that's probably when people are highly infectious too but continue daily activity.

'So, the current self-isolation guidelines, especially given the lack of support provided for sick leave, does not serve for the purpose.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Are you already planning a well-deserved holiday extravaganza for 2022 after the last two years were a bit of a washout due to covid and lockdowns?

Well, then you're in luck, as if you plan carefully, you can score a staggering 45 days off, while booking just 18 days of annual leave.

You just need some clever booking tips to make the most of your time off.

2020 and 2021 were both washouts when it came to holidays. But if you cleverly book your leave around the bank holidays and weekends you can get 45 days off using just 18 days leave

Easter easy holiday hack

Let's start with Easter. Good Friday will roll round on 15 April. Easter Monday is on 18 April.

Upcoming bank holidays in England and Wales Upcoming bank holidays in England and Wales 2021 30 August Monday Summer bank holiday 27 December Monday Christmas Day (substitute day) 28 December Tuesday Boxing Day (substitute day) 2022 3 January Monday New Year’s Day (substitute day) 15 April Friday Good Friday 18 April Monday Easter Monday 2 May Monday Early May bank holiday 2 June Thursday Spring bank holiday 3 June Friday Platinum Jubilee bank holiday 29 August Monday Summer bank holiday 26 December Monday Boxing Day 27 December Tuesday Christmas Day (substitute day) Advertisement

If your workplace closes over weekends and on bank holidays, you can turn this into a 10-day break using just four days leave. Simply book the 19, 20, 21 and 22 April off work.

Because the 16, 17, 18, 23 and 24 April are either public holidays or weekends, you will max out your leave time while barely making a dent in your annual allowance.

Book off 19, 20, 21, and 22 April for a nine-day stretch.

Make the most of May

Then in May, you could make another canny holiday move by taking an eight-day holiday for the price of just four days of annual leave.

This is because April 30 and May 1 are weekend days. May 2 - the Monday - is a bank holiday. So if you book off the 3, 4, 5, and 6 as annual leave, this brings you to the next weekend, another two days off.

Book off 3, 4, 5, and 6 May for an eight-day break.

A Jubilant jubilee in June

There are even more holiday bonuses to come, as the nation celebrates the Queen's Jubilee next year. June 2 is the Spring bank holiday, and June 3 is the Platinum Jubilee bank holiday.

Wise holidaymakers could book the 30 and 31 of May, and the 1 of June as annual leave, then enjoy the Thursday and Friday bank holidays on the 2 and 3 of June, and the weekend on the 4 and 5.

So another seven days holiday, for just three days of annual leave.

Book off 30 and 31 May and 1 June for a seven day celebration.

We're all going on an extended Summer holiday

If this sounds too good to be true...just wait for August, when it gets even better, with a potential nine-day holiday using up just four days of precious leave.

This is how it works. The 27 and 28 of August are weekend days. Then, you have the 29 August bank holiday on the Monday. Book off August 30 - September 2 as annual leave, then you have another weekend.

Those who work Monday to Friday can score themselves another tidy holiday in December.

Book off August 30 and 31, and September 1 and 2 for a nine-day sun-fest.

The Jubilee next year means Monday-Friday employees are going to score some extra time off as Queen Elizabeth celebrates her record-breaking reign

Cash in on Christmas

Christmas Day falls on a Sunday, and Boxing day and the 27 are both bank holidays.

So book off the December 28, 29, and 30, which brings you to the weekend, and then another bank holiday on Monday, 2 January.

Book off December 28, 29, and 30 for a 10-day festive fiesta.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CONTRIBUTORS STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

1.1 The definitions and rules of interpretation in this Clause apply in these Terms and Conditions.

“ANL” means Associated Newspapers Limited, registered address, Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London W8 5TT and registered company number 84121;

“Affiliates” means in relation to a person, any direct or indirect parent undertaking or subsidiary undertaking from time to time of such person, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings from time to time of any parent undertaking of such person. An undertaking is a “subsidiary undertaking” of another undertaking (its “parent undertaking”) if that other undertaking, directly or indirectly, through one or more subsidiary undertakings:

(a) holds 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(b) it is a member of the undertaking and has the right to appoint or remove 50% or more of its board of directors or equivalent managing body; or

(c) it is a member of the undertaking and controls alone, or pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders or members, 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(d) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over it, for example by having the right to give directions with respect to its operating and financial policies, with which directions its directors are obliged to comply.

“Content” means any and all text, Images, Videos, Lineage, audio or video material, recordings of moving images with or without sound, all stills, images, content, materials, information, data, software and executable code, in whatever medium or form supplied or made available by or on behalf of the Supplier in connection with these Terms and Conditions;

“Fees” means the fees that we have agreed to pay the Supplier respect of the licence of the Content as set out in the self-generated Invoice;

“Images” means any photos, print graphics, interactive or digital graphics or other still images;

“Intellectual Property Rights” means all intellectual property rights wherever in the world arising, whether registered or unregistered (and including any application), including copyright, know-how, confidential information, trade secrets, business names and domain names, Marks, patents, petty patents, utility models, design rights, semi-conductor topography rights, database rights and all rights in the nature of unfair competition rights or rights to sue for passing off;

“Lineage” means written content or text material accompanying the content supplied by Supplier;

“Licensed Media” means:

(a) any and all digital or electronic publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website, and which in each case is owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time including those which operates under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, ‘Metro’ or ‘This is Money’ brands, or any derivative of such brands, including, but not limited to the publications owned or operated by ANL and which are located at www.metro.co.uk, www.mailonline.co.uk, Mailonline.co.uk/au, www.dailymail.co.uk, www.dailymail.com and www.thisismoney.co.uk and any subsequent or additional URLs which may replace them from time to time;

(b) any and all print publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed which ANL operates including those under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, or ‘Metro’ brands, or any derivative of such brands;

(c) any of the above publications’ pages or articles (including its mobile versions) on any social media accounts or news aggregator websites from time to time (including, but not limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, MSN, Apple i news and Yahoo; and

(d) any media player owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time (with or without embedding functionality and whether incorporated in the publications set out above or in any third party sites, services, apps or publications).

“Marks” means any and all trade marks, trade names, service marks, trade dress, logos, URLs, identifying slogans or other distinctive brand features of a party to these Terms and Conditions, whether or not registered;

“Supplier” means the entity set out in the self-generated Invoice; and

“Video” means a recording of moving images with or without sound supplied by Supplier.

2. GRANT OF LICENCE

2.1 Subject to these Terms and Conditions, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL and each of its Affiliates a non-exclusive (unless otherwise agreed), royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence to use, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform, display, edit and transmit the Content in connection with and through the Licensed Media and to make the same available to end users of the Licensed Media.

2.2 The Supplier, by granting the licence detailed in Clause 2.1, also grants ANL the express right to ANL and each of its Affiliates to grant a sub-licence to end users and readers of Licensed Media to the extent necessary for end users and readers to view

and use the Content in accordance with the Licensed Media’s terms of use from time to time.

2.3 The Supplier agrees that ANL shall be entitled to change, modify and edit the Content for technical or editorial purposes (including, without limitation, cropping or framing the Content).

2.4 ANL shall be entitled to reproduce the whole or any part of any Content in any secondary reproductions of Licensed Media (e.g. compilations, screen shots, stills, thumbnails) in order to promote or market the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including any and all print, digital and electronic publications.

2.5 If the Content includes Videos, ANL shall be entitled to embed, and enable, facilitate and support the embedding and organic sharing of Content by any end user of, all or any part of the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including without limitation, on any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website. ANL shall be entitled to manage, control and change the embedding functionality and settings of any of its media players from time to time as ANL shall determine in its sole discretion.

2.6 ANL agrees that it shall include the credit marked on the Images and Videos or notified by the Supplier on any use or reproduction of the Images and Videos.

2.7 Any inadvertent failure by ANL to accord the credit shall not constitute a breach of these Terms and Conditions by ANL provided that ANL uses its reasonable endeavours to remedy such failure that the Supplier makes ANL aware of, as soon as reasonably practicable and on a prospective basis only. For the avoidance of doubt, ANL will not be required to recall any print or other material already printed nor incur legal costs or expenses.

2.8 The Supplier hereby waives all moral rights in the Content to which the Supplier may be entitled under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) or the Copyright Act 1968 (Australia) as amended from time to time (and under all similar legislation from time to time in force anywhere in the world) to the extent necessary for ANL to exploit the Content in the Licensed Media.

2.9 The Supplier hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Content may be copied or reproduced under separate licences or arrangements with NLA Media Access and all other such database aggregators and services. As such, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL all such licences and rights as are required in order to enable others to access, copy and reproduce all or part of the Licensed Media (whether via press cuttings or similar services) pursuant to those licences or arrangements, including the non-exclusive right to syndicate (including electronic syndication or syndication for use in electronic databases) or distribute the Licensed Media (containing the Content) to NLA Media Access and all other owners of such databases, databanks and services for storage, copying, republication and redistribution to third parties for further storage, copying, publication and distribution in any medium.

2.10 ANL will have the non-exclusive right to store the Content (whether or not the Content has been published by ANL) in any of its electronic databases and to allow access to the databases for research purposes.

3. MARKS

3.1 The Supplier acknowledges and agrees that ANL owns all right, title and interest in and to the Licensed Media and ANL’s Marks. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall confer in the Supplier any right of ownership in the Licensed Media or ANL’s Marks.

3.2 Supplier hereby grants to ANL a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty free licence to use, reproduce, display and transmit the Supplier’s Marks solely for the purposes of performing its obligations under these Terms and Conditions, including in connection with the presentation of the Content within the Licensed Media.

4. FEES AND PAYMENT

4.1 In consideration of the provision of the Content by the Supplier, ANL shall pay the Fees which shall be all inclusive for the rights granted above (including syndication).

4.2 ANL will send Supplier a self-generated invoice (“Invoice”) reflecting the uses along with the payment of the Fee, no more than forty-five (45) days after the use. If the Supplier believes ANL has used Content that is not reflected in an Invoice, or for which payment was not made within forty-five (45) days after the use, the Supplier will promptly notify ANL:

(a) via mailonlinecontributionqueries@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s online digital publication and provide links to the URL(s) or scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment; or

(b) via accountspayable@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s print publications and provide scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment,

Each of (a) and (b) a (“Notification”). If ANL accepts that Content has been used without timely payment of the Fee, it will pay the Fee within fifteen (15) business days of ANL’s receipt of the Notification.

4.3 Payment shall be made direct to the bank account nominated in writing by the Supplier.

4.4 If a party fails to make any payment due to the other under these Terms and Conditions by the due date for payment (due date), then, without limiting the other party's remedies under these Terms and Conditions, the defaulting party may be required to pay interest on the overdue amount at the rate of 2% per annum above the Bank of England base rate from time to time. Such interest shall accrue on a daily basis from the due date until the date of actual payment of the overdue amount, whether before or after judgment. The defaulting party shall pay the interest together

with the overdue amount. This Clause shall not apply to payments that the non-paying party disputes in good faith.

4.5 If ANL disputes any invoice or other statement of monies due, ANL shall immediately notify the Supplier in writing.

4.6 ANL may, without limiting any other rights or remedies it may have, set off any amounts owed to it by the Supplier against any amounts payable by it to the Supplier.

4.7 All Fees are exclusive of VAT or GST, as applicable.

5. WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES

5.1 Each party to these Terms and Conditions represents and warrants to the other party that:

(a) it has the full corporate right, power and authority to enter into these Terms and Conditions and to perform its obligations hereunder;

(b) the execution of these Terms and Conditions by such party, and the performance by such party of its obligations and duties hereunder, do not and will not violate any agreement to which such party is a party or by which it is otherwise bound;

(c) it shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to the performance by it of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions including but not limited to all applicable laws and regulations concerning bribery and corruption; and

(d) when executed and delivered by such party, these Terms and Conditions will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of such party, enforceable against such party in accordance with its terms.

5.2 The Supplier represents and warrants to ANL that:

(a) it has sufficient rights in the Content to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(b) it has secured all third party permissions and releases necessary to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(c) it will take all reasonable precautions in accordance with generally recognised industry standards not to provide Content that contains any matter which is defamatory, libellous, unlawfully threatening or unlawfully harassing, causes injury, invades privacy rights, or is otherwise actionable in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed;

(d) the Content:

(i) does not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights;

(ii) is created, compiled and published using reasonable care and skill and do not violate any law, statute, ordinance, rule, court order, code of practice or regulation (whether on a regulatory or statutory basis) or generally recognised industry standards, in each case in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed, including but not limited to the Editors’ Code of Practice issued by the Editors’ Code of Practice Committee in the UK, and where relevant the Statement of General Principles issued by the Australian Press Council from time to time; and

(iii) does not contain any viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time bombs, cancel bots or other computer programming routines that are intended to damage, detrimentally interfere with, surreptitiously intercept or expropriate any system, data or personal information;

(e) the only costs to be borne by ANL in respect of the use of the Content in the manner envisaged by these Terms and Conditions are the Fees and (with the exception of the Fees) it shall be responsible for all payments, fees, royalties, charges or otherwise due to all and any third parties arising out of the same; and

(f) the Supplier’s Marks do not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights or other rights of any third party.

5.3 The Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless and keep ANL (and each of its employees, directors and agents) fully and effectively indemnified from and against any and all losses, demands, claims, damages, costs, expenses (including consequential losses and loss of profit, legal costs and expenses and VAT or GST thereon) and liabilities suffered or incurred, directly or indirectly by ANL as a result of any breach by the Supplier of the warranties set out in Clauses 5.1 and 5.2.

5.4 Should any legal proceedings against ANL follow from the publication of any Content, then ANL or any other Affiliate shall be entitled, in its absolute discretion (but shall be under no obligation), to take such action as it shall deem fit, including without limitation, settling or defending such claim. The Supplier shall make itself available to assist ANL in every reasonable way possible and hereby acknowledges and agrees that it shall have no claim against ANL in any way relating to ANL's conduct of any such claim where ANL has used the Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

6. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES AND LIABILITY

6.1 Nothing in this Clause 6 shall limit a party’s liability for death or personal injury.

6.2 The liability of the Supplier shall not be limited in respect of a claim by ANL under Clause 5.3.

6.3 Subject to Clauses 6.1 and 6.2, the liability of ANL to Supplier in contract, tort, negligence, pre-contract or other representations or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or the performance or observance of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions shall be limited in aggregate to the aggregate Fees paid by ANL to the Supplier in the six months immediately preceding the incurring of such loss or damage.

6.4 ANL shall not be liable in contract, tort (including negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent misrepresentations) or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions for:

(a) any economic losses (including, without limitation, loss of revenues, profits, contracts, business or anticipated savings); and

(b) any loss of goodwill or reputation; or

(c) any special, indirect or consequential losses, in any case, whether or not such losses were within the contemplation of the Supplier at the date of these Terms and Conditions, or were suffered or incurred by that party arising out of or in connection with the provisions of these Terms and Conditions or any matter arising under these Terms and Conditions.

The following clause 6.5 does not apply to, and shall have no effect in, Australia:

6.5 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereof, whether imposed by statute or by operation of law or otherwise, that are not expressly stated herein, including without limitation, the implied warranties of satisfactory quality and fitness for a particular purpose.

The following clause 6.6 applies to, and has effect in, Australia only:

6.6 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions and to the extent permitted by law, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereto. To the extent that ANL’s liability for breach of an implied warranty or condition cannot be excluded by law, ANL’s liability will be limited, at ANL’s election, to the resupply of the services or the payment of the costs of the resupply of the services.

6.7 Each provision of this Clause 6 excluding or limiting liability shall be construed separately, applying and surviving even if for any reason one or other of these provisions is held inapplicable or unenforceable in any circumstances and shall remain in force notwithstanding the expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions.

6.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in these Terms and Conditions, if ANL believes that any Content may create liability for ANL, ANL may remove such Content from the Licensed Media as ANL believes, in its sole discretion, is prudent or necessary to minimise or eliminate ANL’s potential liability.

7. POST- TERMINATION RETENTION OF CONTENT

7.1 ANL’s right to use the Content as contemplated hereunder is perpetual and shall survive the termination of these Terms and Conditions.

7.2 On expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions for any reason, all provisions of these Terms and Conditions shall cease to have effect, except that any provision which can reasonably be inferred as continuing, including, but not limited to,

the perpetual rights and licences granted under Clause 2.1, shall continue in full force and effect.

7.3 For the avoidance of doubt, neither the termination (for any reason) nor expiration of these Terms and Conditions shall require ANL to delete or destroy copies of, or remove from transmission or display, all or part of any Licensed Media containing Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

8. GENERAL

8.1 Any notice required to be given under these Terms and Conditions shall be in writing and shall only be deemed to have been duly served if hand delivered or sent by first class recorded delivery within the United Kingdom and outside the United Kingdom by registered airmail and to the party’s registered address and in the case of ANL to Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London, W8 5TT with a copy to contracts@assocnews.co.uk

8.2 Any notice pursuant to Clause 8.1 shall be deemed to have been served:

(a) if hand delivered, at the time of delivery;

(b) if sent by post, two days after posting; and

(c) if sent by airmail, seven days after posting.

8.3 Supplier shall not be entitled to assign the benefit and/or burden of these Terms and Conditions in whole or in part without the ANL’s prior written consent.

8.4 Unless a signed and dated agreement exists between the parties, these Terms and Conditions contain the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter covered and supersede any previous agreements, arrangements, written or oral, between the parties in relation to such matters.

8.5 The parties acknowledge that no standard terms and conditions sent to the Supplier by A&N Media Finance Services Limited (A&N) shall apply to these Terms and Conditions. Similarly, no terms or conditions endorsed upon, delivered with or contained in the Supplier's quotation, acknowledgement or acceptance of order, specification, invoice or similar document shall take effect in relation to the licence of Content under these Terms and Conditions and the Supplier waives any right which it otherwise might have to rely on such terms and conditions.

8.6 The parties acknowledge that ANL enters into these Terms and Conditions for the benefit of itself and each of its Affiliates. Any Affiliate from time to time may for its own benefit enforce in its own right any term of these Terms and Conditions subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the terms of these Terms and Conditions may be varied, amended or modified or these Terms and Conditions may be suspended, cancelled or terminated by agreement in writing between the parties or may be rescinded, in each case without the consent of any such Affiliate. Except as provided in this Clause 8.6, a person who is not a party to these Terms and Conditions has no right under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any terms of

these Terms and Conditions but this Clause 8.6 does not affect a right or remedy of a third party which exists or is available apart from that Act.

8.7 If any provision (or part of a provision) of these Terms and Conditions is found by any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain in force.

8.8 If any invalid, unenforceable or illegal provision would be valid, enforceable or legal if some part of it were deleted, the provision shall apply with whatever modification is necessary to give effect to the commercial intention of the parties.

8.9 Each party shall do, sign, execute and deliver all deeds, documents, instruments and acts reasonably required of it by notice from the other party to carry out and give full effect to these Terms and Conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties under it.

8.10 Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture of any kind between the parties or as constituting either party as the agent of the other party for any purpose whatsoever and neither party shall have the authority or power to bind the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the other party in any way or for any purpose.

8.11 These Terms and Conditions and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) are governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England.

8.12 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

The following clause 8.13 shall have apply to, and have effect, in, Australia only:

8.13 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have non-exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

APPENDIX 1

Invoice format:

The invoice for content licensed under this agreement must at a minimum include or be supplemented with the following information:

· Type of content claimed (video, words, pictures)

· Article IDs or links

· Video IDs for video invoices

· Title of caption

· Fee claimed if exclusively negotiated/applicable

Please note that standard rates apply where exclusive rates have not been agreed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@J.R.R. Tolkien's books have garnered blockbuster movies, a global fan following and now a $1billion Amazon series which is set to be produced in the UK, rather than New Zealand.

The news that the company has relocated filming to Britain after New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced strict border controls were here to stay is sure to be welcomed by Tolkien enthusiasts.

Hardcore fans of the Birmingham author's work have long speculated on the real-life locations in the UK which may have inspired the settings used in the fantasy novels.

It is thought the landscape of the industrial Black Country, a West Midlands area located near where Tolkien grew up, shaped the imagery of Mordor, the realm of the evil Sauron in Middle-Earth.

Elsewhere, the Shire, home to the hobbits, is often thought to have been based on Worcestershire, while Malvern Hills in the county inspired the White Mountains.

The great mountain range travelled in Lord of the Rings is supposed to have been inspired by the hills after the author visited a friend who was based there.

Amazon has yet to reveal the locations where its as-yet untitled series will be filmed, but has confirmed the relocation to the UK and that production will start from next year.

Here, FEMAIL reveals the British places and items that inspired key scenes in Tolkien's books...

The Black Country = Mordor

It's long been thought that the hellish landscape of Mordor in Tolkien's novels was inspired by the industrialised Black Country (pictured), near the author's childhood home of Birmingham

Experts have suggested Tolkien's description of the evil Sauron's stronghold (pictured) could easily have applied to the factories and forges of the Midlands

It's long been thought that the hellish landscape of Mordor in Tolkien's novels was inspired by the industrialised Black Country, near the author's childhood home of Birmingham.

Experts have suggested Tolkien's description of the evil Sauron's stronghold could easily have applied to the factories and forges of the Midlands.

Carol Thompson, who was the curator of The Making of Mordor exhibition in 2014, told the BBC that Tolkien's 'poisoned region' in Middle-Earth resonated strongly with the Black Country's look during his childhood.

'Its filthy air, ravaged landscape and fiery skies must have seemed like an ominous presence, ready to engulf his beloved home and all that he valued,' she said.

She continued: 'He associated industrial progress with the destruction of the countryside, the loss of traditional values and skills, and the corrosion of society.

In Sindarin, one of the Elvish languages created by the author and used in Middle-Earth, Mordor even translates as 'black lands'.

The Midlands area was seemingly first referenced as the Black Country by a young Queen Victoria.

During an introductory tour of Birmingham and Wolverhampton, the then 13-year-old princess wrote in her diary about the coal-blackened faces of her subjects living in industrial Britain.

'The men, woemen [sic], children, country and houses are all black,' she wrote, inadvertently giving the area the name that it still has today. Her 1832 diary entry predates the first published use of the phrase by 14 years.

Faringdon Folly = Orthanc

The author behind The Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien: The Places that Inspired Middle-earth, John Garth, believes Saruman the White's fearsome tower in Isengard, the Orthanc, draws its roots from Faringdon Folly (pictured) in Oxfordshire

The Faringdon Folly, which was built on a hill used as a defensive location in both civil wars and the Second World War, faced major local opposition in the 1930s, sparking an epic planning row. Pictured, the Orthanc

Tolkien lived in Oxford for much of his adult life, picking up his academic career as a professor in the country in 1925.

The author behind The Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien: The Places that Inspired Middle-earth, John Garth, believes Saruman the White's fearsome tower in Isengard, the Orthanc, draws its roots from Faringdon Folly in Oxfordshire.

The Faringdon Folly, which was built on a hill used as a defensive location in both civil wars and the Second World War, faced major local opposition in the 1930s, sparking an epic planning row.

When its backer Lord Berners was asked by a planning subcommittee why he wanted the tower, he is meant to have replied: 'The great point of the tower is that it will be entirely useless.'

Despite the local muck-slinging planning permission was eventually given, but with a provision that it could not tower more than three feet above the surrounding trees.

Garth argued that the row outside Oxford would have been familiar to Tolkien, and quickly found its way into the Middle-Earth fiction culminating in two rival towers.

'Faringdon Folly isn't a complete physical model for Orthanc,' he told The Observer in 2020.

'It's the controversy surrounding its building that filtered into Tolkein's writings and can be traced all the way to echoes in the scene where Gandalf is held captive in Saruman's tower.'

Malvern Hills = The White Mountains

The author's inspiration for the White Mountains was the green and mist-soaked uplands of Malvern Hills (pictured) in Worcestershire

The Ered Nimrais mountain range, known colloquially as the White Mountains (pictured), marked the border between the kingdoms of Rohan and Gondor in Tolkien's Middle-Earth

The Ered Nimrais mountain range, known colloquially as the White Mountains, marked the border between the kingdoms of Rohan and Gondor in Tolkien's Middle-Earth.

His inspiration for the great mountain range was the green and mist-soaked uplands of Malvern Hills in Worcestershire.

The Lord of the Rings author visited them often during the 1930s, according to Countryfile, arriving on the early train from Oxford and spending the day there.

The link was confirmed by the novelist's friend George Sayer, author of the biography of CS Lewis, who remembered hiking with Tolkien in the Malvern Hills.

The Lord of the Rings author 'lived the book as we walked, sometimes comparing parts of the hills with, for instance, the White Mountains,' he said.

A previous report in the Malvern Gazette also added of the pair's trips: 'By day, they tramped the hills and Tolkien compared them with his own creation, the White Mountains of Gondor.

'At night, to entertain him, Mr Sayer brought out a tape recorder, for Tolkien had never seen one before. He was fascinated and asked if he might record some of the poems in The Lord of the Rings to find out how they sound to other people.

'He recorded several long passages and, when he heard them played back, his confidence in the work returned.'

Sarehole Mill and rural Wales = The Shire

The roots of The Shire have never been confirmed, with fans speculating different areas helped shape the place. For instance, Sarehole Mill (pictured), historically in Worcestershire but now part of Bimingham, is strongly thought to be the inspiration for The Shire

Meanwhile, the website for Visit Wales claims Tolkien is rumoured to have stayed in the appealing Powys village of Talybont-on-Usk in the 1940s while penning parts of his novels. The site says his 'nostalgic depiction of The Shire was inspired by rural Wales (pictured)

The Shire (pictured) is an idyllic inland area settled exclusively by hobbits and largely sheltered from the goings-on in the rest of Middle-Earth

Revealed: The Welsh language inspired Tolkien's Elvish in the Lord of the Rings The Lord of the Rings author was known to be heavily influenced by the Welsh language. Cardiff University's Dr Carl Phelpstead told the BBC that the Elvish language bears a close resemblance to Welsh. He said the author knew both the modern and medieval language very well, adding: 'It's not so much that he borrowed Welsh words, more the sounds. This particular Elvish language is very like the sounds of Welsh and deliberately so.' Visit Wales said that Tolkien lived near a railway station in Birmingham, where Welsh words first appeared in his life. Tolkien later said: 'Welsh is of this soil, this island, the senior language of the men of Britain; Welsh is beautiful.' Advertisement

The Shire is an idyllic inland area settled exclusively by hobbits and largely sheltered from the goings-on in the rest of Middle-Earth.

The roots of The Shire have never been confirmed, with fans speculating different areas helped shape the place.

For instance, Sarehole Mill, historically in Worcestershire but now part of Bimingham, is strongly thought to be the inspiration for The Shire.

The 16th-century working watermill powered by the River Cole is first believed to be referenced in the 1937 bestseller The Hobbit.

Bilbo Baggins sets off on his great adventure by running 'past the great Mill, across The Water, and then on for a mile or more'.

Today, the mill is a museum, with a permanent Tolkien exhibition.

Meanwhile, the website for Visit Wales claims Tolkien is rumoured to have stayed in the appealing Powys village of Talybont-on-Usk in the 1940s while penning parts of his novels.

The site says his 'nostalgic depiction of The Shire was inspired by rural Wales.

This was at a time when industrialisation was transforming the British countryside, much to the author's dismay.

It also notes that he named the Hobbit settlement of Crickhollow after nearby Crickhowell.

White Horse Hill = Barrow-downs

Fans are split over the inspiration for Barrow-downs - which was a series of low hills east of the Shire. Many insist they are shaped on White Horse Hill in Oxfordshire (pictured)

A former place of a battle, it's a location used by Tolkien where swords and spears clash once again in his novels (pictured)

Fans are split over the inspiration for Barrow-downs - which was a series of low hills east of the Shire.

A former place of a battle, it's a location used by Tolkien where swords and spears clash once again in his novels.

Many insist they are shaped on White Horse Hill in Oxfordshire, with its prehistoric horse hill figure, while others suggest they reflect the burial site of Wayland’s Smithy near Ashbury, according to The Telegraph.

Meanwhile, expert Garth believes Maiden Castle in Dorset, which is one of the largest and most complex Iron Age hillforts in Europe, is the atmospheric Barrow-downs.

A year before Tolkien wrote the action-filled passage, Garth argued, major excavations at the castle had been written about in a newspaper column by his friend REM Wheeler, meaning it is likely he was also aware of the work.

Moseley Bog = The Old Forest

Moseley Bog (pictured) - an often forgotten nature reserve in Birmingham - is said to have inspired J R Tolkien's vision for The Lord Of The Rings trilogy

He said the Bog inspired the mystical Old Forest (pictured) Frodo and his Hobbit companions travel through in the books

Moseley Bog - an often forgotten nature reserve in Birmingham - is said to have inspired J R Tolkien's vision for The Lord Of The Rings trilogy.

The author would play in the grassy area with his younger brother, Hilary Tolkien, when they were children.

He said the Bog inspired the mystical Old Forest Frodo and his Hobbit companions travel through in the books.

Now a Local Nature Reserve, Moseley Bog was an ideal place for Tolkien’s childhood adventures.

'It is an ancient place with Bronze Age burnt mounds and a mill pool, probably a storage pool for Sarehole Mill,' said the Tolkien Society.

Edgbaston Waterworks Tower and Perrott's Folly = Two Towers of Gondor

During part of his childhood Tolkien lived in Edgbaston in Birmingham, and the area's landscapes can be spotted in the Lord of the Rings' Two Towers, according to many fans. It is believed the eerie towers were inspired by two local buildings the Perrott's Folly (pictured), and Edgbaston Waterworks Tower

The two Birmingham buildings are said to have shaped the Minas Morgul and Minas Tirith towers in the Lord of the Ring novels, which both taking the shape of the inspirational builds (pictured one of the Lord of the Ring films)

During part of his childhood Tolkien lived in Edgbaston in Birmingham, and the area's landscapes can be spotted in the Lord of the Rings' Two Towers, according to many fans.

It is believed the eerie towers were inspired by two local buildings the Gothic tower Perrott's Folly, and Edgbaston Waterworks Tower.

The author would've passed these buildings regularly as a child since he lived in a nearby street at the time.

The extraordinary 96ft high Perrott’s Folly is named after John Perrott who had it built in 1758, and was originally part of a hunting lodge.

Meanwhile, Edgbaston Waterworks features a Victorian chimney tower that was part of a complex of buildings designed by Joseph Chamberlain and William Martin in 1870.

The two Birmingham buildings are said to have shaped the Minas Morgul and Minas Tirith towers in the Lord of the Ring novels, which both taking the shape of the inspirational builds.

Warwick Castle = Elven forests

The Elven forests draw a link to the woods around Warwick and Warwick Castle (pictured), argued the author behind The Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien: The Places

However, previous studies have suggested the Elven forests (pictured) are linked to Latuterbruunen, a valley in Switzerland where a quaint village sits amid snow-capped mountains

The Elven forests draw a link to the woods around Warwick and Warwick Castle, argued the author behind The Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien: The Places.

The picturesque woodland was familiar to Tolkien, who married his partner Edith at St Mary's Immaculate Roman Catholic Church in the city.

His principal biographer Humphrey Carpenter also remarked that the author 'found Warwick, its trees, its hills and its castle, to be a place of remarkable beauty'.

Tolkien also travelled to the area on romantic breaks with Edith, while a professor in Oxfordshire.

However, previous studies have suggested the Elven forests are linked to Latuterbruunen, a valley in Switzerland where a quaint village sits amid snow-capped mountains.

Tolkien acknowledged the link in 1950, writing to his son: 'From Rivendell to the other side of the Misty Mountains the journey... including the glissdale down the slithering stones into the pine woods... is based on my adventures in Switzerland in 1911.'

University of Birmingham's 'Old Joe' Clock Tower = Eye of Sauron

It's an iconic building for any University of Birmingham students, past or present - but the Joseph Chamberlain Memorial Clock Tower (pictured) also inspired Tolkien

The tower's brightly shining clockface is believed to have shaped the Eye of Sauron (pictured) in the author's novels

It's an iconic building for any University of Birmingham students, past or present - but the Joseph Chamberlain Memorial Clock Tower also inspired Tolkien.

Known affectionately as ‘Old Joe’, the build dominates over the Edgbaston campus and can be seen from far and wide.

During the First World War, the University of Birmingham was requisitioned by the army as the 1st Southern Military Hospital and various parts of the campus were used as temporary wards, including the Great Hall.

In November 1916, Tolkien was brought to the hospital from the Somme after being diagnosed with trench fever, which is transmitted by lice, and causes fever.

He stayed in the hospital for six weeks and at night, the tower's brightly shining clockface is believed to have shaped the Eye of Sauron in the author's novels.

The Eye of Sauron keeps watch over Middle-Earth from its highest tower, the Dark Tower, located in northwest Mordor, near Mount Doom.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A historic castle which has hosted prime ministers, Mick Jagger, Paul McCartney and the cast of TOWIE has been listed for £11million.

Lympne Castle, which is listed with Savills, is a Grade I listed country estate steeped in history, which has also resulted in the property's hefty price tag and its popularity as a party destination.

Situated on the southeast coast in Kent just above Romney Marsh, the 137 acre plot encompasses both rural countryside and views of the sea.

A historic castle (pictured) which has hosted prime ministers, Mick Jagger, Paul McCartney and the cast of TOWIE has been listed for £11million

Lympne Castle is a Grade I listed country estate steeped in history, which has also resulted in the property's hefty price tag. Pictured: One of the many rooms within the expansive property

The house is situated on the southeast coast in Kent just above Romney Marsh and boasts many original features and has maintained an authentic look throughout

The 137 acre plot encompasses both the historic castle (pictured) set in the rural countryside as well as various others properties and outbuildings

Visitors and residents are treated to an incredible blend of rolling countryside and seaside views, all of which can be seen from the impressive property

The medieval property sits at the top of the escarpment - a steep or long cliff - providing residents and visitors with breathtaking views of the surrounding area.

The interior of the magnificent property still maintains the building's historic origins with elements such as the exquisite exposed wood on the King Post roof inside the Great Hall.

Many of the rooms in the property remain wood paneled, have large open fireplaces as well as stone elements, in-keeping with its original style. The property also features a grand hall, two towers and several spiral staircases.

Light floods the property through the ornate Gothic traceried windows - an architectural device by which windows are divided into sections of various proportions by stone bars or ribs of moulding.

The interior of the magnificent property still maintains the building's historic origins with elements such as the exquisite exposed wood on the King Post roof inside the Great Hall

The medieval property sits at the top of the escarpment - a steep or long cliff - providing residents and visitors with breathtaking views of the surrounding area (pictured)

Many of the rooms in the property remain wood paneled, have large open fireplaces as well as stone elements, in-keeping with its original style

Light floods the property through the ornate Gothic traceried windows - an architectural device by which windows are divided into sections of various proportions by stone bars or ribs of moulding

As well as the main building, the £11million property also comes with several cottages on the land as well as a flat for staff and a restaurant.

As well as impressive interiors, the property also boasts perfectly maintained gardens and views spanning for miles around.

On some days, when the weather is particularly clear, it is even possible to see the French coast from the property.

There are several walled gardens, including one which houses a swimming pool with a surrounding lawn and paved terrace - perfect for the sunny summer months.

Perfect for entertaining, another walled garden contains a kitchen garden which also has a variety of fruit trees and bushes lining the walls, including apples, peaches and raspberries.

On some days, when the weather is particularly clear, it is even possible to see the French coast from the property

As well as the main building, the £11million property also comes with several cottages on the land as well as a flat for staff and a restaurant

There are several walled gardens, including one which houses a swimming pool with a surrounding lawn and paved terrace - perfect for the sunny summer months

Perfect for entertaining, another walled garden contains a kitchen garden which also has a variety of fruit trees and bushes lining the walls, including apples, peaches and raspberries while others offer residents a glimpse of the expansive views (pictured)

There are also various outbuildings to take advantage of, including several glass houses, potting sheds, barns, stables, a tack room for housing riding equipment and a summer house.

The property is currently used as a thriving wedding venue and often plays host to various functions.

The Only Way Is Essex has used Lympne Castle several times to host events, including a Christmas special in 2014 which saw the cast singing carols in the grounds.

It was also used in a royal wedding season finale in May 2018 after Prince Harry married Meghan Markle at Windsor castle. Several of the female cast members all dressed in white gowns.

In addition, in September 1978, Paul McCartney's Wings recorded sessions at Lympne Castle for their 1979 album Back to the Egg.

The Only Way Is Essex has used Lympne Castle several times to host events, including a Christmas special in 2014 which saw the cast singing carols in the grounds
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Oh, the waiting and the false hopes have been cruel, like low-grade torture. But with the Green List extended to the Caribbean, we can enjoy the shock of the exotic once more in Barbados – evening warmth with a wash of waves, the outrageous colours of the sea and beautiful bougainvillea, and the tastes of the tropics in tree-ripened mango, nutmeg and rum that zings with lime.

But how different is Barbados now from what we remember? Will there be the same gracious Bajan welcome and the familiar verve to the west coast?

The island has been proactive in its vaccination programme and has tracked Britain’s stuttering release, adapting its entry protocols so now you just need a negative Covid test before boarding your flight, and another on arrival.

With the Green List extended to the Caribbean, we can enjoy the shock of the exotic once more in Barbados (pictured)

You’re then confined to your hotel until you get a negative result – usually by that evening – but that is no hardship as the urgency of the outside world evaporates and you’re cocooned in a serene green enclave filled with colourful tropical blooms.

The west coast stalwart resorts are all open, having ticked over with a few staycationers, and have readied themselves in the hope of a flood of summer visitors. There is a bit of temperature-taking in public-facing services, and some activities must be booked, but otherwise it feels normal.

Coral Reef is looking particularly good, tranquil in its beautifully trained gardens. Similarly The Sandpiper, whose profusion of greenery screens any activity at the beach, and Cobblers Cove, where ‘rooms’ of foliage provide nooks to recline in.

Sandy Lane is, of course, immaculate. It reached its 60th anniversary earlier this year. There were no celebrations (that’s being saved for next year), but until mid-October it is offering a special Return To Paradise package with added dinners, spa treatments and golf.

Barbados has always been easy and fun to explore, and nothing prevents you from getting out there again.

The pandemic has hit businesses hard, but equally there is plenty of building work going on along the coastal roads. There is also increased interest in the Atlantic side of the island, so the Round House now has some competition despite sharpening up its menu (though still offering an excellent breadfruit soup with breadfruit chips).

Sunloungers at The Sandpiper resort, which has a profusion of greenery that screens any activity at the beach

Eco-Lodge, above Bathsheba, has an easy, laidback vibe, serving farm-to-table and sea-to-table dishes on a deck that’s among the palms 100ft above the coast.

A more local stop is Dina’s, a lilac and fuchsia shack right above the Atlantic rollers, where you are greeted by the lady herself – ‘Dina?’ ‘Yes, Dina, and who could be finer?’ She presides in the kitchen, offering local fish, chicken, salad and macaroni pie. My tip – ask if she’s roasting breadfruit.

It’s not just the hotels in Barbados that have superb gardens. Every home you pass has some crotons with a flowering bush or a fruit tree and some spices.

Dreamy: A bedroom at the Colony Club, where Caribbean rum is a speciality

Andromeda Gardens has an extraordinary collection of tropical and Barbadian plants originally amassed in the 1960s and 1970s. It is open, although you must book ahead. Hunte’s Gardens, set in a limestone sinkhole, is a far more flamboyant affair and lots of fun. You descend via spiral stairways into a cauldron of colour and blooms – the outrageous pinks, purples and scarlets of ixora, orchids and lobster claw lean in on you. Gentle classical music is piped and everywhere there are nooks and corners to sit quietly, often in the company of statues.

In the east, a noisier, frenetic experience is on offer for motor-racing fans at the Bushy Park Circuit. The islanders are in ferment over their star driver, 17-year-old Zane Maloney, winner of Formula 4 in 2019 and currently riding high in the Formula Regional European Championship.

You can book a ride around the track on which he honed his skills as a passenger in a Formula 4 racing car, a Radical FR3.

Hunte’s Gardens (pictured), set in a limestone sinkhole, is a flamboyant affair and lots of fun

While gin conquers the world, the Bajans are putting in a claim as the original home of rum. Recently, Mount Gay, in the north, where they have been making rum continuously since 1703 (although there are also claims it dates back to 1654), has opened a full distillery tour. You begin at the estate house for the story of how rum developed on the island, then set off to see the essential water well, molasses house, fermentation area and pot stills used for distillation, and finally the ageing houses each stacked to the roof with wooden barrels and fragrant with the ‘angels’ share’ of evaporating alcohol.

The story continues back at the Colony Club, our hotel on the west coast, with a Storied Rum Dinner in the rum vault. A feast of three courses and cocktails features glazed pork belly with a spiced sorrel rum sour, while coconut-crusted red snapper in lemongrass is paired with Mount Gay Silver rum laced with lime and a fennel and ginger syrup. It is accompanied by an entertaining tale of rum through the centuries by ‘Rum Ambassador’ Corey Sobers.

We finish with a flight of three rum digestifs and associated chocolates – and a slightly wobbly walk back to the room.

Sparkling fare: Champagne and prawns at The Fish Pot in Hastings

TRAVEL FACTS James Henderson was a guest of Elegant Hotels Barbados, owned by Marriott International (marriott.com), staying at two of its west coast properties – the traditional Colony Club (B&B from £215 per room per night) and boutique The House (from £403 per room per night all-inclusive), based on two people sharing a room. He flew with Virgin Atlantic (virginatlantic.com), which offers return fares from Heathrow to Barbados from £490. For more information about Barbados, see visitbarbados.org. Advertisement

The restaurants of Barbados come with a strong reputation. Not everywhere is open, and change is afoot, though as always in the Caribbean, owners change too radically at their peril. Returning regulars want things tweaked but to remain dependably the same.

At the Lone Star, the view on arrival and from the deck, with its white and blue tablecloths and chairbacks, is still fabulous. A new chef has arrived: Minesh Patel (who trained under Gordon Ramsay and Angela Hartnett) will retain the metropolitan menu and its Caribbean ingredients through the summer, but begin also to branch out, peppering dishes with exotic touches from North Africa, Korea, Persia and beyond.

The Cliff is under new ownership and is undergoing ground-up reconstruction while Guy Beasley remains at the helm of The Tides in Holetown, which is still offering its popular take on the Bajan tradition of Sunday lunch, Rhythm And Roast, with entertainment accompanying your meal.

Holetown itself is less a centre of culinary gravity nowadays, though locals frequent (always a good sign) Fusion Rooftop in Limegrove shopping centre for its international fare.

There are plenty of restaurants scattered along the coast.

The Fish Pot in Hastings still offers artfully simple fare in a lovely setting, and the Horny Ram in Holetown has good-quality local meat. For a distinctly West Indian setting, a rickety deck painted in red gold and green and a sea view through palms and tamarind trees, try Bomba’s for a great shrimp curry and rum cake.

There is a burgeoning farm-to-table scene. PEG Farm, whose excellent meats are used around the island, offers superb burgers on an inland deck with a vast view. There are also farmers’ markets in Brighton and at Art Splash, a cafe and gallery in Hastings on the south coast.

The south has also sprouted beach bars in classic Caribbean style – shacks that resonate to the thump of reggae and the chatter of islanders and tourists alike. Check out Blakey’s On The Boardwalk or Chill Cafe Bar & Grill in Hastings, for a Carib beer or a Banks (or try the lighter 10 Saints lager).

And back on the west coast, there’s trusty Ju-Ju’s, in a shed painted in the Bajan colours of blue and yellow.

A recent innovation is Barbados’s elegant beach bars, made for lingering all day and evening. Sea Shed, a sand-coloured bar with tiered decks above lovely Mullins Bay, is always lively: swim, drink, eat, repeat. The menu is varied, from pizzas to a daily catch and wagyu burgers, with a DJ on Friday and Sunday afternoons and live jazz on Saturdays.

And La Cabane is a French-inspired, free- form scattering of cable barrels and safari chairs under the bushy trees of Batts Rock Beach near Bridgetown.

Arrive for lunch and Minuty rosé and don’t be surprised if you’re still there at sunset, sampling their rum punch as the sun slides over the horizon.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mount Etna has grown in height to a record 11,013ft after six months of activity, according to Italy's volcano monitoring agency.

Experts said the southeast and youngest crater of Europe's most active volcano is now much higher than its 'older brother', the northeast crater, which was the 'undisputed peak of Etna' for 40 years.

Some 50 episodes of ash and lava have been belching from the mouth of the crater since mid-February, the National Institute for Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV) said, giving Etna a new peak.

Scroll down for video

Mount Etna has grown in height to a record 11,013ft after six months of activity, according to Italy's volcano monitoring agency. Experts said the southeast and youngest crater of Europe's most active volcano is now much higher than its 'older brother', the northeast crater (pictured)

Each year, Etna produces around 7.7 million tons of carbon dioxide, water and sulphur dioxide

The southeastern crater is shown here on the graphic and in satellite images above along with the other three craters at Etna's summit: the northeastern, West Chasm or Bocca Nuova (new mouth) and the central Voragine craters

How can researchers predict volcanoes? According to Eric Dunham, an associate professor of Stanford University's School of Earth, energy and Environmental Sciences, 'Volcanoes are complicated and there is currently no universally applicable means of predicting eruption. In all likelihood, there never will be.' However, there are indicators of increased volcanic activity, which researchers can use to help predict volcanic eruptions. Researchers can track indicators such as: Volcanic infrasound : When the lava lake rises up in the crater of an open vent volcano, a sign of a potential eruption, the pitch or frequency of the sounds generated by the magma tends to increase.

: When the lava lake rises up in the crater of an open vent volcano, a sign of a potential eruption, the pitch or frequency of the sounds generated by the magma tends to increase. Seismic activity : Ahead of an eruption, seismic activity in the form of small earthquakes and tremors almost always increases as magma moves through the volcano's 'plumbing system'.

: Ahead of an eruption, seismic activity in the form of small earthquakes and tremors almost always increases as magma moves through the volcano's 'plumbing system'. Gas emissions : As magma nears the surface and pressure decreases, gases escape. Sulfur dioxide is one of the main components of volcanic gases, and increasing amounts of it are a sign of increasing amounts of magma near the surface of a volcano.

: As magma nears the surface and pressure decreases, gases escape. Sulfur dioxide is one of the main components of volcanic gases, and increasing amounts of it are a sign of increasing amounts of magma near the surface of a volcano. Ground deformation : Changes to a volcano's ground surface (volcano deformation) appear as swelling, sinking, or cracking, which can be caused by magma, gas, or other fluids (usually water) moving underground or by movements in the Earth's crust due to motion along fault lines. Swelling of a volcano cans signal that magma has accumulated near the surface. Source: United States Geological Survey Advertisement

The northeastern crater of Etna reached a record height of 10,990ft in 1981, but a collapse at its edges reduced that to 10,912ft, recorded in 2018.

Satellite suggest the southeast crater has now surpassed that and stands at 11,013ft.

Etna is Europe's most active volcano, producing enough lava every year to fill a 108-story skyscraper.

It has been churning out smoke and ash since February, dirtying streets, slowing traffic and damaging crops.

Although it poses little danger to surrounding villages, Sicily's government estimated in July that 300,000 metric tones of ash had so far been collected as part of the clean-up operation.

The INGV, based in the Sicilian city of Catania, said this increase in volcanic activity had led to a 'conspicuous transformation of the volcano's outline'.

'Thanks to the analysis and processing of satellite images, the southeast crater is now much higher than its "older brother", the northeast crater, for 40 years the undisputed peak of Etna,' the INGV wrote in a press release.

'The summit of Etna, since 1980, has always been considered the northeast crater which, with the paroxysms of September 1980 and February 1981, reached a maximum height of 3,350m (10,990ft).

'This height, which has decreased over the years due to the collapse of its edges, in the summer of 2018 settled at 3,326m (10,912ft).

'This record, however, has now been surpassed by the cone of the southeast crater and, today, Etna has a new peak.'

The 700,000-year-old volcano is the second most active on Earth, after Hawaii's Mount Kilauea.

Situated between the African and Eurasian tectonic plates, it generates nearly constant eruptions of varying degrees.

Each year it produces more than tens of million tons of lava and over 7 million tons of carbon dioxide, water and sulfur dioxide.

It's most severe recent eruption occurred in March of 2017, when nearly a dozen people were injured.

But eruptions have been recorded as far back as 1500 BC, with a devastating eruption in 1169 causing an earthquake that killed an estimated 15,000 people.

Some 50 episodes of ash and lava have been belching from the mouth of the crater since mid-February, the National Institute for Geophysics and Volcanology said, giving Etna a new peak

Europe's most famous volcano was already known to be edging slowly towards the Mediterranean. But a new analysis shows the movement is mainly being driven by it collapsing under its own weight - a phenomenon known as 'gravitational instability'

Research from 2018 revealed that Mount Etna is slowly sliding into the sea and when it finally goes it could trigger a tsunami.

It was already known to be edging slowly towards the Mediterranean, but the analysis showed the movement is mainly being driven by it collapsing under its own weight — a phenomenon known as 'gravitational instability'.

This has caused one of the sides of the notorious mountain on the east coast of Sicily to weaken, increasing the risk of a devastating tidal wave.

Previously it had been assumed the lava bubbling inside was the root cause of the volcano's movement.

Separately, scientists have also argued that the title of the world's highest mountain should go to a volcanic peak in Ecuador, rather than Everest.

HOW EARTH'S 'HIGHEST' MOUNTAINS MEASURE UP Mount Everest Mount Chimbarazo Location

Himalayas, Nepal and Tibet Cordillera Occidental, Equador Height above sea level 29,029 feet 20,500 feet Height from centre of Earth 3,965 miles 3,967 miles Average climbing time 40 days from base camp 14 days First ascent 1953 1802

They said in 2016 that when measured from the centre of the planet, Mount Chimborazo extends further out into the atmosphere than Mount Everest.

This is because the Earth is not a perfect sphere and bulges around the equator.

When measured from sea level, Mount Chimborazo, which rises 20,500 feet, falls short of Everest by 8,529 feet, which stands at a mighty 29,029 feet.

But when measured from the centre of the Earth, researchers at the Institut de Recherche pour le Développement in France confirmed that Chimborazo's apex reaches 3,967 miles.

Everest, by comparison, does not even make the cut for the Earth's top 20 highest mountains, measuring 3,965 miles from the planet's centre.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Travel chiefs and business leaders demanded ministers act to reduce the cost of rip-off tests for holidaymakers.

Ministers announced on Wednesday that restrictions on international travel will be scrapped – allowing cruises to begin again.

They also said that double-jabbed US and EU travellers will be able to travel to the UK without the need to quarantine.

But there was nothing said about the high cost of tests that travellers must take to prove their Covid negative status, which can be hundreds of pounds.

Travel chiefs and business leaders demanded ministers act to reduce the cost of rip-off tests for holidaymakers

Abta, the group which represents tour operators and travel agents, welcomed the resumption of cruising but warned barriers remain. A spokesman said: ‘We need to see the Government make further progress on making testing more affordable and proportionate, and we need to see more destinations added to the green list at next week’s review.’

Willie Walsh, the director of airline group IATA and former head of British Airways, said: ‘Why are travellers forced to test twice, the second time using expensive PCR tests?’

Claire Walker, co-executive director of the British Chambers of Commerce, said firms wanted to see cheaper tests for foreign visitors to the UK to incentivise them to come.

She added: ‘These costs must not be allowed to become an impediment to the viability of businesses.’

Yesterday, Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab said easing restrictions for EU and US travellers coming to England was a ‘smart, sensible’ approach. He admitted the Government ‘cannot guarantee’ that US and EU travellers will not try to show fake vaccination certificates but said it was ‘highly unlikely’.

Bill for testing cost almost as much as flights

By Martin Beckford for the Daily Mail

It was in the dark days of the winter lockdown that I booked a summer family holiday to Spain.

Like millions of Britons, I wanted my children to have something to look forward to while stuck at home.

And I felt sure that the vaccination programme would see foreign travel back on track within a few months.

Months of anxiety later, my gamble appeared to have paid off as foreign travel restarted and then double-jabbed passengers like me were told we would not have to isolate on return from Amber list countries – just days before we were due to fly. But it quickly became apparent that not all of the ever-changing rules had been relaxed as I had hoped.

To get into Spain, my eldest child, 12, would have to take a commercial test less than 48 hours before arrival – but some providers said it took that long to get the results. And what if her swab got lost in the post?

It seemed safer to go to a drive-thru centre for a quick test that would be accepted in Spain and the ‘fit to fly’ declaration within an hour – but that cost £136 for my daughter and me. I got one myself in case my vaccination certificate wasn’t accepted.

To our relief, we tested negative and last Tuesday we breezed into Luton airport with only a cursory check of our printed test certificates, and had our Health Control Form QR codes successfully scanned at Alicante.

To get back into the UK, all travellers have to fill out a Passenger Locator Form online – and this requires a reference number to prove you have bought Covid tests for two days after your return

Getting back to the UK this week was even more costly, however. A Spanish clinic charged us 190 Euros (£162) for two lateral flow tests although they did check our blood pressure too, probably wise given the size of the bill they had just handed me.

The local doctor signed a letter to show at the boarding gate – but the airline staff barely glanced at it, let alone checked to see we hadn’t just printed it ourselves at home.

The biggest testing was still to come, however. To get back into the UK, all travellers have to fill out a Passenger Locator Form online – and this requires a reference number to prove you have bought Covid tests for two days after your return.

Although only 11-year-olds and older have to take pre-arrival tests, anyone over four has to get a post-arrival one so that covered all three of my children as well as me – even though I have had both jabs and already provided two negative tests in the past ten days.

In total I have spent £598 on tests – as against £656 on flights. Anyone with more than one adult or teenager in their party would not see much change from £1,000

The Government website claims prices start at £24 – but the cheapest I could find were £75 for self-swab ones. So that came to £300 for all of us.

And, of course, after we had spent half an hour queuing at Passport Control, the over-stretched officers had no time to study our form details. In total I have spent £598 on tests – as against £656 on flights. Anyone with more than one adult or teenager in their party would not see much change from £1,000.

It makes sense to test passengers arriving from high-risk destinations, but why should young children and the fully-vaccinated pay such a high price for taking a well-earned break in a country the Government deems safe?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There are plenty of contenders for the prettiest village in the Cotswolds, but Burford has a rightful claim to the most spectacular high street. Sweeping downhill from the High Wolds towards the medieval bridge over the River Windrush, both sides are flanked by an unbroken line of ancient houses and shops.

Halfway up, or down, is The Highway Inn, a 500-year-old timber and stone building, newly, and lovingly, refurbished by owner Scott Williamson and his architect partner.

The Grade II listed building has provided rest and sustenance to travellers since 1480 when, in the heyday of the wool trade, Burford’s location between Oxford, Bath and Gloucester made it an important staging post for merchants.

Five hundred years of history: The timber and stone exterior of The Highway Inn

The Highway Inn has 11 individually decorated rooms named after surrounding villages and hamlets. Decorated in a modern English country style and furnished with a mixture of contemporary and classic furniture, they are a brilliant blend of traditional inn and cosy Cotswold home.

The walls between the ancient oak beams are now painted in a range of heritage hues, the original fireplaces are hung with Warhol-esque artworks, and the solid-wood four-posters are strewn with jewel-coloured velvet cushions. Although it has a grown-up feel, the inn also welcomes children and dogs.

I can hardly decide where to lounge after a long day stomping through the surrounding hills – on the four-poster, the chaise-lounge or in the window nook.

Meals are served in the stone-walled bar area, breakfast room or the peaceful medieval courtyard garden. We dined on rich ham hock with black pudding and apple terrine, tangy Cotswold Gin-cured salmon, thyme-roasted local lamb and crispy duck-leg croquettes with a vodka-cherry sauce.

One of the dog-friendly bedrooms, which features a mix of contemporary and classic furniture

TRAVEL FACTS The Highway Inn, Burford, Oxfordshire. B&B costs from £100 a night. For more information visit thehighwayinn.co.uk. Advertisement

As well as being famed for its picturesque high street, Burford is known as the ‘gateway to the Cotswolds’. Uber-pretty Bibury and Roman Cirencester are all on the doorstep, while Chipping Camden is an easy drive away, making The Highway Inn a perfect base from which to explore.

The USP: A historic hotel, blending original and contemporary features.

The rooms: Three of the 11 are dog-friendly. Premium rooms come with four-poster beds, fireplaces and uneven sloping floors, while the newer rooms contain wood panelling and contemporary iron bedframes.

The food: Expect classic pub fare with refined touches and a selection of vegan dishes. Starters cost from £6 and mains from £13. The bar serves ale from the local Hook Norton Brewery, and there is an eclectic range of boutique gins, vodkas and malts.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Virgin Red is one of the newest rewards club to hit the market with Booking.com becoming the latest partner to join the service.

The partnership will reward holidaymakers with 12 Virgin Points for every £1 spent on accommodation for any domestic stays and European city breaks booked before 30 September 2021, which Virgin claims is a market-leading rate for holiday bookings.

It said this means a five-night stay in Cornwall, with the accommodation costing between £600 and £800, could earn users enough points to book a free flight to a European city or a three-course meal for two at a Raymond Blanc brasserie.

However, is the rewards club the best on the market – or can others beat it?

Virgin Red is offering consumers a number of deals - but how does it compare to other schemes?

What does Virgin Red offer?

Anyone can sign up to Virgin Red and it is free to join - it has been part of a recent advertising blitz.

Once you are a member, you can earn and spend Virgin Points across hundreds of different rewards.

It has partnered with a number of brands including John Lewis and Partners, eBay, Asos and Just Eat which means you get Virgin Red points anytime you shop with these brands.

Virgin Red also has partner offers that enable customers to earn a number of points at once including up to 7,400 points when switching to Octopus Energy, 15,000 points when switching to Virgin Money's M Plus account or 21,000+ points on Upper Class Virgin Atlantic flights to LA.

They have also partnered with Booking.com to give people points with existing customers able to access their Genius benefits, as well as being able to earn Virgin Points.

There are currently more than 150 rewards to choose from, across five different reward categories.

They start from 200 points and customers can sign up online or by downloading the Virgin Red app.

To redeem rewards online, customers must visit the website they are looking to claim points at via Virgin Red's website.

If it is an in store purchase, customers must use the app or website to redeem the points after which they will receive a code they can show to a team member when purchasing.

However, whilst there are some deals offering top end points, other purchases offer much less.

For example, users only get 1 point per £1 spent at both Boots and on eBay.

Another issue is that there is no cash conversion for the points with the value varying from partner to partner depending on the reward on offer.

This could make it tricky for consumers to understand how much benefit they are actually getting from the scheme.

WHAT VIRGIN RED POINTS COULD BUY YOU £s Points Reward £300 3,600 18 sausage rolls or two tickets to the cinema £500 6,000 A driving experience £600 7,200 Raymond Blanc Meal £800 9,600 A business flight to Paris £1,000 12,000 Three flights to Amsterdam £1,500 18,000 Virgin Active yearly membership £2,000 24,000 Flight to New York (exc. taxes, fees and charges) or 120 Greggs Doughnuts £3,000 36,000 Exclusive use of the Virgin Red Room - a private members suite at Manchesters AO Arena £4,000 48,000 Three flying lessons or five cases of wine Source: Virgin Red

How does this differ from competitors?

Whilst the Virgin Red rewards scheme may look appealing, there are a number of other companies on the market offering similar incentives.

Rob Burgess, Head for Points, said: 'The best way to think of Virgin Red is simply as another cashback or rewards portal.

'Despite how it is branded, it simply isn't any different to TopCashback, Quidco, Nectar estores or Avios estore except that Virgin Points are far less flexible than the cash that Quidco or TopCashback would give you.'

For comparison, TopCashback is currently offering 7 per cent cashback on UK and European hotel bookings via Booking.com.

Meanwhile, the British Airways estore is offering 10 Avios per £1.

By comparison, Nectar is offering, for every 400 Nectar points - the equivalent to £2 in cash - 250 Avios points - much more than British Airways.

Ultimately, it is up to customers to decide whether Virgin Red would be worthwhile for them.

Burgess said: 'If you are an active Virgin Points collector then this offer of 12 points per £1 is attractive.

'If you are not an active Virgin Points collector, I would definitely be looking to take 7 per cent in hard cash via TopCashback instead of being stuck with some Virgin Points I may never get to use.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

We've waved goodbye to lockdown and the timing couldn't have been better (or worse, depending on how you see it) as temperatures soared.

Beaches were packed and pools, lidos and leisure centres booked up, but some of the country's most beautiful areas for wild swimming remained primarily the preserve of those in the know.

So get ready for the next heatwave with our guide to the best spots to take a dip — but always exercise caution and check that the water conditions are safe.

Coniston Water, Cumbria

From five-mile-long Coniston Water you can explore Peel Island and spy John Ruskin's house

Go river deep and mountain high in Coniston. From five-mile-long Coniston Water you can explore Peel Island (the inspiration for Wild Cat Island in Swallows and Amazons), spy John Ruskin's house (he once said, 'there is no such thing as bad weather, only different kinds of good weather') and to the west, 2,600ft of The Old Man of Coniston (the name comes from a Celtic phrase meaning High Stones). Pack a picnic and don't miss the lovely tarn Goat's Water.

Stay: B&B doubles at The Coniston Inn from £149 (inncollectiongroup.com/coniston-inn, 0191 580 3610).

The Thames, Clifton Hampden, Oxon

The River Thames at Clifton Hampden, where the scenery is rich and beautiful, according to writer Jerome K Jerome

With a village backdrop of immaculate thatched cottages, this calm, inviting stretch of the Thames has plenty of micro- beaches. In Three Men In A Boat, Jerome K. Jerome wrote that 'the river scenery is rich and beautiful' there.

Stay: The Plough B&B, Clifton Hampden, from £78 (ploughbnb.com, 01865 409976).

Loch Etive, Glencoe, Scotland

Loch Etive is so serene you won't know which half is the reflection in your photographs

Protected by mountains, the vast and much-loved Loch Etive is so serene you won't know which half is the reflection in your photographs. Elsewhere, dip into the 20 miles of river, with its deep canyons of glassy water, or jump from the cliffs to make a bigger splash. Stay in nearby Taynuilt and take in Tralee Beach, too.

Stay: B&B doubles at Taynuilt Inn from £110 (taynuiltinn.com, 01866 822437).

Fritton Lake, Great Yarmouth, Norfolk

You'll be sharing this corner of 1,000 acres, which is part of the Somerleyton Estate, with 'wildstock' cattle, pigs, deer and water buffalo, all as part of an ambitious rewilding project. Stay in the clubhouse or a plush cabin (with hot tub for stargazing) and glide around the two miles of peaceful lake (new this year is a floating sauna), though nobody will judge you if you prefer the heated 22m pool.

Stay: B&B doubles at Fritton Lake from £160, two nights minimum (frittonlake.co.uk, 01493 484008).

River Wye, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire

By the River Wye in Herefordshire there is a top glamping spot with hot showers and an outdoor cinema

Enjoy your own river beach and peaceful swimming just a few steps from your giant tipi, glamping (with hot showers, barbecues and an outdoor cinema) in an apple orchard on a working farm by the river Wye. Your hosts can even organise a night swim with a local guide.

Stay: B&B doubles at White House on Wye from £169 per night (whitehouseonwye.co.uk, 07849 621669).

River Rawthey, Sedbergh, Cumbria

Four rivers run through this valley in the Yorkshire Dales National Park, at the foot of the Howgill Fells. Accompany a local swimming guide on the Rawthey; don't miss the deep pool in the Akay woods with a waterfall, and the pool at Uldale Force.

Stay: Doubles at the Black Bull in Sedbergh from £139 (theblackbullsedbergh.co.uk, 015396 20264)

Walpole Bay Tidal Pool, Cliftonville, Margate

Walpole Bay Tidal Pool in Margate, which was built in the 1930s, is one of only 13 in England

Ideal for swimmers who like a dip in the briny, this 1930s Grade II-listed seawater pool is one of only 13 in England. It is fully submerged by the tide and so refilled with seawater twice a day. The pool is perfectly positioned on the Queen's Promenade and spans four acres. Restorative fish and chips are within easy reach, too.

Stay: B&B doubles at Cliftonville Town House from £99 (cliftonvilletownhouse.com, 01843 228 164).

River Dove, Ellastone, Peak District

Handel is said to have begun composing his Water Music when he was staying near Ellastone, and George Eliot was inspired to write Adam Bede while sitting on the Dove's banks. Wallow in the shallows upstream near Norbury Church, then try the pools and rapids.

Stay: B&B doubles at The Dunscombe Arms from £170 (duncombearms.co.uk, 01767 650764).

Port Isaac Bay, Cornwall

Take a session with a swim guide to improve your open-water skills at the sheltered beach of Port Gaverne

Port Gaverne is a sheltered beach near Port Isaac, where Doc Martin is filmed. Take a session with a swim guide (available from their beachside office) to improve your open-water skills, then keep your strength up with fresh Cornish crab from Port Isaac.

Stay: Doubles at the Slipway Hotel from £165 (portisaachotel.com, 01208 880264).

Rosebush Quarry, Preseli Hills, Pembrokeshire

This secluded freshwater lagoon in the Preseli Hills of Pembrokeshire National Park was originally dug as a pit and is so famously 'fresh' that local cold-water swimming clubbers break the ice to enter it. Stay local and explore the sandy beaches at Barafundle or Broadhaven, and the waterfall in Ffynone Wood.

Stay: B&B doubles at The Mill, Rhosfach, from £385 for three nights (qualitycottages.co.uk, 01348 837871).

The River Nene, Fotheringhay, Northamptonshire

The River Nene in Northamptonshire is a top spot for experienced swimmers, especially the two-and-a-half-mile stretch from Cotterstock to Fotheringhay via Tansor

The two-and-a-half-mile stretch from Cotterstock to Fotheringhay via Tansor is a beautiful one for experienced swimmers.

Others can enjoy Fotheringhay, near the castle where Mary Queen of Scots met her end, where you can camp and also swim in the private river.

Stay: Fotheringhay Castle Farm camping from £8 per adult (fotheringhaycastlefarm.co.uk, 07976958452).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Families say they are having to cancel their holidays due to a waiting time of up to ten-weeks for a new passport.

The Passport Office has issued a warning saying people should allow up to two-and-a-half months to renew their papers. Previously it had been just three weeks.

They are concerned because only four of an expected seven million applied last year for them.

But Home Office officials are adamant there is not a backlog and the processing time has not been affected by civil servants still working from home. They were insistent last night there were no problems and everything was working perfectly.

It will be news to mother Claire Mochar whose son has still not received his new paperwork after applying back on July 16.

She said she had been forced to cancel their holiday, adding: 'Such a shambles. We have had to cancel our holiday as we were due to fly.

'It hasn't even been processed or approved yet. I renewed mine in December and only waited 10 days.'

A Twitter user said they too had been suffering problems trying to get an emergency appointment.

He added: 'I haven't been able to get an appointment for weeks, and my flight is on 18th August.

'At this rate I'm going to ruin my kids' summer holidays.'

The passport office has warned people it could take ten weeks to renew their papers

Mother Claire Mochar branded the system a 'shambles' and has had to cancel her holiday

One Twitter user said the problems were going to ruin his children's holidays due to the delays

It comes as the majority of civil servants continue to work from home during the pandemic, although the Home Office insisted remote working did not slow down any processes.

Texts have been sent by mobile phone out to those whose documents are nearing expiry.

It reads: 'Reminder: It takes up to ten weeks to get a new passport. Don't leave it too late, renew now.'

And the website for the identifying travel papers urges people to avoid delaying getting them re-ordered.

Director General of Her Majesty's Passport Office, Abi Tierney, said: 'It is vital those who may need to apply for a new passport do so now.

'If you have delayed renewing your passport or are applying for the first time, please apply now so you can receive it in good time.

'Our dedicated staff work tirelessly to ensure that passport applications are processed as quickly as possible.

'This new advice will help to ensure that we continue to meet the travel plans of our customers during any period of the very highest passport demand.'

The passport office says it usually has an excess of seven million people apply for renewal.

But it says the pandemic has seen a 'significant drop' from applicants.

Passport alerts have been sent by text warning people they need to renew in good time

Covid cases in the UK and France look set to pass each other in the coming days as a wave of delta cases in Britain drops while it is on the rise across the Channel

Grant Shapps: I can't rule out Spain turning red - but denies keeping it amber is because of a lack of space in quarantine hotels The Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said he 'can never say there is a zero chance' travellers from Spain and other popular holiday destinations will not have to quarantine again in future. Grant Shapps was asked by Sky News whether Spain could return to the red list for travel destinations in future. He replied: 'With coronavirus you can never say there is zero chance. 'But having said that, the levels of vaccination and what we now know about the virus and what our scientists have been able to work out in the last year means that people should be able to go away, enjoy their holidays without looking over their shoulders the whole time and as I say, the next set of changes are not for another three weeks.' He also denied that Spain has not been placed on the travel red list because the UK would not have the capacity to quarantine all returning travellers. The Transport Secretary was asked by Times Radio if this was the 'real reason' Spain had not been placed on the red list. Mr Shapps replied: 'We will always do whatever is required, and you have seen us do this so far with the red list to make sure that countries, even from destinations where there are a lot of people, would go on that red list if that is what is required. 'But we will simply follow the scientific advice.' He also explained why the Government is recommending travellers from Spain take a PCR test before they leave, saying scientists are 'particularly interested in one of the new variants which is B.1.162', currently prevalent there. Advertisement

It estimates that in 2020 just over four million people wrote in to get their documents renewed.

The disappointing news comes as holidaymakers have been told they can travel abroad without 'looking over their shoulders' in fear of being caught out by changing rules.

Restrictions are being eased or limited for people arriving in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland from several countries from 4am on Sunday.

Fully-vaccinated travellers will be exempt from quarantine when returning from France, Spain has kept its place on the amber list, and India is among four countries being removed from the red list.

Seven nations will be added to the quarantine-free green list, including Germany, Austria and Norway.

Grant Shapps said the rollout of vaccinations in the UK and overseas means changes to the travel lists are being made every three weeks, compared with once a week last summer.

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'I hope people will be able to go away under this simplified system, enjoy their breaks and not be looking over their shoulders the whole time.'

But asked on Sky News whether Spain could be put on the red list in future, the Cabinet minister replied: 'With coronavirus you can never say there is zero chance.'

Mr Shapps defended the decision to raise the price of quarantine hotels, which are mandatory for travellers returning to the UK from red list locations.

From August 12 the rate for solo travellers will rise from £1,750 to £2,285.

Additional adults sharing a room will see their bill hiked from £650 to £1,430.

Mr Shapps told Times Radio: 'It is necessary to cover the costs of the quarantine hotels and at the moment the system hasn't been doing that and it has cost about £75 million, so we are keen to ensure people using them are covering the full cost of this service.'

Under the latest changes, India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates are being moved out of the red list, while Mexico, Georgia and the French overseas territories of La Reunion and Mayotte are being added to that tier.

Austria, Germany, Latvia, Norway, Romania, Slovenia and Slovakia will be added to the green list.

The UK Government announced the moves for England, but the devolved administrations in Scotland and Northern Ireland said they will match the decisions.

The Welsh Government has not confirmed whether it will take the same action.

Mark Tanzer, head of travel association Abta, said confirmation that France is being aligned with other countries on the amber list is 'positive' news, especially during the 'critical' school holiday period.

But he warned that the Government is 'failing to capitalise fully on the success of the vaccine rollout' with a 'very cautious' approach to the green list and 'failure to relax restrictions on travel, including requirements for multiple tests even when visiting low-risk destinations'.

He said: 'As a result, the UK is falling behind our European competitors and the opening up of international travel from the UK is progressing at a snail's pace - making it extremely difficult for travel agents and tour operators to generate enough income to kick-start a recovery, which is desperately needed to protect jobs, businesses and livelihoods.'

EasyJet chief executive Johan Lundgren said: 'Now summer is fully under way, this provides some reassurance to consumers by keeping the status quo for key holiday destinations, as well as adding some green list destinations for last-minute bookers where there are still great flight and holiday deals available.'

But he added that the budget airline is 'disappointed at the double standards applied to travel versus the domestic economy'.

'With infection rates remaining lower in much of Europe and the high vaccination levels in the UK, if not now, it is hard to know when the time is for much of Europe to genuinely turn green,' he said.

Spain has avoided being given red status, but the Government is advising travellers to take a PCR test before they fly home from the country.

A Home Office spokesperson said: 'We continue to process passport applications promptly and last month 99.6% of passports using the urgent Fast Track and Digital Premium services were issued within their respective service standards.

'Since the outset of the pandemic, more than 4.5 million people have delayed applying for a passport. With the potential demand for passports higher than ever before, passport processing times could change quickly. Since April we have been advising applicants using the standard service to plan to wait up to 10 weeks before they receive their passport.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The heartwarming moment hundreds of seasonal workers from Samoa stand on the balconies of their quarantine hotel and sing a traditional Christian hymn as a 'thank you' to Australia has been captured on video.

The contingent of roughly 200 workers arrived two weeks ago in Hobart and are set to finish their isolation stints and go out to work on farms around the country in the coming days.

The clip shows every balcony at the front of the Best Western hotel filled with Samoans singing in unison as workers and onlookers on the street below stop to listen.

The Samoans were singing a rendition of Chris Tomlin's gospel classic 'How great is our God' in their native tongue.

The contingent of Samoan workers flew out from the capital Apia on July 14 (pictured) and were required to complete Covid tests before departing and on arrival

A clip of the beautiful moment has been liked by nearly 10,000 people since being uploaded on Wednesday with many people saying they were impressed by the positive attitude of the guests.

'They bring a special vibe when you walk past them. Such happy people who wave and chat amongst themselves not hurting anyone. Well done to the team inside the hotel aswell,' one person said.

'Thank you. You are most welcome visitors to our state and country. Very uplifting and made our family smile,' added another.

'Lovely people who are willing to go into quarantine without whining and go to work on the farms so that we can have fresh food and fruit on our tables,' a third said.

Australia's High Commissioner to Samoa Emily Luck (pictured right at Apia airport as the workers flew out) said the 'hardworking group would gain valuable skills while supporting their community'

The Victorian government has struck a deal to bring in 1,500 Pacific Island workers who will quarantine in Tasmania and be required to get a negative Covid test before flying to Victoria.

In return the Victorian government will help Tasmania with their commitment to bring back 330 Australians who are overseas and quarantine them in Victorian facilities.

Some people commenting on the clip said they really hoped the Samoans 'got paid properly' for their work.

Those who fly to Australia under the Pacific Labour Scheme are entitled to the same rights as Australian workers - including the minimum wage.

They are also covered by Fair Work Australia and can contact the ombudsman with questions about working in the country.

In addition the should be guaranteed a certain number of hours work per week and their visas cannot be cancelled by employers in Australia participating in the scheme.

The first group of 320 seasonal Tongan workers under the Pacific Labour Scheme arrived in Tasmania in March.

Samoan health authorities said on Thursday that about 14 per cent of the Pacific Island nation's population has been fully vaccinated.

The Samoan workers flooded the balconies of their quarantine hotel in Hobart to sing a thank you song to their hosts (pictured)

Their vaccination program has been carried out with the help of AstraZeneca vaccines from Australia and a soon-to-arrive shipment of Pfizer vaccines from New Zealand.

'Australia will continue to promote the COVID-safe recruitment of Samoan workers to help address critical workforce shortages in rural and regional communities.' Australia's High Commissioner to Samoa Emily Luck told the Samoa Observer.

'The hardworking group will gain skills while supporting their families and communities in Samoa,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

In a ray of hope for millions of British holidaymakers, industry experts last night released optimistic data which they say shows how 17 countries (pictured) could be added to the quarantine-free green list or green watch list.

The creation of an extra travel alert level hangs in the balance today amid a mounting Tory revolt and a warning by Rishi Sunak that the industry faced devastation - while travel experts push for 17 destinations to be added to the quarantine-free green list.

Ministers signed off proposals last week to create an 'amber watch list' that could plunge the plans of hundreds of thousands of British holidaymakers into turmoil.

Travellers would be warned that destinations – possibly including hotspots such as Spain and Italy – face being placed on the red list while they are away, forcing them to quarantine on return in a state-selected hotel at huge expense.

But Whitehall sources last night told the Mail that the plans could now be scrapped - amid a growing backlash from Tory MPs.

It comes as yesterday it emerged that Mr Sunak had written to Boris Johnson to warn the Government risked damaging the travel sector by imposing more 'draconian' measures than EU rivals.

And today fully vaccinated arrivals to the UK who have been double jabbed in the US or the EU will no longer have to quarantine when arriving from amber list countries after a rule change.

The Chancellor said UK border policy was 'out of step with our international competitors' in a way that threatened to damage jobs.

Tory backbenchers also took aim at the Government's 'amber watch list' plans, which they dubbed 'inexplicably complicated'.

And industry bosses last night issued a warning that it was the 'last chance saloon' to 'save the summer' unless ministers moved more countries on to the green list.

Travel expert Paul Charles has said it would be a 'disaster' if the Government introduced a new travel traffic light category.

The chief executive of travel consultancy The PC Agency told ITV's Good Morning Britain programme: 'It would be a disaster to bring in an amber watchlist on top of the amber list, the green list, the red list.'

Mr Charles argued creating a watchlist designed to warn travellers of the possibility that countries with concerning coronavirus data - which could potentially include Italy and Spain - could be put onto the red list at short notice 'doesn't make any difference to what we've got today'.

'Today with the amber list the Government can change (destinations) to red at short notice,' he added.

The traffic light system was not achieving its aim of encouraging the travel sector to recover, Mr Charles said.

'At the moment the system in the UK is choking off recovery, and it's not helping the sector because there's no confidence to book because people are worried about places changing at short notice anyway.'

Meanwhile, in a ray of hope for millions of holidaymakers, industry experts last night released optimistic data which they say shows how 17 countries could be added to the quarantine-free green list or green watch list.

Countries including Germany, Austria, Poland and Canada, are among the countries most likely to go green due to low infection rates, according to travel experts.

It comes as it was revealed:

That free coffee and cinema tickets could be next incentives to beat Covid vaccine hesitancy in youngsters after the Government unveiled plans to to hand out Uber rides and takeaways to encourage Britons to go get the jab;

That all over 50s across the UK will be offered a booster shot of Pfizer by Autumn in a bid to battle back variants;

Meanwhile, Covid cases fell for the eleventh day in a row, with infections dropping by 16 per cent in a week to 24,470 and deaths stay low at 65;

New figures also revealed a 10-year age drop in Covid patients due to the impact of the vaccine roll-out;

But Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg warned that enforcing Covid vaccine passports was 'not a British way to behave';

Lewis Hamilton claimed he is suffering from Long Covid after suffering dizziness and fatigue following his second-placed finish at the Hungarian Grand Prix.

Countries including Germany, Austria (pictured), Poland and Canada, are among the countries most likely to go green due to low infection rates, according to travel experts

The creation of an extra travel alert level hung in the balance last night amid a mounting Tory revolt and a warning by Rishi Sunak (pictured) that the industry faced devastation

Travellers would be warned that destinations – possibly including hotspots such as Spain and Italy – face being placed on the red list while they are away, forcing them to quarantine on return in a state-selected hotel at huge expense

Ministers signed off proposals last week to create an 'amber watch list' that could plunge the plans of hundreds of thousands of British holidaymakers into turmoil (file image)

Probe into testing kits pricing By Az Munrallee for the Daily Mail Many of the Government's cheapest Covid test kits are unavailable to holidaymakers, probing an investigation by the British advertising watchdog. Private firms offering tests are listed on the Government's website, with some advertised at £23. But analysis of the 50 least costly options found two thirds could not be ordered or appointments for on-site tests were not available until next month. The Advertising Standards Authority is now investigating the issue following complaints over 'inconsistent pricing' of the kits that are mandatory for travel. Unvaccinated amber list holidaymakers from England must have a test before they return to the UK, and have two PCR tests when they return during their quarantine. Vaccinated travellers need a test before they arrive and another when they return. Consultancy firm Fideres, which carried out the analysis, said consumers should expect to pay around £114 for a two-test kit. The cheapest swabs for those returning from an amber list country was £78. The firm's Paul Vella said: 'The Government is reporting prices... without actually checking if these low prices are available.' He also told The Guardian that travellers are being 'misled' and steered into 'using more expensive providers'. The Department of Health said: 'We do not endorse or recommend any private Covid-19 test provider. All private providers must meet the minimum required standards.' Advertisement

Today, amid a growing revolt by Tory MPs, a Whitehall source told the Mail last night that the idea for an amber watch list could be shelved, adding: 'We'll have to wait and see what the data looks like later this week.

'But there will have to be a very strong case to create another category at this stage. There is a lot of opposition to anything that causes more confusion and uncertainty right now.'

Yesterday it emerged that Mr Sunak had written to Boris Johnson to warn the Government risked damaging the travel sector by imposing more 'draconian' measures than EU rivals.

He said UK border policy was 'out of step with our international competitors' in a way that threatened to damage jobs.

Treasury sources played down the split, insisting the Chancellor's letter was written before last week's decision to lift quarantine restrictions for double-jabbed tourists from the US and Europe, which comes into force today.

But senior Tories warn against imposing measures that could wreck family holidays and damage the stricken travel sector further.

Former Tory leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith said families should be governed by the quarantine rule in place when they leave for a holiday, even if the status of their destination alters during their trip.

He told the Mail: 'We cannot mess families around like this.

'If you have gone away on the basis that the country is okay and you have had your two vaccines then you should not have to self-isolate when you get back.

'I am glad the Chancellor is getting involved because we have to start thinking about the economic damage we are causing by overly restrictive and constantly changing rules. We need to be trusting our vaccines and opening up, not constantly tinkering in a way that undermines confidence.'

Another senior Tory described an amber watch list as 'madness', adding: 'It is a stupid idea which will cause bookings to collapse. Who in their right mind would go on holiday having been warned they may have to quarantine at huge expense when they get back?'

Heathrow rocked by exodus from its top team Heathrow's top team has taken a hit with a third of its executive committee quitting. Carol Hui, Andrew Macmillan and Chris Garton, chief of staff, chief strategy officer, and chief solutions officer respectively, have left the airport's eight-person leadership team. John Holland-Kaye said he was 'very sorry to see them leave us' but was 'confident that the new exec team will provide the leadership needed to win the recovery'. Heathrow nosedived to a £2 billion annual loss after the 'toughest' year in the airport's 75-year history as the pandemic saw passenger numbers crash by 73%. The airport's annual financial results, which were released this morning, lay bare the devastating impact the Covid crisis has had on the aviation industry. The number of people passing through the west London airport tumbled from 80.9 million in 2019 to 22.1 million last year - a level not seen since the 1970s - and more than half of those travelled before the Covid-19 crisis struck. Advertisement

Henry Smith, chairman of the Future of Aviation group of MPs, also backed the idea of a 'fortnight guarantee' for holidaymakers, adding: 'I hope ministers will accept the case that if you travelled in good faith you should be allowed to come back in on the conditions on which you left.'

He said the complex traffic-light system, which has five alert levels, was 'putting people off travel to places that are arguably safer than many parts of the UK'.

Meanwhile, Huw Merriman, the Tory chairman of the Commons transport committee, said the proposal for an amber watch list was a 'giant red flag' that could throw the industry into chaos by sparking a wave of cancellations.

He told the Times: 'The government has used the vaccine dividend to make some positive strides in the last few weeks, making it easier for those travelling in and out of the UK.

'This is not the time to be adding further complexity, uncertainty and anxiety to an already beleaguered sector.'

Tim Alderslade, chief executive of Airlines UK, which represents the aviation industry, also told the paper: 'The EU must be looking at us in incredulity.

'We have totally squandered the vaccine dividend we had built up. No wonder passengers have no idea whether they're coming or going.

'Green is the only way forward for the industry — this is the last chance saloon now for saving the summer.'

The push to create an amber watch list has been prompted by concern among health officials about the rise of the Beta variant in countries such as Spain.

The strain, which emerged in South Africa, is thought to be more resistant to the AstraZeneca jab than the Delta variant, which his now dominant in the UK.

Ministers are keen to avoid a repeat of the fiasco in which France was placed on an 'amber plus' list of its own last month.

Travellers from France still have to isolate for ten days on arrival in the UK, although this restriction is set to be lifted this week.

Travellers would be warned that destinations – possibly including hotspots such as Spain and Italy – face being placed on the red list while they are away, forcing them to quarantine on return in a state-selected hotel at huge expense. Pictured: File image of sunbathers in Barcelona, Spain, on July 9, 2021

Fully vaccinated arrivals jabbed in the US or EU will no longer have to quarantine when arriving from amber list countries Fully vaccinated arrivals to the UK who have been double jabbed in the US or the EU will no longer have to quarantine when arriving from amber list countries after a rule change. Non-UK residents arriving from amber list countries have previously been forced to self-isolate when arriving in the UK - even if they have been double jabbed. But from 4am today, the rules will change to allow them to enter the country providing they have been double vaccinated in either the US or an EU country. The rule change will be a big boost for families abroad who have faced strict restrictions when planning visits to the UK since March last year. The UK government has said the change, which was announced last week, will help to reunite family and friends whose loved ones live abroad. Airline bosses have welcomed the move. Travellers will still need to take either a lateral flow or PCR test pre-departure and a PCR test on the second day after they arrive. Under-18s will be exempt from isolation, and some will not have to test, depending on their age. Advertisement

An amber watch list would not carry quarantine restrictions of its own. But travellers would be warned their destination is on the brink of going on to the red list.

If it does, they would face the choice of rushing home before the deadline or paying £1,750 a head to quarantine in a Government-approved hotel when they return.

The Joint Biosecurity Centre, which analyses Covid data, is due to give ministers its latest assessment of the international threat.

They will then meet on Thursday to decide which countries should go in each category, and whether a new amber watch list is needed.

It comes as travel consultancy, the PC Agency, last night released research which shows that 17 countries could join the green or green watch list.

The research suggests 12 destinations, including Germany, Poland, Canada, Austria and Romania could go fully green - meaning even unvaccinated holiday makers can return to the UK without having to quarantine on their return.

According to the PC Agency, all 12 destinations have infection rates below 30 cases per 100,000 of the population - placing them significantly lower than the UK's 286 cases per 100,000 people - and most have also jabbed more than half of their adult populations.

According to the research, reported in the Telegraph, a further five destinations, Bhutan, French Polynesia, North Macedonia, Norway and Saudi Arabia, have low enough infection rates to join the green watch list - which is the same as the green list but with the possibility of a sudden switch to the amber list looming.

Meanwhile, in another boost for British families, fully vaccinated arrivals to the UK who have been double jabbed in the US or the EU will no longer have to quarantine when arriving from amber list countries after a rule change.

Non-UK residents arriving from amber list countries have previously been forced to self-isolate when arriving in the UK - even if they have been double jabbed.

But from 4am today, the rules will change to allow them to enter the country providing they have been double vaccinated in either the US or an EU country.

The rule change will be a big boost for families abroad who have faced strict restrictions when planning visits to the UK since March last year.

The UK government has said the change, which was announced last week, will help to reunite family and friends whose loved ones live abroad. Airline bosses have welcomed the move.

But travellers will still need to take either a lateral flow or PCR test pre-departure and a PCR test on the second day after they arrive. Under-18s will be exempt from isolation, and some will not have to test, depending on their age.

It comes as it was revealed last night how tens of millions of Britons are expected to be offered a Pfizer booster jab this autumn as the vaccine has proved to be the most effective against the Delta variant.

The booster scheme, which was announced earlier this year, is set to start in September and should see 23million over-50s, vulnerable Britons and NHS and care home staff offered a third dose.

Extra vaccines would be rolled out in two stages — prioritising those most at risk of Covid, before the programme is extended.

While patients were initially expected to be offered the jab they were originally inoculated with, it is understood all patients will be offered the Pfizer jab as it has proven to be the most effective against the Delta variant.

Pictured: A woman receives the AstraZeneca Covid19 vaccine at an NHS vaccination centre in Ealing, west London

Pictured: A young person receives a dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech jab at a vaccination centre for young people and students at the Hunter Street Health Centre in London on June 5

Which jab combinations provided the best protection? The early results from the Com-Cov trial, published today in the Lancet, looked at the efficacy of either two doses of Pfizer, two of AstraZeneca, or one of them followed by the other. All second doses were given four weeks apart and the trial recruited 830 volunteers who were aged 50 and above. All combinations worked well, priming the immune system. It found: — AstraZeneca's vaccine, followed by Pfizer's, induced higher levels of antibodies and T cells than vice versa. — Both antibodies and T cells, a type of white blood cell, play a crucial role in defending against Covid. — The mix-match approach produced more antibodies than two regular doses of AstraZeneca's, no matter which way round the jabs were given. — The largest antibody levels were induced after two doses of Pfizer, and the highest T cell response was from AstraZeneca's followed by Pfizer. Advertisement

The Department of Health has yet to confirm the official details of the booster scheme, plans of which were first shared by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in June.

The JCVI is expected to issue its final advice in regards to the booster scheme in the coming months.

A senior government source also told the Times that those who received the AstraZeneca vaccine would 'be getting an mRNA booster'.

MRNA used in the Pfizer and Moderna jabs is essentially a DNA instruction to tell your cells how to produce the harmless spike proteins from the virus - allowing your body to create an immune response without being exposed to the virus itself.

Oxford AstraZeneca is not an mRNA jab - instead using a weakened version of a common cold virus from chimpanzees that has been modified to contain genetic material shared by the coronavirus.

Again, this technique means the person receiving the jab is not exposed to the real virus - unlike previous jab types which often relied on weakened or dead forms of the actual virus.

A UK Government-backed study published earlier this year found that mixing and matching Covid vaccines may result in higher protection against the virus.

People who had been vaccinated with AstraZeneca's jab initially and then received a top-up with Pfizer's had nine times more antibodies than those who stuck to the UK vaccine.

Although antibodies are just one part of the immune response, the Oxford University researchers said the findings strongly suggested the approach could enhance immunity.

But it is understood the mix and match approach is not going to be used in the short term more broadly because there is a 'strong supply' of each vaccine type.

A senior HSE source told the Times: 'Currently there's no need for it. Currently we have plenty of vaccines. The amount of vaccine isn't an issue at all. There's no plan to do it. It's not under immediate consideration, but I wouldn't rule it out.'

The Government said analysis has shown that the Pfizer vaccine is 96 per cent effective against the Delta variant while the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine is 92 per cent effective against hospitalisation after two doses.

Three days working at home to become the new normal The traditional working week is over with firms adopting a three-and-two approach – with fewer days in the office. Having three days at home and two in the office is set to become the new normal as a result of the pandemic. Many big firms have already agreed the changes, while the Institute of Directors said two thirds of business leaders will allow remote working. Roger Barker, the institute's director of policy, said the pandemic had driven a revolution 'greater than radical reform or regulation ever could have'. And YouGov found just one in five bosses will require all staff to come in five days a week after the pandemic. NatWest expects almost nine in ten staff to work at home while Asda said its employees could work from any location suited to their job. Advertisement

A study published this week also showed that a third dose of the Pfizer vaccine could offer strong protection against the Delta variant.

Research showed that antibody levels increased five-fold among people ages 18 to 55 who were given the booster shot.

The third dose was especially effecting for the elderly, with antibody levels spiking 11-fold among people aged 65 to 85 who had already received the standard two doses.

In the slides published online, the researchers wrote there there is 'estimated potential for up to 100-fold increase in Delta neutralization post-dose three compared to pre-dose three.'

The booster roll-out will coincide with the annual influenza inoculation programme, which health officials said will be vital this winter amid warnings of a difficult flu season.

Immunity gained from Covid jabs last for at least six months in the 'majority' of cases, but there are fears this could fade later in the year which could trigger a spike in hospitalisations and deaths.

An Oxford University trial looking at booster doses suggested a third shot six months after the second could restore peak immunity against Covid.

It comes as the week-on-week rate of Covid cases fell yesterday for the tenth day in a row with 26,144 infections marking a 17.8 per cent fall while deaths also fell to 71.

The latest data from Public Health England and Cambridge University suggests that about 60,000 deaths, 22 million infections and 52,600 hospitalisations have been prevented by vaccines.

The Government plans to lure young people in for their vaccinations with the promise of cut-price taxis and takeaways, as Boris Johnson tries to tackle the relatively low take-up among the under-30s.

Uber, Deliveroo and Pizza Pilgrims are among the companies in discussion with the Government about offering incentives as part of the 'Jab 18-30' drive.

So far, only two-thirds of people in that age bracket in England have received a first dose since they became eligible in June, compared with 88.4 per cent across all age groups, meaning more than three million 18-to-30-year-olds remain unjabbed.

Prizes for having the jab: As No. 10 plans to hand out Uber rides and takeaways, insiders reveal free coffee and cinema tickets could be new incentives to beat Covid vaccine hesitancy in youngsters

ByJason Groves Political Editor For The Daily Mailand Eleanor Hayward For The Daily Mail

Young people could be offered a free latte or cinema ticket in return for having the Covid jab under plans being discussed by ministers.

The Government yesterday announced commercial tie-ups that will see firms like Deliveroo and Uber offer discounted takeaways and taxi rides to people who sign up for vaccination.

A Government source said that further deals were expected in the coming days with cinema chains, coffee franchises and high street restaurants potentially involved.

However ministers have ruled out offering cash bribes as seen in the United States where newly-vaccinated citizens are to be offered $100 in cash, equal to £72.

'There is a lot of work going on into broadening this out into other areas,' the source said.

'We will not be offering cash payments but we hope there will be a range of attractive high street incentives that will encourage more people to come forward and have the jab.'

Boris Johnson is said to be frustrated that 30 per cent of people aged under 30 have still not come forward for their first jab, more than six weeks after vaccinations were opened up to all adults.

A Government source said vaccinations in the age group were currently running at 40-50,000 a day, but added: 'We'd like to be doing a lot more.'

Young people could be offered a free latte or cinema ticket in return for having the Covid jab under plans being discussed by ministers. Pictured: Vaccinator Hari Roberts administers the first dose of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine to an 18 year old Zuzanna Szelag at a vaccination centre in north London

The Government yesterday announced commercial tie-ups that will see firms like Deliveroo and Uber offer discounted takeaways and taxi rides to people who sign up for vaccination. Coffee companies, like Costa, could also be involved

Enforcing vaccine passports 'not a very British way to behave,' says Jacob Rees-Mogg Enforcing vaccine passports is 'not a British way to behave', Jacob Rees-Mogg has warned the Government. The Leader of the Commons broke ranks to say the policy should only be considered for nightclubs, and even then only temporarily. Other ministers, including Boris Johnson, have suggested the passports could be used for concerts, sports events, business conferences, busy bars and even workplaces. In a sign of Government nervousness over the issue, sources yesterday confirmed that ministers have abandoned plans to make Covid vaccines compulsory for university students. Mr Rees-Mogg said the Government had to consider the importance of preserving 'ancient freedoms', as well as controlling Covid. 'We don't want to get into a society where routinely people are expected to show their papers,' he said. 'That is not a British way to behave.' His comments came as the Tory mutiny over vaccine passports continued to gather pace. Andrew Bridgen, one of 43 Conservative MPs to sign a declaration opposing vaccine passports, yesterday said Parliament should be recalled from its summer recess if ministers are 'serious' about asking people to show proof of their vaccine status to gain entry to domestic venues and events. Fellow Tory Bob Blackman said that even introducing vaccine passports for nightclubs would be a 'slippery slope'. Mr Blackman added: 'When is a night club a pub or when is a pub a nightclub? If you start enforcing it in nightclubs, it will rapidly be enforced in pubs and restaurants.' The call means cross-party backing is emerging for the Commons to return before September. The PM has announced that he intends to change the rules in September so only those who are fully vaccinated can attend nightclubs. And last week Cabinet ministers Grant Shapps and Dominic Raab backed businesses operating so called 'no jab, no job' policies that only allow fully vaccinated people into the workforce. But speaking on BBC Radio Four's Any Questions, Mr Rees-Mogg said: 'We have an ancient right to go about our lawful business without being expected to prove who we are or what we're doing to anybody... we should protect our ancient freedoms very carefully.' And Tory grandee Sir David Lidington told Times Radio that introducing a 'Government certificate of approval' to access certain events would set a 'dangerous precedent'. Advertisement

The move to offer incentives follows controversy over Government efforts to force young people to have the jab by introducing vaccine passports.

Tory MP Andrew Bridgen said: 'I personally don't think it would get through the House of Commons in any event and that's why the Government has moved on to this carrot inducements for young people.'

Labour environment spokesman Luke Pollard said the party was 'very cautious' about domestic Covid passports with leader Sir Keir Starmer ruling out supporting them for use in 'everyday life' setting up the possibility of a Government defeat on the policy.

Uber, Bolt, Deliveroo and Pizza Pilgrims are among the first brands who will be offering incentives to encourage youngsters to get inoculated, Department for Health has announced.

Taxi app firm Uber will offer discounted rides and meals on its Uber Eats platform for young adults who receive a vaccine, while Deliveroo is planning to give vouchers to young people who get jabbed.

Mr Pollard, who dubbed the offer 'kebabs for jabs', said he doubted the concept 'is going to be enough to get that last 30 per cent of young people' vaccinated, and called for youngsters to be given more of a role in leading the campaign to get protected from the virus.

Ministers could also face questions about whether the plan complies with the Government's anti-obesity strategy.

But they are determined to drive up vaccination rates among the young before the winter.

The vaccination rollout has slumped to the lowest rate since it began as demand slows to a trickle due to vaccine hesitancy in the young.

Currently first doses are averaging just 40,000 a day, compared with more than half a million a day in March.

Latest Government figures show that on Saturday there were just 38,851 first doses, compared with 212,159 second jabs. The fall in demand has forced doctors to send back unused vaccine doses to prevent them going out of date.

Dr Rosemary Leonard, an NHS GP, said on Twitter: 'Please, please, could young people be allowed to get their vaccines earlier than eight weeks.

'Numerous colleagues telling me of 100s of doses being thrown away, yet 'early requesters' at clinics being turned down.

'I've heard of one clinic having to bin 1,000 doses of Pfizer because it had expired, yet turning people away for second dose.'

Some 170,000 doses of the Moderna vaccine are at risk of expiry within the next fortnight because not enough youngsters are coming forward, it is claimed.

Beccy Baird, a fellow at The King's Fund, also said the young's vaccine hesitancy is making it harder to know where to prioritise jabs.

So far 88 per cent of adults have had one dose and 72.5 per cent have had both doses.

In total, more than 85million doses have been administered across the UK.

Last night Health Secretary Sajid Javid said: 'In under eight months, health services across the UK have delivered more than 85million doses – this is a phenomenal achievement.

A Government source said that further deals were expected in the coming days with cinema chains (pictured: Library image), coffee franchises and high street restaurants potentially involved

Boris Johnson (pictured) is said to be frustrated that 30 per cent of people aged under 30 have still not come forward for their first jab, more than six weeks after vaccinations were opened up to all adults

'It has shown Britain at its best. From our NHS administering the jabs, to the Armed Forces, thousands of volunteers and civil servants, you have all played an important role in getting us to this life-saving milestone – and I want to thank you all for your tireless efforts.

'Please get both of your jabs if you haven't already to protect yourself and your loved ones.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

We used to do things better than the Germans. So much so, in fact, that during the Industrial Revolution they sent spies to filch the secrets of our cotton and steel factories. And filch they did.

One Teutonic tycoon, in a moment of mischievous honesty, even named his factory ‘Cromford’ after the Derbyshire mill whose technology he had swiped.

Now, by contrast, whether you’re talking about football or Covid containment, there’s a growing sense that we have more to learn from the Germans than they do from us.

Munster was badly bombed in World War II and it was reconstructed in a combination of old and new styles. Pictured is the marketplace

If you don’t believe me, read John Kampfner’s recent book Why The Germans Do It Better — or follow my lead and visit the country’s lesser-known north-west corner.

If you are familiar with the nightlife of Berlin and highlights of Bavaria, you are ready for the more obscure pleasures of the Ruhr and North Rhine-Westphalia near Dusseldorf. First among them is the Landschaftspark. An old ironworks near Duisburg has been transformed into a visitor attraction with something for everyone. That’s right: the Germans even do industrial heritage better.

There’s a warehouse turned open-air cinema, and a gas storage unit you can scuba-dive in. Concrete walls have become the country’s largest artificial climbing area. You can also scale the blast furnace to a viewing platform. Your Instagram feed will runneth over with shots of mysterious cisterns and photogenic generators, fat slag heaps and squat smoke stacks.

Head north-east for 60 miles and you come to Munster — a medieval town so attractive that in the 16th century the Anabaptists hailed it as ‘the New Jerusalem’. They took it over and practised enthusiastic polygamy while burning all books except the Bible. That was until the ringleaders were caught and tortured to death (tongues torn out, stabbed in the heart, and so on).

Germany is known for its love of sausages. One of the famous varieties is a blutwurst, or blood sausage (stock image)

You can still see the cages in which their rotting corpses were displayed for decades atop St Lambert’s Church, to the delight of the local ravens.

Present-day Munster is a much jollier place. After some slices of terrifying-looking but tasty blutwurst (blood sausage) at the Pinkus brewery, washed down by large glasses of strong Bock beer, I attempt to buy a cigarette from a bright-eyed student.

She donates it to me for free, suggesting I give my proffered euro to a homeless person. I ask her what she thinks of Brexit and she shakes her head apologetically. ‘It’s like a marriage,’ she replies wistfully. ‘It’s always sad when it ends.’ She isn’t sad, though, to be a student in Munster, calling the city ‘heaven on earth’. I privately reflect that the Anabaptists made a similar mistake, but I can see where she’s coming from.

Burg Hulshoff, a handsome redbrick moated castle, was once home to the poet Annette Von Droste-Hulshoff

COVID RULES Germany turns green tomorrow, meaning Britons don't have to quarantine on return to the UK. In order to enter Germany, travellers over 12 must show proof of double vaccination, proof of recovery, or proof of either a negative PCR test taken no more than 72 hours before arrival, or antigen test taken no more than 48 hours before arrival. Advertisement

The place was badly bombed in World War II and, in a detail that to my mind sums up the philistinism of war, the Allies aimed for the cathedral spire, since they knew that it marked the centre of town. The post-war reconstruction has been deftly done in a combination of old and new styles.

Inside the cathedral, pay your respects to the towering statue of St Christopher, the patron saint of travellers.

He was a muscleman who once struggled to carry the infant Jesus across a river. It turned out that the child’s weight was the weight of the world’s sins.

The cathedral also boasts a large, intricate astronomical clock. The several hands rotate anti-clockwise, and mark 24 hours, as well as the planetary phases. Every quarter of an hour, a skeletal figure of Death rings the changes.

By contrast, the Picasso Museum seems positively cheery. It currently hosts an exhibition comparing his work with that of his friend Joan Miro. This demonstrates the truth of Picasso’s remark that every child is an artist; the challenge is to stay one.

Literature lovers should make a detour to the Burg Hulshoff. Six miles west of Munster, this handsome redbrick moated castle was once home to the poet Annette Von Droste-Hulshoff.

Born prematurely in 1797, she suffered health problems including severe short-sightedness. Undaunted, she grew up to become one of Germany’s most famous female poets, and wrote a mystery novella that was decades ahead of its time.

Munster is no further from London than Edinburgh. A mere 330 miles away all this awaits — and doubtless more than I am able to glean on my short trip.

I feel as if, two centuries after the heyday of German industrial espionage, it’s time for us to steal back a few secrets. So make for Munster and see what you can learn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Back in July 1841, a Baptist missionary had a bright idea while walking from Market Harborough to Leicester to attend a temperance meeting. His name was Thomas Cook.

How about arranging tours, using newfangled trains, to make it easier for likeminded people to get about, he pondered as he plodded along. So he did — and there began package tourism in the UK, as Cook took 500 people 11 miles from Leicester to Loughborough for a teetotal rally.

Included in the price of one shilling were tea, ham sandwiches and music by a brass band. Crowds lined the train tracks to cheer them on.

Thomas Cook was the pioneer of package tourism in the UK after having the idea to arrange a tour in 1841. As the decades went by the concept became increasingly popular, with the arrival of cheap and speedy air travel turbo-boosting the numbers

FIRST BROCHURES: Mid-1840s

After Thomas Cook's Loughborough trip, he branched out to Wales and Scotland, producing journey 'handbooks' (the first travel brochures) proclaiming the delights of early staycations.

EUROPE HERE WE COME: 1850s

By 1851, Cook was sending 150,000 people to London's Great Exhibition. By 1855, he led a tour from Harwich to Antwerp, continuing to Brussels, Cologne, Heidelberg, Strasbourg and Paris for an International Exhibition. Swiss and Italian trips followed, with 'reps' wearing blue jackets with gold buttons.

NILE CRUISES: 1860s

The first Thomas Cook High Street shop opened in Fleet Street in 1865. In 1869, Cook broadened his horizons with trips to Egypt and the Holy Land. Two Nile steamers were booked for the passage to Luxor, where Cook went for a swim and was almost swept away: 'My first and last attempt at bathing in the Nile.'

AROUND THE WORLD: 1870s

The first-ever travel brochures came in the 1840s, proclaiming the delights of staycations. By the early 20th century trips to exotic locations were being advertised

HOW HOLIDAYS ARE PROTECTED Package holidays offer the best form of legal and financial protection. Under the Package Travel Regulations, if a holiday is cancelled you are due a refund within 14 days. You're also covered if the company you're due to travel with goes out of business or if you are not provided with the holiday you paid for. For example, if something isn't provided or as promised, the company will be legally obliged to sort it out for you. Advertisement

In 1872 the ever-busy Cook arranged an extraordinary 222-day round-the-world tour. After a steamship to New York, customers took the train to San Francisco and ships to China, India and Egypt on the way home. Meanwhile, in 1874, an early form of travellers' cheques was created.

OFF TO THE ALPS: 1890s

The first package ski holiday was to Chamonix, France, in 1898-99 organised by Dr Henry Lunn, a former Methodist minister. Lunn had become a rival to Thomas Cook, then run by descendants (Thomas having died in 1892), also organising large group trips to Rome. Some consider him the first budget tour operator.

APRES SKI INVENTED: 1900s

In 1902-03 Lunn sent 400 skiers to the Swiss resort of Adelboden after founding the Public Schools Alpine Sports Club, 'a congenial society of people'. This expanded to Murren and Wengen, where apres ski began.

UP IN THE AIR: 1920s

Thomas Cook began flights on Imperial Airways from Cricklewood, London, to the Continent in 1919, but in 1927 a Fokker Universal plane with wicker seats was chartered from New York to Chicago to attend a Jack Dempsey boxing match. Participants were shipped to New York.

BUTLINS AND FRANCE: 1930s

The Holidays With Pay Act, introduced in the UK in 1938, ensured workers would get one week's paid holiday a year. This image shows hi-jinks on a beach in Folkestone in 1940

One million Britons travelled abroad in 1950 as Vladimir Raitz, a Russian émigré, set up Horizon Holidays the same year

The first Butlins, set up by Billy Butlin, opened in Skegness, Lincolnshire, in 1936 for 35 shillings a week full board. This was just ahead of the Holidays With Pay Act 1938, ensuring one week's paid holiday a year. Meanwhile, others were catching Thomas Cook charter flights to the French Riviera by 1939 — while ski companies Inghams and Erna Low offered Snow Sports Specials trains to the Alps.

MASS TOURISM TO EUROPE: 1950s

Vladimir Raitz, a Russian émigré, set up Horizon Holidays in 1950 with Gatwick to Corsica flights on Douglas DC-3s taking six hours, rather than 48 hours by ship, on what are considered the first mass-market packages. The price was £32 including meals and wine. Sardinia and the Costa Brava followed. One million Britons travelled abroad in 1950.

CRAZY FOR COSTAS: 1960s

Rapid hotel construction under Franco and the first commercial passenger jetliners, Boeing 707s, meant the journey to Majorca was soon two hours. In 1965, Thomson Holidays began (later bought by TUI). Alicante Airport opened in 1967, accelerating development in Benidorm, where 100 hotels were built in a decade.

Alicante Airport opened in 1967, accelerating development in Benidorm (pictured), where 100 hotels were built in a decade

In the 1970s, Kuoni offered new Boeing 747 jumbo jets with 400-plus seats for trips to the USA, Kenya and Brazil

HELLO JUMBOS: 1970s

Kuoni, a Swiss company, offered new Boeing 747 jumbo jets with 400-plus seats for trips to the USA, Kenya and Brazil. Thomson began flying to the Caribbean, while Laker Holidays, founded by the swashbuckling entrepreneur Freddie Laker, featured Miami.

NEW REGULATIONS: mid-1970s

The Algarve in Portugal and Greece began to feature on itineraries, with Sunvil Holidays and Olympic Holidays specialising in Greece and its islands. Competition became cut-throat and several tour operators collapsed, including Court Line in 1974. New regulations were introduced to protect holidaymakers.

HEYDAY YEARS: 1980s

Feeling the heat: High Street travel agencies sprang up during the 1980s and package holiday sales soared

Uncertainty caused by the pandemic has turned people back to package holidays, which provide financial protection and refunds by law

Package holiday sales soared as price wars between Thomson and Intasun raged. High Street travel agencies sprang up.

CLOUDS ON HORIZON: 1990s

Operators prospered, with 15 million Britons taking package trips in 1994. Club 18-30 courted controversy with 'Beaver Espana' and 'Girls. Can we interest you in a package holiday?' adverts; the latter accompanied by a picture of a man wearing boxer shorts. In 1995 easyJet began flights from Luton and Gatwick for £29.99. By 1997 they were being sold on the internet — beginning a new era.

DIY HOLIDAYS: 2000s

No-frills airlines such as easyJet and Ryanair undercut traditional carriers, sometimes with flights for 1p (plus tax). Holidaymakers realised they could book their own trips easily.

TROUBLED WATERS: 2010s

Tour operators felt the pinch. Ryanair was Europe's biggest airline in 2018-2019, carrying 152million passengers a year (up from 2million in 1995). Booking.com and Airbnb became major players for hotels and apartments. In 2019, Thomas Cook went bust, but has since been reborn under Chinese ownership.

BACK TO THE FUTURE: 2020s

Uncertainty caused by the pandemic turns people back to package holidays, which provide financial protection and refunds by law. Some now forecast a package holiday revival.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Declaring Venice's waterways a 'national monument', Italy is banning mammoth cruise liners from sailing into the lagoon city, which risked being declared an imperilled world heritage site by the United Nations later this month.

Culture Minister Dario Franceschini said the ban was urgently adopted at a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday and will take effect on August 1. It applies to the lagoon basin near St. Mark's Square and the Giudecca Canal, a major marine artery in Venice.

Franceschini said the government decided to act fast 'to avoid the concrete risk' that the UN culture agency Unesco would add Venice to its list of 'world heritage in danger' after it begins meeting later this week in Beijing.

Declaring Venice's waterways a 'national monument', Italy is banning mammoth cruise liners from sailing into the lagoon city. Pictured is a cruise ship passing St. Mark's Square in 2019

The Cabinet decree also 'establishes an unbreakable principle, by declaring the urban waterways of St. Mark's Basin, St. Mark's Canal and the Giudecca Canal a national monument', the minister added.

Before the coronavirus pandemic severely curtailed international travel, cruise ships discharging thousands of day-trippers overwhelmed Venice and its delicate marine environment. Environmentalists and cultural heritage have battled for decades with business interests, since the cruise industry is a major source of revenue for the city.

The government's decision was 'awaited by Unesco and by all those who have been to Venice and who have remained disturbed by the huge size of these ships passing through the most fragile and most beautiful place in the world,' Franceschini told reporters.

Before the coronavirus pandemic severely curtailed international travel, cruise ships discharging thousands of day-trippers overwhelmed Venice and its delicate marine environment

Unesco recommended last month placing Venice on the agency's list of World Heritage in Danger sites.

There was no immediate comment from the UN cultural agency.

The Italian government earlier this year had decided on a ban but without quickly setting a date for it to start.

But now, the government 'decided to impose a strong acceleration' to implementing the move given the looming Unesco review, Franceschini said in a statement.

The ban applies to ships weighing more than 25,000 tons or longer than 180 metres (530 feet) or with other characteristics that would make them too polluting or overwhelming for Venice's environment

Another impetus was the startling appearance in early June of a 92,000-ton cruise ship nosing its way down the Giudecca Canal for the first time since the pandemic's arrival in early 2020 effectively suspended mass tourism in Venice.

The ban applies to ships weighing more than 25,000 tons or longer than 180 metres (530 feet) or with other characteristics that would make them too polluting or overwhelming for Venice's environment.

Italian Premier Mario Draghi's office specified that ships that don't have any of those characteristics and thus 'are considered sustainable' to the Venetian environment can continue to dock in Venice. The premier's office noted that permitted ships generally have about 200 passengers compared to the thousands that huge cruise vessels carry.

Unesco recommended last month placing Venice on the agency's list of World Heritage in Danger sites

With only a few hours of shore time in Venice, the big liners' passengers tend to clump around classic tourist sites like St. Mark's Square, adding to the city's already crowded public spaces.

No cars are allowed in historic Venice, which consists of narrow alleys and many bridges linking passageways. During high tourist season, which occupies a good deal of the year in Venice, navigating as a pedestrian is a daunting challenge.

The Cabinet decree also establishes compensation mechanisms for navigation companies and others affected by the ban. Until a more suitable docking area can be established elsewhere in waters outside the heart of Venice, the government has approved creating at least four temporary docking sites near the industrial port of Marghera, located on the northwestern Adriatic Sea.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Breathtaking beaches, sensational history, delicious cuisines and beautiful harbour towns, sun-soaked Greece truly is a destination unlike any anywhere else in the world.

With each region of this country, from its magnificent mainland to its idyllic islands, offering an incredible holiday experience, choosing where to escape to can be tricky!

Help is at hand with Jet2holidays, which flies to 19 Greek destinations - more than anyone else - from 10 UK airports, and boasts a range of new islands, including Santorni and Mykonos.

Here's the lowdown on the six must-visit Greek destinations so you can enjoy Greece your way.

Cultural Crete

From idyllic Elounda to vibrant Hersonissos, Eastern Crete is rich in both cultural and stunning scenery

Crete is the epitomy of the Greek isles - a picture-perfect island filled with white beaches and pretty villages.

To the east you'll find an abundance of these gorgeous places, such as Elounda, Stalis and Gouves to name a few.

But one that really stands out from the crowd is Hersonissos. This harbour town is a holidaymaker's paradise, with a wealth of tavernas and bars sitting right out on the waterfront, meaning every delicious meal comes with a spectacular view.

But authentic dining and photogenic landscapes aren't all this little place has to offer. Alongside breathtaking beaches, such as Gefyri, you'll find plenty of family-friendly activities like the CretAquarium, home to some of the Med's coolest marine creatures such as turtles and sharks.

Hersonissos is also home to one of Crete's largest water parks, WaterCity, where everyone from kids to childish grown-ups can cool off under the Greek sun on some awesome water slides.

Then, after a day of being on the move, spend your evenings here gently strolling through the local shops and markets. Don't miss the opportunity to visit Piskopiano Village, a tiny community of fewer than 500 people. It may be small, but its local crafts and restaurants are on par with what you'll find in the bigger towns; a must for shopaholics and foodies alike.

The Balos Lagoon is a picturesque is a wonderland for adventurers, sunbathers and snorkellers alike

Just over two-hours up the northern coast in Western Crete is stunning Chania, home to impressive canyons, secret coves and picturesque gorges.

Wander the winding maze-like shopping scene to discover maritime museums, busy bars, quaint cafes, and art shops.

Then watch as the jewel of the harbour, the 16th-century lighthouse, twinkles in the distance as the port’s bustling bars and tavernas come alive at sunset.

Relax on the sandy shores of alluring Balos lagoon, Crete’s most photographed beach.

Magical Elafonisi is lined with pink sand, while palm tree-lined Chrissi Akti is one of Chania’s many blue flag beaches, with crystal-clear waters and plenty of restaurants.

Feeling active? The 10-mile-long Samaria Gorge is ideal for trekkers, taking in peaceful lakes, a 1,000-year-old forest and the White Mountains - at the foot is where to find botanical gardens.

Remarkable Rhodes

Sail through the ancient Mandraki harbour, Rhodes, once home to the Colossus of Rhodes

With soft-sand beaches, lush forests, and charming medieval towns, Rhodes has something special to offer every type of holidaymaker.

The capital of the Dodecanese’s charming shores are perfect for soaking up the rays, or unwinding in a Roman bath, before sampling delicious cuisines in traditional tavernas.

For an action-packed break, try watersports including windsurfing, then trek the panoramic coastal paths, taking in rolling hills and pine-filled forests.

Explore the incredible 24 centuries of history and stroll within the Old Town’s magnificent medieval walls, with fortress-like buildings and pretty winding alleyways.

Beach lovers should head to cosy Agathi beach, nestled in a scenic cove, situated below the medieval castle of Faraklos; idyllic Anthony Quinn Bay, considered one of the loveliest on the island; and Faliraki is where to find sunbeds, water skiing and beach bars.

Charming Corfu

Corfu is more than just a party town. Beyond the city, there's a wealth of history and untouched beaches to discover

This delightful island is popular for good reason, with historic palaces, winding cobblestone streets, and idyllic sun-drenched beaches.

The Old Town of Campiello, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is where to find the large square of Spianada, and learn about the fascinating history behind the 15th-century Venetian Old Fortress.

Soak up the sun on one of Corfu’s beaches. Famous Paleokastritsa is surrounded by green cliffs and caves; family friendly Agios Georgios boasts watersports; while Marathias with its crystal-clear waters and golden sand is a must.

The 137-mile Corfu Trail is one of Greece’s greatest walks, or bike rides, taking in the quieter parts of the island as it winds past olive groves, gorges, sand dunes and forests.

Spend a wild day at a waterpark, enjoying exhilarating rides down slides of all sizes, or book a boat trip and hop to the nearby islands for a sensational day out.

Knockout Kefalonia

Sitting at the foot of two mountains with views of the brilliant Ionian, Myrtos beach in Kefalonia is a must for sun and sea

Idyllic Kefalonia is one of Greece's most beautiful islands, with postcard-pretty scenery, movie-worthy beaches, lush vineyards and rugged mountains.

Enjoy its spectacular countryside and discover hidden gems on a horse riding or hiking tour, taking in abandoned villages, historic monuments and wild flowers.

Sample local wines and learn about how they're produced on an excursion of the island's stunning landscape - a glass of the popular Kefalonian Robola is a must.

Chic capital Argostoli is brimming with cafes, tavernas and shops, perfect for whiling away an afternoon, before exploring Venetian monuments.

When it comes to beaches, Kefalonia is world-class.

You’ll recognise Hollywood hotspot Antisamos beach from its starring role in Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, with its picturesque mountain backdrop.

Famous for its red sand, Xi is so striking, you'll think an Instagram filter has been applied to the photos - but it's all real.

Don’t leave without booking a boat tour to the jaw-dropping Melissani Cave - the 40-metre-wide underwater lake was once worshipped by the Ancient Greeks. Stunning!

Sensational Skiathos

Offering everything from lively nightlife to chilled out, peaceful beaches, Skiathos is an undiscovered Greek gem

Famous thanks to its starring role in Mamma Mia! the island of Skiathos - or ‘the Aegean paradise’ - is loved for its idyllic beaches, teal-tinted waters and luscious leafy landscape.

At just seven miles long - and boasting more than 60 beaches - it’s easy to explore. Head to the chic Old Town, above the old port, for streets lined with tavernas, antique shops and museums.

When it comes to beaches, Skiathos has plenty. Beautiful Koukounaries, with its fine white sand and blue waters, is a sight to behold, offering sunbeds and watersports.

With close-by tavernas, Megali Ammos is walking distance from the town; while Banana beach is surrounded by pine trees, and lively bars.

Hop on a boat to visit nearby sister island Skopelos. See the terracotta-topped whitewashed houses spring into view as you arrive at its charming port.

Then explore the eateries nestled within the narrow alleyways - and don’t leave before trying home cooked dishes with sweet plums grown on the island.

Perfect Preveza

Is this the French Riviera? No! It's Preveza's gorgeous waterfront - complete with incredible local restaurants and stunning sea views

Dreamy Caribbean-style beaches, beautiful architecture, French Riviera-esque harbour towns and divine views, the traditional seaside town of Preveza promises an unforgettable getaway.

Whether you want to spend endless days soaking up the sun, or trying windsurfing, paddleboarding, diving or jetskiing, there’s a stretch of white sand perfect for you.

Tranquil Lichnos, nestled into a lush cove, is surrounded by olive groves, and glistening waters, perfect for kayaking and cave exploring.

Breathtaking Ai Sostis is perfect for those who want to escape, with a sandy shore and turquoise ocean - pack a picnic and stay for the day.

While popular Monolithi, one of the longest in Europe, boasts sunbeds and watersports.

The region’s chilled-out harbour town, dating to 290BC, is brimming with Byzantne and Venetian buildings and fascinating museums.

With ouzeries and tavernas dotted around, relax and enjoy Preveza’s famous pita bread and savoury pies.

Spend a day hiking one of the 12 trails that take in the beautiful Acheron River, stopping in the turquoise waters for swimming or kayaking, before visiting the natural wonder that is Aphrodite’s Cave.

For a traditional event, the Parga Kanaria Festival, with singing, dancing and fireworks, is a must - it takes place every summer on August 14th.

It promises to be a holiday you’ll never forget!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Carlo, Carlo!’ Maria’s lyrical voice carries across the wooded hills, calling her 88-year-old husband to come in for dinner. But Carlo isn’t listening. He’s busy in the forest, his trusty dog beside him, searching for truffles.

This evocative scene – drenched in the golden light of autumn – is brilliantly captured in a new film, The Truffle Hunters, by directors Michael Dweck and Gregory Kershaw. The American film-makers spent three years immersing themselves in the time-honoured ways of life in the villages of Piedmont, in the north of Italy, to understand the mysteries of truffle-hunting.

Now released in UK cinemas, its artfully shot depiction of a place seemingly lost in time has already won accolades at Sundance, Cannes and other prestigious film festivals worldwide.

The sweet life: The peaceful village of Pella where you'll find the super-stylish bolthole Casa Fantini

Its focus is a handful of men – old in years but young in spirit – who live around the tiny villages of Santo Stefano, Belbo and Roddino. Spending their days and nights hunting for the elusive white truffle, they are guided by an age-old culture and training passed down through generations, as well as by the noses of their cherished Lagotto dogs.

‘These communities still live in the world of their youth,’ says director Kershaw. ‘They listen to the same music they’ve listened to all their lives, they work the land they grew up on, they hunt for truffles in the same forests they’ve always known. It’s a very beautiful, simple life.’

As well as revealing a cast of often eccentric characters, The Truffle Hunters sets a painterly vision of Piedmont – of fairytale forests, of ramshackle but welcoming villages and of cosy homes where vats of pasta bubble away atop wood-burning stoves.

A scene from The Truffle Hunters film, which follows a handful of men who hunt for the elusive white truffle in Piedmont

It’s also an enigmatic introduction to the all-encompassing passion surrounding food which dominates life in this region.

Food is everything in Piedmont. Italy’s second-largest region after Sicily, it is framed by the Alps in the north, then sweeps south to encapsulate pastoral rolling hills, scenic lakes and vine-covered terrain.

The major city is Turin, but gourmet travellers will be most familiar with its food-focused towns such as Alba, Asti, Barolo and Bra.

As well as revealing a cast of often eccentric characters, The Truffle Hunters sets a painterly vision of Piedmont – of fairytale forests, of ramshackle but welcoming villages and of cosy homes where vats of pasta bubble away atop wood-burning stoves.

Here truffles are sold for thousands of pounds, sparkling wines – some say comparable to champagne – are carefully cultivated and blood-red grapes are grown to produce classic vintages.

Nordelaia (nordelaia.com), a new hotel found in the untouched village of Cremolino, an hour’s drive south from Turin, aims to celebrate this food-fuelled heritage. Converted from an 800-year-old farmhouse, it now has soulfully rustic interiors designed by Rose Murray, director of hip London-based design studio These White Walls.

While the 12 rooms and suites are charming thanks to restful, nature-inspired details – stone and burnished metals softened with velvet throws and linen lightshades – it is the culinary offering which will truly wow, overseen by award-winning chef Andrea Ribaldone. From the Roccaverano cheese risotto overlaid with Fassone beef tartare to the delicate lemon tart with basil sorbet, Ribaldone’s dishes are all a riff on traditional Piedmontese cuisine using locally sourced ingredients.

‘Connection to nature and the local terroir [environmental conditions] is really important to me,’ he says, ‘and I have purposely reinterpreted classic recipes, passed on from nonna to mamma, which use the best of the region’s produce.’

There is also a more casual menu, with plenty of mouthwatering dishes on offer, including Nordelaia’s version of vitello tonnato, tajarin pasta (what the locals call the tagliatelle-like tagliolini) laden with sausage slices, hazelnuts and the most exquisite panna cotta made with figs and rhubarb.

As for room service, forget the bog- standard burger – instead, you can order a lavish charcuterie board featuring the best local cheeses and prosciutto.

Nordelaia guests can also connect to nature with walking trails around the 12-acre estate, foraging in the countryside or enjoying wine experiences in the surrounding pinot noir vineyard. If you want to know how those truffle-hunters find their treasure, you can try your hand at it with an expert’s help.

Gourmet travellers will be most familiar with the region's food-focused towns such as Alba, Asti, Barolo (above) and Bra

A tantalising dish from Casa di Langa

There are cookery lessons with Andrea Ribaldone or, for a real highlight, you can book a personalised tasting menu, eaten in the top floor of the three-tiered restaurant. Its glorious floor-to-ceiling windows are designed so that as guests dine, their eyes are continuously drawn to the views outside – it’s particularly compelling as the setting sun begins to casts its shadows over the valley.

There are also herb and wildflower gardens, a travertine-lined pool and a formal courtyard area with fragrant lemon trees in huge terracotta pots. Even the spa is inspired by the bounty harvested in Piedmont, with herbal remedies on offer as well as apitherapy – guests lie in a special ‘house’ above the resident beehives and breathe in the supposedly healthy honey-laden air.

Some 40 miles west, and also offering a taste of la dolce vita, or the sweet life, is the new Casa di Langa boutique hotel (casadilanga.com). From touring neighbouring vineyards on a vintage Vespa to taking lessons in farm-to-table principles, this is the place where you can deep-dive into a wealth of culinary experiences.

‘We have created a special truffle-hunting experience on our estate,’ says general manager Eva Codina. ‘Accompanied by a couple of trifulau [truffle-hunters] and their Lagotto dogs, you’ll go into the forest. Depending on the season, you’ll possibly find black or white truffles right on our doorstep.’

Based in its own vineyard, the 39-room Casa di Langa is located in the celebrated Barolo, Barbaresco, and Alta Langa wine-making areas. Understandably there is a focus on wine, with classes, tastings and visits to wineries on offer. For true wine buffs, they can even earn certification from the Wine & Spirit Education Trust, with Casa di Langa being one of the few WSET accredited hotels in Italy.

It all comes to the fore at the hotel’s star attraction: the Faula Restaurant. Chef Manuel Bouchard, who was born in Turin, is inspired by the age-old Italian custom of families and friends spending quality time together around a table. His menu is rooted in Piedmontese cuisine, with ingredients sourced from the hotel’s vegetable garden, orchard and local producers. ‘My passion comes from Piedmont,’ says Bouchard. ‘We have such a variety of products – from the mountains and lakes in the north to the hills of the south. I’ve become a connoisseur of many of the region’s recipes and believe that many don’t need any innovation to improve them – they are already perfect.’

Appetising: The pretty town of Bra, where the Slow Food movement was started in 1986

Head north to Piedmont’s culinary heart. The Slow Food movement was formed in 1986 in Bra as a way to oppose the opening of a McDonald’s at the Spanish Steps in Rome and to champion ancient food production techniques. It has since spread across the world.

Nearby is Alba, a place where the mighty white truffle reigns supreme and where you’ll find one of Italy’s highest concentrations of Michelin-starred restaurants.

Just over an hour’s drive onwards, to the northern reaches of Piedmont, you’ll arrive at captivating Lake Orta. On its shores, in the quiet village of Pella, is the super-stylish bolthole Casa Fantini (casafantinilaketime.com). Owner Daniela Fantini says: ‘With just 11 bedrooms, the hotel is intimate. It’s a serene place, made peaceful because of the atmosphere of the lake. It is where you can truly taste the flavours – from the table to the landscape – of Piedmont.’

Truffle-hunting experiences are offered in the region where tourists can learn how to seek out the mighty fungi

The kitchen at Casa Fantini is overseen by chef Paolo Bullone, whose specialities include his take on a regional pigeon and chicory dish that has been served in the nearby Vercelli area since 1860. There’s also tortellini with parmesan, black truffle and Breme onion (a local, large red onion); green tomato, lemon and red shrimp carpaccio; and a ‘famous’ apple cake – Bullone’s interpretation of a neighbourhood recipe.

By day, you can hop on the hotel’s boat and take a picnic to Orta San Giulio, perched in the middle of Lake Orta. Forget sausage rolls and limp sandwiches, Bullone’s lunch includes ‘tapas of the casa’ – caprese salads, fresh breads packed with mocetta (salted meat marinated with mountain herbs), and sausages.

When you return to Casa Fantini, Daniela, a convivial host, may invite you to have a glass of sparkling Alta Langa rosé at the bar. This might even turn into dinner with other guests at the long communal table. ‘Casa Fantini is a place where people tend to meet and bond – especially over food,’ she says. ‘What better way to celebrate the joy in life?’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Getting to grips with testing before going on holiday has become a minefield. Some people have been left unable to go abroad due to their tests not arriving in time.

Others have been forced to quarantine for long periods after receiving the incorrect — and even used — tests.

Here’s what you need to know . . .

Travellers are having to rely on reviews to find the best providers. The above table shows the ones to trust and those to avoid

WHICH ARE APPROVED BY THE GOVERNMENT?

With more than 400 companies listed on the gov.uk website (and prices ranging from £19.95 to £399), it’s difficult to establish the best provider.

Travellers are forced to trawl through the list and rely on reviews and comments. In order to get on the Government’s list of ‘approved providers’, companies simply have to declare they meet minimum standards for testing, opening it up to rogue companies.

To cover itself, the Government states underneath the list that it ‘does not recommend any particular test provider. Do your own research about available providers, the tests they supply and their terms and conditions.’

Getting to grips with testing before going on holiday has become a minefield, writes the Daily Mail's Harriet Sime

A scan of reviews website Trustpilot shows dozens of approved providers have been hit with bad reviews, some as low as 1.4 out of 5 (one is the lowest rating a customer can give).

Expert Medicals, which claims to offer ‘industry leading medical services’, has more than 400 reviews and an average rating of 1.4. It has even been accused on social media of sending out tests with used nasal swabs inside.

Eurofins, which claims to ‘offer its global scientific testing expertise to make fast, reliable and affordable PCR testing available to all’, has more than 900 reviews with an average rating of 1.4. Customers have complained about delays with results and refunds being refused.

DAILY MAIL COMMENT Why isn’t the Prime Minister following France’s lead and allowing Britons to use free NHS PCR tests for travel? Families would no longer be risking thousands of pounds every time they book a holiday. Alternatively, the Government could recommend a few dozen companies that have a proven record of providing travellers with reliable test results. Advertisement

Those using Randox Health, the official testing partner of the 2020 Olympics, have had similar issues with its service. Richard Lamping, who works in the drinks industry, returned from Paris last week after visiting family.

He booked a £48 ‘day 5’ test with Randox which would mean he could leave the 10-day quarantine early through the Test to Release scheme and go back to the office. But his test didn’t turn up and he was forced to pay £129 for another with a different firm.

Richard, 41, said: ‘I needed to work and see clients. I tried to speak to Randox several times. I waited on the phone for two hours only for someone to answer, laugh at me and hang up. I thought it was a reputable company, but it’s a joke.

A Randox spokesperson said: ‘We investigated the cases brought to our attention and have been in communication with the customers.’

WHAT ARE OTHER COUNTRIES DOING?

The UK appears to be on its own with testing, especially when it comes to pricing. Last November, Greece introduced a price cap on private medical facilities of £34 for PCR tests and £8.50 for antigen tests, while some regions in Italy have capped the cost of PCR tests at £52. In France, residents get free PCR and antigen travel testing.

EXPLAINING THE RULES…

GREEN: Take a ‘pre-departure’ antigen test while on holiday (72 hours before your flight back to the UK).

Take a PCR test on day one or two after arriving back into the UK.

AMBER: Rules the same as above, with an extra test on day eight of your return.

RED: Quarantine at a Government-approved hotel for ten days at a cost of £1,750.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Overwhelming beauty, dreamy beaches, sensational scenery and delicious gastronomy - Dubrovnik-Neretva County offers a holiday unlike any other.

The southern region of Croatia is filled with hidden gems to discover, local food and wines to savour, pristine stretches of golden sand to relax on and untouched nature to explore.

Here, we reveal the perfect travel itinerary to ensure you don’t miss a thing!

Delve into Dubrovnik

Dubrovnik, the 'Pearl of the Adriatic', is an architectural wonderland - and much more besides

It’s with good reason sun-drenched Dubrovnik, surrounded by glistening waters and beautiful beaches, is called the ‘Pearl of the Adriatic’.

With its terracotta roofs, ancient city walls and centuries of cultural heritage, it’s an incredible place to explore, taking in breathtaking Baroque, Gothic and Renaissance churches, monasteries, palaces, and fountains.

Hike to the top of Mount Srd for stunning views of the city, which has caught the eye of many Hollywood directors, having starred in many films and TV shows.

Hire a bicycle and hop on a ferry to explore nearby pretty Lokrum island, where you can splash around in turquoise waters, spot peacocks, and take in the gorgeous pastel-coloured houses.

Or head to the mountainous Konavle region, with its rocky coast, exhilarating waterfalls and delicious local cuisines.

Enjoy a boat trip to the beautiful Elaphiti islands, a cluster of 13 isles, of which the largest three - Kolocep, Lopud, and Sipan - are perfectly positioned for island-hopping tours.

Perfect Pelješac

Wine lovers will be in heaven in the lush peninsula of Pelješac, with its rolling vineyards and Wine Road, which you can walk or cycle while admiring the scenery.

Spend an afternoon sampling sumptuous red wines, such as Dingač, Postup or Plavac, while tasting traditional, locally sourced delicacies including oysters and mussels.

Stop in the quaint village of Ston to admire the stone city walls. Kuna is home to an 18th-century monastery bursting with works of art, and Mali Ston is where to dine al fresco, taking in twinkling harbour views.

Beaches don't get much prettier than those in Pelješac

Then head to one of the many idyllic beaches, sprinkled with soft white sand, and shimmering waters that are perfect for swimming, diving, kitesurfing or just soaking up the sun.

The small towns of Viganj and Kučište offer ideal conditions for windsurfing of all levels.

Charismatic Korčula

Korčula, the largest island of Dubrovnik-Neretva County, is just a stone’s throw from the Pelješac peninsula.

It’s a treasure trove of culture, steeped in history with untouched nature, narrow alleyways, alluring architecture and an abundance of cafes and restaurants.

Korčula - an ancient town looking out onto perfect blue sea

The chic capital is on the north-eastern side, and is perfect for spending a day strolling and exploring its maze-like streets, as well as the Gothic-Renaissance style St Mark's Cathedral, which, dating to the 15th century, dominates the heart of the old town.

Pick up souvenirs in the fascinating shops, then visit the famed Marco Polo Museum before enjoying a traditional meal of fresh fish and a glass of local wine in one of the many eateries.

Then, explore the island’s hidden bays, sandy beaches and craggy coastline. Try your hand at sailing, go diving for a chance encounter with a dolphin, or head to the Pelješac Channel for world-class windsurfing.

Hit the waves for some world-class windsurfing after a feast of south-Croatian seafood delicacies

Marvellous Mljet

The beautiful island of Mljet offers a getaway unlike any other, with its tranquil National Park making up a third of the island.

Boasting pine forests and stunning saltwater lakes, home to the Mediterranean’s largest coral reef, its unspoiled wilderness is a huge draw, so it’s well worth spending a day exploring this spectacular landscape.

Expore secluded woodlands or swim through peaceful lakes in Mljet National Park

Here, you can zip around the pine forest on a bicycle and kayak the translucent lakes before drinks in secluded Polace town.

Still feeling active? Trek up the peaks of Montokuc and Veliki Sladin Gradac for unbeatable views.

The island is also dotted with pebble beaches where you can soak up the sun, or dive in to explore the underwater world. Hire a boat or book a tour to hop to some of the nearby breathtaking isles.

Don't leave without visiting the alluring Odysseus' Cave, named after the legendary hero of Greek mythology. This is accessible via a path from Babino Polje that takes in vineyards and olive groves. Go swimming in glistening blue waters and enjoy the sun-soaked beach.

Lucious Lastovo

The islands and lakes beyond Dubrovnik are best enjoyed by boat - so charter one or join a boat tour to make the most of your trip

Enjoy meditation on the beach or relax in the calm waters, on the postcard-pretty island of Lastovo which, thanks to its jaw-dropping beauty, has been declared a national park.

It's filled with hiking and walking trails, taking in cute bays, gentle hills, the oldest lighthouse in the Adriatic, lush forests, as well as stunning views and caves of Rača and Puzavica.

Visit the tranquil bays here by hiring a boat or hopping on a tour.

Nip round to the pristine Saplun beach - the only sandy stretch in the archipelago. Swim in the crystal-clear waters then enjoy a feast of local vegetables and fresh fish for an adventure to remember.

Endless river days...

Wind down from your thrilling adventure with a calming tour up the Neretva River

Make sure you don't miss a trip down the peaceful Neretva River.

Book a photo safari boat trip for a sedate ride along the narrow channels, during which you’ll learn all about the life of the locals, discovering how this wondrous masterpiece has fed people with a plethora of fruit, primarily citrus, figs and grapes.

You’ll also spot animals, including some of the 300 odd bird species that call this region home.

Get closer to south Croatia's natural habitat and wildlife on a peaceful horseback tour

Then explore the Neretva valley by bike, or, thanks to the winds, it’s the perfect location for kitesurfing.

Sample some of traditional delicacies such as ‘brodet’, a Croatian fish stew, with a glass of the excellent local wines.

Head to the Neretva valley to witness the interconnected Baćina lakes that are surrounded by natural beauty, making it an ideal place for cycling, running, hiking or windsurfing.

It will be the perfect end to an unforgettable break!

Click here to book your Dubrovnik and Neretva County adventure today.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britain's wild west PCR testing for travel regime where swabs that were supposed to cost £2 actually sold for more than £100 was caused by a lack of regulation, industry experts have claimed.

In one of the most embarrassing moments of the testing fiasco, the Government had to change a company's £1.99 listing on its website showing approved PCR testing providers to show that its kits actually cost £117.

And insiders say the broken system was caused by experts pushing for more expensive PCR tests as a requirement for travel, the decision to allow private providers to sell the tests and a lack of oversight on the Government's part to prevent middlemen companies profiteering.

It means companies like Corporate Travel Management — which has received a one-star rating in 210 out of 217 reviews on Trust Pilot for its tests — could enter the market without being blocked.

Minister have only now, finally moved to tackle the market — dropping the cost of their own Covid tests by a fifth in the hope private firms will follow.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid admitted the Government’s own costs were too high and said its single post-holiday PCR test package will fall from £88 to £68. A two-swab NHS Test and Trace package will be cut from £170 to £136.

Mr Javid also accused some private testing firms of ‘acting like cowboys’ by advertising misleading prices on the Government website and vowed to boot them off within days.

But the changes were dismissed by the travel industry last night, with bosses saying the price cuts amounted to ‘tinkering’.

The head of Gatwick Airport said testing should be removed altogether for the double vaccinated to restore ‘shattered’ passenger confidence and help the industry through a desperate time.

Ministers were branded ‘hypocrites’ this week after repeatedly calling on private firms to drop their prices but failing to cut their own for summer.

Britain's wild west PCR testing for travel regime where swabs that were supposed to cost £1.99 actually sold for £117 was caused by a lack of regulation, industry experts have claimed

Pictured: Passengers waiting in line outside the Testing Centre in the Arrival Hall of Terminal 5 at London's Heathrow Airport

But the testing troubles began in earnest when the Government decided to introduce testing as a requirement for travel earlier in the year, experts said.

SAGE described the gold-standard PCR test as the 'key defence' against variants coming into the country from abroad back in January 21, because these can be used to sequence mutant strains of the virus.

But the NHS's calamitous Test and Trace system did not have the capacity to meet demand from travellers so the decision was made to open the market up to the private sector, paving the way for rogue firms to set whatever price they chose.

George Batchelor, a health economist at Edge Health, told the Daily Telegraph: 'Expensive PCR tests are always going to be better than cheaper lateral flow tests.

'Two tests are always going to be better than one, so why not more and more testing, they argued?

'There was never another side to the coin and that was against a backdrop of the NHS test and trace capacity not meeting demand. The testing capacity would have to come from the private sector.'

Research by airline consultancy Skytrax shows airport PCR tests were available for as little as $8 (£5.70) in Mumbai, India, in April. The cost in Britain was nearly £100

The Government identified providers capable of delivering the tests and lab facilities, listing around 430 on its website.

It also provided its own NHS package, which inflated the market because of its previous price of £88.

Middlemen firms acting as commercial fronts that buy testing expertise for laboratories quickly spotted a way to profit from the hectic market and little was done to regulate firms or protect consumers.

The UK Accreditation Service is ostensibly performing that job but firms are not audited for their timeliness or prices.

It meant companies like Corporate Travel Management entered the market without interference. The firm offers tests for people returning to Britain priced at £210.

More than 400 firms rushed to get in, with some naming themselves Aardvark or 0001doctor in order to rank at the top of approved lists of providers, company bosses claimed. Neither company has been accused of misrepresenting their products.

It comes after Mail reported how the Department of Health was charging more than four times what the cheapest private provider was advertising on the Government’s website. This ratio has doubled from earlier this summer.

It is understood that officials do not want NHS Test and Trace travel swabs to dominate the market and hope the move will nudge private firms into bringing their own prices down so more families looking for a well-earned break can afford to go abroad.

Officials will now also conduct a rapid review of the firms listed on the Government website and boot off any deemed to be ripping off or misleading consumers

Industry insiders have previously said the Government’s own prices have inflated the market and that they won’t bring down their own costs until ministers move first.

Officials will now also conduct a rapid review of the firms listed on the Government website and boot off any deemed to be ripping off or misleading consumers. The internal review will start this weekend and last ten days. Providers failing to meet necessary standards will be immediately removed.

It will run alongside the review being conducted by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), ordered by Mr Javid last week after a flood of complaints from customers about receiving swabs and results late or not at all.

This has led to some having to extend their quarantine period or even miss flights.

Announcing the latest moves, Mr Javid suggested he was expecting the CMA initial findings within days so swift action can be taken.

He added: ‘I know how much people have looked forward to their summer holidays and that the cost of PCR testing can be a barrier to that. That is why I am determined to protect consumers and hard-working families from exploitative practices and ensure high quality tests are available at a reasonable price.

‘I am pleased to announce that with immediate effect we’re slashing the price of day 2 and 8 tests from NHS Test and Trace by a fifth – this will benefit people right across the UK...

‘I’ve also ordered my department to urgently review the list of private providers on gov.uk to ensure pricing is clearer and transparent.

‘Any provider found to be misleading the public will be kicked off. Too many providers are acting like cowboys and that needs to stop.

‘The public should be allowed to enjoy their summer holidays without having to face excessive costs or anxiety.’

There are more than 400 private firms listed on the Government’s website. Yesterday, the average price of a single PCR swab across them all was £90

There are 441 private firms listed on the Government’s website. Yesterday, the average price of a single PCR swab across them all was £90.

Prices are listed between £20 and £400.

However, as the Mail reported this week, the cheapest rates are often not realistically obtainable for many, as when clicking through to each firm’s website they are mostly out of stock or offered in centres, meaning many would have to travel hundreds of miles to take advantage of them. It is this practice that Mr Javid is looking to clamp down on.

However, the new Government price could still add more than £250 to the cost of a foreign break for a family of four.

For an unvaccinated family, it could add more than £500.

The travel industry last night dismissed the price cuts as ‘tinkering’ and said they ‘do not go anywhere near far enough’.

Karen Dee, CEO of the Airport Operators Association, said: ‘It is time for the Government to get a grip on testing and replace costly PCR tests with more affordable rapid tests for low-risk countries and bring international travel in line with the rest of the economy.’

Paul Charles, of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said: ‘Even with the changes, test costs are still far too high to restore confidence to travel, and also far higher than most European countries.

‘Providers who are making substantial profits during the pandemic are acting unethically when consumers are being forced to take these PCR tests by Government. It’s the policy that urgently needs reviewing, not just pricing.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@You don’t have to arrive in Upton Magna on two wheels, but you’ll be in good company if you do.

The sleepy Shropshire village is a popular pit-stop on the cycle route between Land’s End and John O’Groats, and the bustling Village Store & Cafe feeds toasties and scones to as many as 300 hungry cyclists a day.

Those who prefer a more leisurely stay head next door to The Haughmond. Like the Village Store, the 17th Century coaching inn is run by chef patron Martin Board and his wife Mel.

The Haughmond is a 17th Century coaching inn located in Upton Magna

They bought the derelict pub in 2012 and have gradually restored it, building their family home there and adding the shop, a self-catering barn conversion and seven bedrooms above the inn.

There are also two pet-friendly ground-floor rooms named after the family’s Staffordshire bull terriers.

Inside, the decor is inspired by the wild deer that throng nearby Haughmond Hill, The Wrekin peak – a local landmark – and Attingham Park, an 18th Century National Trust property with 200 acres of parkland.

There are stag portraits, wall-mounted antlers and deer etched everywhere from the menu to the candles on the dinner tables. Sage-green walls, buttery leather armchairs, low whitewashed beams and a whole wall of saddles and stirrups add to the hunting-lodge feel.

Plush: The richly decorated Red Room has sweeping views over The Wrekin from the bed

Yet locals don’t come for cosy pints but slap-up special-occasion dining, courtesy of executive head chef Gareth Howarth. The Haughmond’s restaurant has been Michelin Guide-listed since 2016 and offers a six-course tasting menu with wine pairing alongside a short à la carte menu, using ingredients sourced within 20 miles where possible.

Even on a Tuesday night, it’s fully booked with well-dressed couples and older families celebrating birthdays and toasting each other with cocktails made of gin distilled in the village vicarage.

It’s worth booking a room for a breakfast with a fine-dining flourish. Before the full English, a chef’s starter plate is an unexpected treat with a curl of smoked salmon on a parmesan pancake, home-made granola layered with fruit and rich Greek yogurt, and a sliver of delicious lemon drizzle cake.

The decor is inspired by the wild deer that throng nearby Attingham Park, pictured above

TRAVEL FACTS The Haughmond, Upton Magna, Shropshire. B&B from £95 per night. For more information visit thehaughmond.co.uk. Advertisement

Just the thing before a day pottering around the cobbled medieval streets and half-timbered Tudor houses of nearby Shrewsbury, birthplace of Charles Darwin.

USP: Cosy country retreat with destination dining.

The food: Exceptional ingredients beautifully presented. The six-course tasting menu is £55 and includes sirloin beef tartare with egg yolk, charcoal mayonnaise and brioche and a feather-light dark chocolate stout cake with malted milk ice cream, smoked fudge and praline. Note that the restaurant is closed on Sundays and Mondays.

The rooms: Individually decorated in rich jewel colours with plush faux-fur throws, oak furniture and feature walls. The Red Room is the largest, with a fireplace and sweeping views over The Wrekin from the bed. Emerald-green Sika in the eaves is the cutest and has French doors and its own Juliet balcony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An all-in-one 'travel pass' that could be used to slash border hall queues for holidaymakers is being trialled at Heathrow Airport.

The International Air Transport Association (IATA), the trade body for airlines, is trialling its new 'Travel Pass' mobile app on flights between the London airport and Helsinki.

The app allows travellers to put a digital version of their passport, along with their Covid test results and their entry requirements in one place so they can be easily checked.

Travel bosses hope technology could cut the wait times at airport check-in and border halls.

Other similar apps, such as Verifly, have been used and promoted, including by the likes of BA, as a way for passengers to check entry requirements and input tests results ahead of travel.

But the IATA's app has drawn particular interest because of the digitalised passport function.

The Government says it is monitoring the three-week trial, which will be rolled out on the Finnair flights between Heathrow and Helsinki Airport between now and mid-August.

The International Air Transport Association (IATA), the trade body for airlines, is trialing its new 'Travel Pass' app (pictured) on flights between the London-based airport and Helsinki

Travel bosses hope the app could cut the wait times at airport check-in and border halls (Pictured: queues at the UK border at Heathrow Terminal 5 last month)

What is the IATA's 'Travel Pass'?: A Q&A Q: What is Travel Pass? A: IATA Travel Pass is a mobile application that helps travellers to store and manage their verified certifications for COVID-19 tests or COVID-19 vaccinations Q: How does IATA Travel Pass work? A: The app has four main functions: 1. A global registry of health requirements which enables passengers to find information on travel, testing and vaccination requirements for their journey 2. A Global registry of testing / vaccination centres, enabling passengers to find testing centres and labs at their departure location which meet the standards for testing and vaccination requirements of their destination. 3. A Lab App – enabling authorised labs and test centres to securely share certified test and vaccination certificates with passengers. 4. Contactless Travel App - enabling passengers to create a ‘digital passport’, receive test and vaccination certificates and verify that they are sufficient for their itinerary, and share test or vaccination certificates with airlines and authorities to facilitate travel. Q: What's the point of it? A: The IATA hopes that it will streamline and digitalise travel documentation and that it will help give governments the confidence to reopen borders without quarantine. Q: Which airlines are taking part? A: More than 45 airlines across the world are taking part in trials - and a full list is here. For UK travellers, the main airlines trialling the scheme are BA and the remaining IAG group, Virgin Atlantic, Emirates and Etihad. Q. Do passengers need to pay for IATA Travel Pass? A: No - it's free to download from the Apple App Store and on Google Play. It is also free to use. Advertisement

Ole Orvér, Finnair Chief Commercial Officer, said: 'Covid-19 travel restrictions have disrupted millions of travellers all around the world.

'They have also severely contributed to ever-present anxieties for travellers across the whole aviation sector.

'The industry is in need for current protocols to be replaced with more effective, digital solutions to simplify coronavirus travel procedures.'

IATA says the app allows travellers to receive, store and manage any verified COVID-19 certificates securely ahead of their flight.

Bosses of the trade board say they hope, in the future, the app will enable customers to navigate their way through airports and board their flight more quickly and efficiently.

'It will do this by ensuring customers avoid the additional burden of travel document hassle – providing a smoother customer experience for regular travellers,' say the IATA.

During the trial, the Finnish carrier will collect feedback from customers and crew to help the app's future development.

Speaking about the plans, a Government spokesperson told MailOnline: 'The Global Travel Taskforce continues to review how we safely restart international travel while managing the risk from imported cases and variants.

'We are constantly exploring how new technology can support these aims and look forward to hearing about the conclusion of the trials.'

Alongside Finnair, the IATA app, which is available on the Apple App Store and Google Play is being trialled on other carriers, including BA, Virgin Atlantic, Emirates and Etihad.

In March the IATA teamed up with Singapore Airlines for flights from Singapore to Heathrow.

Speaking at the time, JoAnn Tan, acting senior vice president of marketing planning in Singapore Airlines, said: 'Digital health credentials will be essential as borders reopen and travel restrictions get progressively lifted worldwide.

'It (the app) gives travellers a one-stop-shop to help them comply with the new rules for travel.

'It shows that governments can efficiently manage these travel requirements with complete confidence in the identity of the passenger and the veracity of the travel credentials—importantly, avoiding long queues.'

During the trial, the Finnish carrier (pictured: A Finnair plane) will collect feedback from customers and crew to help the app's future development

The new trial comes as it was revealed on Tuesday that Border Force officers have been told they no longer need to make Covid checks on arrivals in the UK.

According to a leaked report officials have been told they no longer have to 'routinely' check passengers arriving from green and amber list countries.

Arrivals currently have to provide a negative Covid test taken before departure and must complete a Passenger Locator Form within 48 hours of departure to the UK.

What do arrivals in the UK from green and amber list countries need to do before they travel? Green List - You must take a Covid test before you travel. This can be a PCR, Lamp or anti-gen but must meet specific requirements - of ≥97% specificity, ≥80% sensitivity at viral loads above 100,000 copies/ml. - You must book and pay for a 'Day 2' Covid test to be taken two days after your arrival in the UK. - You must fill out a Passenger Locator Form within 48 hours of travel Amber List All of the above. PLUS: - If you are NOT double vaccinated you must quarantine at home for at least 10 days. You can be released earlier if you take part in the Test and Release scheme. - If you ARE double vaccinated you will need to declare that you have been fully UK vaccinated on your passenger locator form or you are under 18 and resident in the UK. You will need to show proof of your vaccination status to your carrier (ferry, airline or train) when you travel. Advertisement

But, as of Monday just gone, Border Force officials will no longer routinely check passengers have these documents, according to the leaked document, first reported by the Guardian.

Passport e-gates will also no longer refer passengers to in-person checks by Border Force officers if a passenger locator form is not found, the paper reports.

Passenger Locator Forms are still checked by airlines ahead of travel, while the Government insists arrivals who do not comply still run the risk of being fined.

The change in policy also does not impact on red list arrivals, who must isolate in designated quarantine hotels for 10 days, at the cost of £1750, after landing in the UK.

The move, aimed at reducing queues at the border, comes after Heathrow Terminal 5's passport control hall was thrown into chaos on Monday night due to a glitch in the e-gate system.

Thousands of frustrated passengers were left queuing in the Border hall on Monday night after a Government blunder led passengers to fill out their Passenger Locator Forms incorrectly.

The forms sparked a wave of rejections at the e-gates, with Border Force officials eventually closing them to prevent further disruption.

Lucy Moreton, professional officer for the ISU, which represents border immigration and customs staff in the UK, said Border Force staff had also been told not to challenge Covid documentation 'even if it is recorded on the system that the documentation has not been completed'.

Ms Moreton told the BBC: 'Ultimately this is a political decision. Certainly, it will reduce queue times significantly and hopefully also the level of verbal abuse to which Border Force staff are subject.

'That is welcome to us. The impact on the UK's Covid security is ultimately a scientific determination.'

A Government spokesman told MailOnline: 'Our utmost priority is protecting the health of the public and our enhanced borders regime is helping reduce the risk of new variants being transmitted.

'All passenger locator forms are still being checked by carriers, as they are legally required to do, and to suggest otherwise is wrong.

'This legal requirement on carriers is underpinned by a robust compliance regime, which is overseen by regulators.

'Compliance with these rules is essential in order to protect the population from new variants of Covid-19, and so there will be tough fines for those who do not follow the rules.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

British tour operators claimed today that 'almost every' hotel they work with in Europe is turning away summer bookings in favour of firms from other countries because UK tourists are not confident enough to travel.

Travel chiefs warned that 'uncertainty' amid rumours over an 'amber watchlist' in Britain has led to hotels on the continent favouring block bookings from operators based in France, Germany and eastern Europe.

They added that European travellers are 'taking our beds' while tour operators in the UK 'have the sword of Damocles constantly hanging over us and things could change and result in cancellations at any moment'.

The sector has repeatedly warned the current traffic light system is hitting consumer confidence and there are now claims that hoteliers on the continent are no longer willing to accept bookings from UK companies.

Noel Josephides, director of Aito, the Specialist Travel Association, and chairman of tour operator Sunvil, said today that his London-based firm was seeing bookings turned away with 'almost every single hotel we work with'.

He told MailOnline: 'We hold what we call allocations of hotel beds - and they are based on a release basis. Some want a release one week before, some two weeks, some one month.

'And what's happening is that they're withdrawing those allocations because we can't say now that we will be sending people in August, because basically there is no confidence here in the public to travel.

'That's what's happening, that's how it works. With hotels, you don't ring up every time - you have so many kind of rooms and release them back.

'Because of the uncertainty they are seeing that there are no bookings, so they're saying I've got a German operator, I've got a French, I've got an eastern European.'

Boris Johnson yesterday abandoned proposals to create a controversial new 'amber watchlist' to identify countries which could turn red at a moment's notice after a furious backlash and warnings the category would further decimate the beleaguered travel industry.

The Prime Minister is now under pressure to go even further, with dozens of travel firms demanding he ditch the existing system and replace it with a single 'red list' of banned countries.

Mr Josephides that the UK Government needed to restore confidence in the industry by guaranteeing that those who go to an to an amber or green destination will not need to quarantine when they get back, between now and the end of the summer season.

He said that the industry was trading 'but it's crumbs' and said the recent back-and-forth rumours of the amber watchlist were a 'terrible way of going about things'.

Meanwhile, the Government's handling of international travel has been further plunged into chaos after it emerged the boss of the Joint Biosecurity Centre, which advises ministers on the rules has quit, with no successor in place.

The JBC pores over international coronavirus data and analyses it to inform the decisions on which countries go onto which list.

The Guardian reported last night that Clare Gardiner had left her role as director general and it is currently unclear who is actually in charge of the body, with critics claiming it is 'rudderless' at a crucial time.

Education Minister Gillian Keegan today confirmed that Ms Gardiner had resigned but rejected the claim of the organisation being 'rudderless'.

The Department of Health and Social Care said Ms Gardiner had 'returned as planned to a role in national security' and the JBC 'continues to operate routinely under robust interim arrangements' with a replacement to be 'announced imminently'.

Ms Keegan also appeared to hint that the 'amber plus' list which requires all returning travellers from France, including the double-jabbed, to quarantine could be scrapped.

She said the Government wants the travel rules to be 'simple enough for people to really understand' and to take decisions 'based on the system so we have the red list countries, the amber list countries and the green list countries'.

The comments also seemed to hint that the 'green watchlist' - a category for countries which are at risk of losing their green status - could be axed.

Pushed on whether 'amber plus' would be scrapped, Ms Keegan would not be drawn and said Transport Secretary Grant Shapps will deliver an update to the travel rules on Thursday.

But travel expert Paul Charles, director of The PC Agency consultancy, said he expects further changes will be made, claiming 'high level' sources had told him the 'amber plus' and 'green watchlist' categories would be dropped.

It is thought Mr Shapps could add 10 countries to the green list this week, including Austria, the Czech Republic and Germany.

It came amid reports that Mr Shapps is being blamed by some of his Cabinet colleagues for the latest travel rules debacle.

Five Cabinet sources told Politico that they believed Mr Shapps and the Department for Transport were responsible for the chaos.

Boris Johnson, pictured Downing Street today, is facing calls from the travel industry to completely ditch the existing traffic light system and replace it with a single 'red list' of banned countries

The PM yesterday dramatically dropped plans for a new 'amber watchlist' amid a furious backlash from Tory MPs. Pictured: People embrace as they arrive from the United States at Heathrow's Terminal 5 following the easing of quarantine for those fully jabbed in the US and the EU

Spain and Italy are thought to have been among the countries set for the watch list - a move which industry experts warned could ruin the holiday plans of millions of Britons. Pictured: A mother and her son check the departures at Heathrow Airport today

The PM (pictured during a visit to Stevenage yesterday) last night axed much-hate proposals for a new section of the amber list, which would have highlighted holiday destinations at risk of being put on the UK's dreaded red list

It is thought that Spain would be added to a new 'amber watchlist' while countries like Italy and Greece could also follow suit

Minister hints 'amber plus' list could be ditched to reopen travel from France as Government 'prepares to add Austria to green list' A minister today hinted that the 'amber plus' list could be scrapped this week to reopen quarantine-free travel from France. Education Minister Gillian Keegan said the Government wants the travel traffic light rules to be 'simple enough for people to really understand' and to take decisions 'based on the system so we have the red list countries, the amber list countries and the green list countries'. Her comments appeared to suggest that the 'amber plus' category could be ditched. The category was created solely for France amid fears over the spread of the Beta coronavirus variant. It currently means that all travellers, including the fully-vaccinated, must quarantine for 10 days when they come to the UK from the country. Moving France back to amber would allow the fully-vaccinated to travel quarantine-free and would provide a major boost to the tourism industry. Pushed on whether 'amber plus' would be scrapped, Ms Keegan would not be drawn and simply said Transport Secretary Grant Shapps will deliver an update to the travel rules on Thursday. It is thought Mr Shapps will announce that 10 countries are being added to the green list, including Austria, the Czech Republic and Germany. Advertisement

The latest coronavirus developments came as:

It was revealed that travellers are getting caught in huge lines at Heathrow because a new £372m computer system keeps crashing;

There were tears and joy at airports as families who have been separated for more than a year because of Covid travel restrictions are finally reunited after quarantine rules are loosened;

Britain's daily Covid cases fell to a five-week low with 21,952 positive tests in 12% weekly drop - as hospital admissions fall by a fifth but deaths jump to 24;

Kate Garraway warned 'there are MORE long Covid symptoms emerging' as she gave an update on husband Derek's road to recovery.

Major airlines and tour operators have signed a letter to Mr Johnson calling for a complete overhaul of the traffic light system.

They said simplified rules would help the UK travel sector recover while protecting the country's health needs.

They called for the UK to adopt a US-style system, where fully-vaccinated citizens can travel to any countries that will allow them to enter.

Provided they take a pre-departure test on their return, double-jabbed American holidaymakers do not need to quarantine when they get home.

The Save Our Summer group, which co-ordinated the letter to the PM, accepted there would continue to be 'a number of red countries which would be out of bounds' to British travellers.

But the signatories said everywhere else would be accessible to the fully jabbed and the 'easy-to-understand' policy would build confidence among consumers.

The group also called for an end to the requirement for the fully-vaccinated to have a PCR test on the second day after returning from a green or amber country.

The letter, seen by the Mail, was last night signed by more than 300 travel firms.

It stated: 'We urge Ministers to simplify travel urgently so that at least the key travel month of August can be salvaged.

'The traffic light system should be either abandoned or made much easier, along the lines of the American system.

'There would continue to be some red countries which would be out of bounds but the majority of destinations would be accessible to the fully jabbed.

'This easy-to-understand policy would help the UK travel sector recover, build confidence quickly among consumers and still protect our country's health needs with pre-departure testing.

'We call on the Prime Minister to act swiftly so as to save tens of thousands of jobs and provide clarity for consumers hoping to travel to see loved ones.'

Signatories included small and large travel firms such as Trailfinders, United Airlines, Finn Air, Kirker Holidays and Regent Seven Seas Cruises.

Last night Tory MP Henry Smith, whose Crawley constituency includes Gatwick, welcomed the proposal.

He told the Mail: 'I'm in favour of anything that is simplified and more easy to understand.

'The traffic light system could have provided that but shortly after it was announced there were all sorts of caveats.'

Diana Holland, the Unite union's assistant general secretary for civil air transport, also urged the Government to take further action to support jobs.

She said: 'The traffic light system is not working and there is disagreement within Government about how to move forward.

'While the situation remains uncertain and complex, the Government must provide job-saving support to our aviation and travel industry.'

France and Germany had put in place sector-specific support for aviation but 'the UK civil air transport sector has haemorrhaged jobs', she said.

The Save Our Summer group also called for an end to the requirement for the fully-vaccinated to have a PCR test on the second day after returning from a green or amber country (Pictured: A beach in Tarragona, Spain, last month)

In a sign that fatalities may start to flatten out or even fall within the next week, Covid hospital admissions fell by nearly 20 per cent in England. Some 593 infected patients were admitted for medical treatment on July 31, the most recent day NHS figures are available for. For comparison, 734 patients were hospitalised the previous Saturday

Fiona Charrington, chief executive of Martin Randall Travel, said: 'Some hoteliers are losing patience. If there's a German company wanting to book or a British one, of course they will go with the one who is less likely to make last-minute changes.' (Pictured: Tourists enjoying the sizzling temperatures in Greece)

What are the current travel traffic light rules? There are currently three main categories in the Government's international travel traffic light scheme: Red, amber and green. But there is also an 'amber plus' list and ministers were considering introducing an 'amber watchlist'. Below is a breakdown of the rules for each category: Red: Travel to the UK from a red list country is banned for non-UK nationals. Brits returning must take a pre-departure test and book a 10 day stay in hotel quarantine at a cost of £1,750. Amber: A pre-departure test is required while non-vaccinated people have to quarantine for 10 days at home and book tests on day two and day 8. The fully-vaccinated do not have to quarantine but they do have to book a day two test. Amber Plus: A new category which currently only includes France. It means everyone returning from the country, including the fully-vaccinated, must quarantine at home for 10 days and take tests on day two and day eight. Amber Watchlist: Ministers were considering introducing the category to highlight countries which are amber but at imminent risk of turning red. However the plans have now been scrapped. Green: Returning travellers must take a pre-departure test and book a day two test as well. Quarantine is not required for anyone unless the test is positive. Advertisement

Mr Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said: 'The Prime Minister could win enormous support by making travel even simpler, not just by removing watchlists, but also by widening the green list and creating a stop-go system as American citizens use.

'The US is still protected with pre-departure testing. The UK can follow a similar model as the Government's own data shows no variants are being brought in from amber or green countries.

'Let's see the end of the complex traffic lights and a move to less onerous testing.'

Tour operators warned that changing rules are causing distrust among hoteliers in Europe.

Fiona Charrington, chief executive of Martin Randall Travel, said: 'Some hoteliers are losing patience.

'If there's a German company wanting to book or a British one, of course they will go with the one who is less likely to make last-minute changes.'

The demands came as the Government was attacked over the revelation that the boss of the JBC had quit.

The Guardian reported that Ms Gardiner's details were removed from the body's website in mid-June.

It is currently unclear who is directly in charge of the organisation.

Ms Keegan today confirmed that it is her understanding that Ms Gardiner had resigned, telling LBC Radio: 'Yes I believe that she has. I mean I don't have any responsibility for that area, but you know, all of these things – there is a group of experts who are basically there that are looking at data, analysing data and then giving advice to the Government, and so I guess they will be looking for a new chair.'

Labour said the failure to install a replacement at the top of the JBC was 'reckless' while the Lib Dems said the organisation is 'currently rudderless'.

Ms Keegan rejected that characterisation, telling Sky News: 'I don't think so. I mean these things, as we have seen with many of these committees, these are groups of experts.

'It is a group of experts that are looking at data that are giving their analysis based on the data.

'So there is still a team of experts, of course we want to replace the chair but there are these teams of experts that are still looking at the data and giving their analysis based on that.'

A Department of Health and Social Care spokeswoman said: 'The Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) is part of the UK Health Security Agency and is led professionally by the Chief Executive.

'The former Director General (DG) has returned as planned to a role in national security. The JBC continues to operate routinely under robust interim arrangements.

'A formal open competitive recruitment process has concluded and the new DG will be announced imminently.'

Ms Keegan also appeared to hint that the 'amber plus' list could be ditched. France is the only country on the list and it requires all returning travellers from the country to quarantine.

Ms Keegan told Sky News: 'I know there has been a lot of speculation in the press about what the system is going to be and obviously we have explored many options but effectively what we want to do is keep it simple enough for people to really understand and obviously be able to take their own decisions based on the system so we have the red list countries, the amber list countries and the green list countries.

'And the amber list countries if you are double-vaccinated you don't have to self-isolate. If you are not double vaccinated then you do on your return.'

Told that that appeared to be an indication that the 'amber plus' list could be scrapped, Ms Keegan replied: 'Well, amber plus, there is this one category for France at the moment just because of the concern over the Beta variant.

'But the Transport Secretary, his next review, which is the three weekly review he does every three weeks, that is on Thursday this week so he will set out more in terms of what is happening with amber plus and also with France in particular.'

Mr Johnson was last night forced to step in and axe the Government's 'amber watchlist' proposals - which experts warned could have sparked chaos for millions of British holidaymakers - after an outcry from backbenchers and concern from key cabinet ministers.

Five Cabinet sources told Politico that Mr Shapps and his department were to blame for the latest chaos amid claims that he had originally advocated creating the category.

Reports claimed that there is already a secret 'amber watchlist' used by ministers to keep track of developments and Mr Shapps had suggested making it public.

Chancellor Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, the International Trade Secretary, are said to have led the Cabinet opposition to the plans amid a wider backlash among Tory MPs and the travel industry.

There were then reports yesterday that Mr Shapps was actually opposed to the proposals.

A number of Tory backbenchers publicly opposed the plans, and, according to the Telegraph, some 'bombarded' Mr Shapps with calls and messages making clear their dislike of the plans.

One of those reportedly told the Telegraph before the sudden U-turn: 'This is genuinely vote-losing stuff. People are genuinely p----- off with this.'

Meanwhile, Labour also attacked the plans last night, with the party's shadow transport secretary, Jim McMahon accusing the Government of being in 'total chaos' over the border policy.

Britain's daily Covid cases fall to a five-week low: UK records 21,952 positive tests in 12% weekly drop - as deaths jump to 24 Britain's daily Covid cases today fell to a five-week low, with just 21,952 positive tests recorded across the nation. Department of Health figures show the number of infections is 12 per cent down on last week, as the third wave continues to slow. Meanwhile, deaths – which lag several weeks behind cases – continued to rise. Another 24 victims were posted today, compared to 14 last Monday. The most recent data on hospital admissions shows 911 people were admitted last Tuesday, down from 926 seven days earlier. Covid cases are lower today than they have been since June 29, according to the official figures released today. But the number of virus tests conducted also fell to their lowest levels since June 26, suggesting there are cases that have not been picked up. The new figures follow data published on Friday, which suggested cases are still on the rise and as many as one in 65 people in England are currently infected. Some experts think fewer people are coming forward for Covid tests to avoid isolation. The figures also signal a slow in the week-on-week drop in infections, with cases dropping by 12 per cent on seven days earlier. Last Monday, cases had dropped by 37.5 per cent compared to the previous week. Meanwhile, there were just 24 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid tests were recorded, down from 65 yesterday, but an increase of 71.4 per cent compared to last Monday. Covid death figures released on Monday often lag, due to a delay in recording deaths over the weekend. Advertisement

He said: 'The Tories are in total chaos over their border policy, with days of confusions surrounding their plans for an amber watchlist.

'Not only have ministers failed to protect our borders, allowing the Delta variant to reach the UK in such force, but time and time again they've refused to be straight with the public and industry to provide them with the information they need to build confidence, with clear information on the direction of travel of infections in each country.

'Ministers need to get a grip and set out a proper strategy, provide full data and progress work with global partners on international vaccine passports so travellers and the industry can have the maximum clarity, instead of reckless​u-turns and confusion.'

However, despite the criticism, Health Secretary Sajid Javid is said to have supported the proposals.

The amber watch list would have seen a new list created to warn holidaymakers that an amber list country could soon be upgraded on to the red list - which carries a mandatory hotel quarantine requirement for UK arrivals.

It is thought Mr Javid backed the new system, because he reportedly believed it would give holidaymakers fair warning that they could face the costly quarantine.

But Spain and Italy are thought to have been among the countries set for the watch list - a move which industry experts warned would scupper holiday plans for millions of Britons.

Airlines UK chief executive Tim Alderslade told the Mirror the decision to scrap the plan was a 'victory for common sense'.

He said: 'The PM has hit the nail on the head - people want a clear and consistent travel system they can understand. We now need to go one step further.'

Mr Johnson had earlier hinted that the amber watchlist proposals would be scrapped after a furious backlash from Tory MPs and warnings from travel bosses that the industry is in the 'last chance saloon'.

The PM was asked yesterday, during a trip to Stevenage, if he is personally in favour of the new category.

Mr Johnson did not categorically rule the move out but said he wanted international travel rules to be 'as simple and as user friendly for people as possible' as he appeared to distance himself from the policy.

The premier said there needs to be a 'balanced approach' because 'this is still a dangerous virus' and the nation must guard against importing variants.

But he added 'obviously the double-vaccinations that we have got really do offer the way forward'.

His comments came after fears were expressed that the 'amber watchlist' would plunge the plans of 1.2million Brits into chaos and wreak further devastation on the beleaguered travel industry.

Moving a country from amber to red at a moment's notice would force travellers to scramble to return home or face having to pay £1,750 for a mandatory 10 day stay in hotel quarantine.

Travel experts said there are approximately one million British tourists currently in Spain along with 150,000 in Greece and 50,000 in Italy.

Just how BAD is the Covid situation in Spain, Italy and Greece? Rates of Beta variant are falling in two and barely noticeable in the other... and cases have already started plateauing in the worst-hit nation, official data suggests

By Luke Andrews Health Reporter for MailOnline

Covid cases of the South African 'Beta' variant are falling in Spain and Greece while the outbreak in Italy is barely noticeable, official statistics suggest.

There are mounting fears all three countries will be placed on a new 'amber watchlist' later this week, potentially sparking holiday misery for thousands by threatening to end quarantine-free travel for the double-jabbed.

The push to create the category was prompted by concern among health officials about the rise of the Beta variant, which scientists say makes vaccines less effective and was behind further restrictions being imposed on travellers returning from France last month.

But figures reveal cases of the mutant strain are either falling or very low in the three major destinations rumoured to be contenders for making it onto No10's list.

And outbreaks of the variant in Italy and Spain are mostly away from tourism areas, data implies. But the variant appears to make up almost a third of tests on the Greek islands popular with British travellers.

Experts said today the mutant strain was unlikely to 'outrun' the more transmissible Indian 'Delta' variant which is already dominant across the continent, meaning it was unlikely to spark major outbreaks.

They added current rules requiring two jabs and proof of a negative test upon return to the UK 'should be enough to ease fears' over the spread of the mutant strain, and that officials should be 'more worried' about the variants that are already in the country and how much Delta continues to spread.

Official data also suggests daily Covid cases are already plateauing in Spain and Greece in a sign the worst of the outbreaks may already be behind them. Infections are mostly among 15 to 24-year-olds who are least at risk from the virus.

More than half of people in the countries are also already double-vaccinated, similar to the UK where it is closer to 60 per cent of the population when children are included.

Boris Johnson today hinted that a proposed 'amber watchlist' could be scrapped after a furious backlash from Tory MPs and warnings from travel bosses that the industry is in the 'last chance saloon'. Asked this afternoon whether he favoured the new category, the Prime Minister did not rule it out but said travel rules should be 'as simple and as user friendly for people as possible'.

It came hours after Digital Minister Matt Warman refused to dismiss concerns over the new list and insisted it was not over complicating travel restrictions to add another category.

Professor Gary McClean, a microbiologist based at London Metropolitan University, told MailOnline: 'It's right to be concerned about Beta because we know it can escape vaccine induced immunity somewhat, particularly with the AZ vaccine used frequently in the UK.

'However, with the rather limited spread of that variant currently in Europe and that it is likely not to outrun Delta, which has an impressive transmission ability, the current rules on travel requiring double jabs and evidence of a negative test should be enough to ease any fears over changes to the travel restrictions currently.'

He added: 'At the moment, we still need to be vigilant about the virus entering through the border but I'm more worried about the virus variants already here in the UK and how much Delta continues to spread, even among vaccinated individuals.'

But scientists also warn variant data from Italy, Spain and Greece cannot be completely relied upon because they carry out much less sequencing than the UK. Each nation checks about 1,000 cases a week, compared to more than 30,000 in Britain.

Mr Shapps is due to update the Covid travel list on Thursday to outline which countries may get more or less travel restrictions.

This graph shows the Covid cases in the UK, Spain, Greece and Italy. Britain has the second highest infection rate (387 cases per million people) with only Spain having more (509 per million). But cases are already dropping in Spain and have plateaued in Greece at 250. They are rising in Italy which is being linked to the country's victory in the Euros

Cases of the South African variant — which was behind the move to slap tighter travel restrictions on France 1 are falling in Spain and Greece, according to the latest data. They are barely noticeable in Italy. The percentage is the proportion of cases down to the variant over the week to July 18 (left) and July 11 (right). Each country only checks around 1,000 cases for variants each week, compared to more than 30,000 a week in the UK

The UK is still carrying out the most Covid tests per week suggesting it has the most reliable figures for its outbreak. But the number of swabs done is also increasing in Greece, Spain and Italy to keep track of the virus there

Covid deaths in Greece, the UK, Spain and Italy remain low amid the successful vaccination drive, this graph shows

Spain has now managed to get two doses to a higher proportion of its population than the UK at almost 60 per cent, this graph shows. Italy has managed to double-jab more than half its population, and in Greece almost half are double-vaccinated

Spain: South African 'Beta' cases are falling and the Covid outbreak is mostly away from tourist areas

Spain may be pushed onto the watchlist later this week, despite data showing that rates of the Beta variant have fallen in recent weeks and outbreaks appear to be mostly away from tourist areas.

The country is currently on the 'amber' list, allowing double-jabbed Britons to visit and dodge ten-day quarantine upon their return to the UK.

If Spain is moved to the watchlist, it means the quarantine exemption could be dropped at short notice if ministers decide to mark it 'red' or 'amber plus'.

Officials have not explained why Spain could be slapped with extra travel restrictions, although it is thought to be linked to cases of the South African variant which spooked them into tightening rules for France.

Latest data submitted to the European Centre for Disease Outbreak and Control (ECDC) show there were no cases of the South African variant detected in the week to July 18. This was down from 1.7 per cent in the previous seven-day spell.

But this is based on only a handful of samples surveyed for variants. Only about 1,000 cases are checked every week, according to the ECDC.

The same data shows the more transmissible Indian variant is taking over in Spain, and already makes up almost half of all cases. In Britain this strain is responsible for more than 99 per cent of cases after 'outcompeting' other variants.

Outbreaks of the mutant strain and the Brazilian 'Gamma' variant that also makes vaccines less effective — which are published together by the country's Ministry of Health — are mostly focused in areas not popular with tourists, except for Catalonia where Barcelona is based.

Outbreaks appear biggest in Catalonia (9.7 per cent in the week to July 18), the Basque country (3.6 per cent) and Galicia (2.7 per cent).

Data from the week before — the latest for some regions — suggests there are also outbreaks in Asturias (8.6 per cent) and Castile and Leon (3.6 per cent).

The data is collated by Spain's own health officials and is based on PCR tests that giveaway tell-tale signs that it may be one of the two variants.

For comparison, in tourist hotspot Andalusia the vast majority of cases are not down to the variants (only 2.2 per cent in the week to July 18, the latest available), and in the Balearic Islands it is even lower (0.5 per cent).

And in another promising sign, Covid cases in Spain — which has fully vaccinated a slightly higher proportion of its citizens than the UK — are also now starting to drop.

It recorded 509 cases every day per million people on August 1, which was down seven per cent on 550 recorded in the previous seven day spell. The UK's infection rate is currently 387 cases per million people.

This graph shows Covid cases in Spain by the proportions down to each variant. It shows that the South African 'Beta' variant (orange) was behind more than 5 per cent of cases at the end of June (second bar from the right), but less than 1.7 per cent in the week to July 11 (bar on the right). In the latest week it was not spotted in any samples sequenced

This graph shows the percentage of cases down to the South African 'Beta' variant and Brazilian 'Gamma' variant by region in Spain over the latest week ending July 18 (No. 28 on the table) and , where the latest is not available, July 11 (ending 27 on the table). It gives the percentage of cases down to the variants and, in brackets, the number of cases checked for variants by region. The final column shows the same for the previous week. It suggests Spain's outbreak is mostly focused away from tourist areas except for Catalonia where Barcelona is based

The above shows graphs of cases down to different variants by week. The South African variant (orange) is shown to have sparked large outbreaks in Castille and Leon (second from top on the right) and Ceuta (third from top on the left) in recent weeks which are not popular with tourists. There are also a few cases in other areas

Italy: South African variant is barely noticeable and away from southern tourist areas

Italy has spotted almost no cases of the South African variant of Covid — and the handful of people struck down have been in the north of the country, according to the latest data from the country.

The country is currently on the 'amber' list allowing double-jabbed Britons to visit and dodge ten-day quarantine upon their return to the UK.

Ministers have not said why they would move Italy to the watchlist, although it is thought it may be linked to cases of the South African variant and the country's overall outbreak.

But the latest data for Italy from the ECDC showed the mutant strain was behind just 0.3 per cent of all infections checked for variants in the week to July 18. This was similar to the rate the previous week.

This is based on only based on a handful of cases that were checked for variants. Italy screens about 1,000 cases a week, according to the ECDC.

The Indian variant is now behind half of all infections in the country, and is 'outcompeting' other mutant strains of the virus.

And separate promising data from Italian Health authorities revealed the variant is mostly being spotted around Milan, which is away from popular tourism destination Rome and beaches in the South where Britons are likely to visit.

A number of cases have been previously found in Sicily and Sardinia, although there are so few they are unlikely to lead to the country being slapped with further restrictions.

However, Italy's daily Covid cases are currently rising and have ticked up by more than a quarter in a week to 89 cases per million people yesterday. The rise was partially linked to the country's victory in the Euro 2020 football tournament.

But this is still barely a fifth of the UK's infection rate which currently stands at 387 per million, suggesting it is not likely ministers will be able to tighten travel rules for the country solely because of rising Covid cases.

The above graph shows the percentage of Italian cases down to different variants. It reveals that the South African variant (very dark orange) has barely registered among national cases since it was first identified. The Indian 'Delta' variant (light orange) has become the most dominant strain in the country in recent weeks

The above map shows where in Italy cases of the South African variant have been detected between June 5 and July 19. It reveals that outbreaks have been mostly based around Milan and away from southern cities and tourism hotspots. But there have been a few cases noticed by authorities on Sicily and Sardinia which are popular summer getaway destinations

This graph shows the percentage of cases that were checked for mutant strains of the virus since the start of the year. They reveal that while it was more than 20 per cent in June when case numbers were very low. But this has now dropped to less than five per cent. Italy checks about 1,000 cases for variants every week

Greece: Cases of the South African variant have fallen in recent weeks while total Covid cases have plateaued

Greece has seen cases of the South African variant fall in recent weeks and its daily Covid cases plateau, figures suggest.

Latest data from the ECDC says the mutant strain was behind 4.4 per cent of cases in the week to July 18, which was down by almost half from 7.5 per cent in the previous seven-day spell.

And in other promising news, daily Covid cases in the country also appear to have plateaued at around 250 cases per million people since late June.

This is 66 per cent of the infection rate in the UK at 387, suggesting Britons are more likely to bring Covid to the country than take it back to the UK.

In yet another glimmer of hope the Indian variant also now makes up around half of all infections in the country. Studies show it is so transmissible it 'outcompetes' other mutant strains.

But official data from the country's health ministry could put holidays to the country in doubt because it suggests the South African variant is most common on the Greek islands which are popular with tourists.

Almost 30 per cent of cases checked for variants in the Southern Aegean were found to be down to the mutant strain in the two weeks to July 4, the latest available.

Epirus which is less popular with foreign tourists but next to Corfu had the second-biggest outbreak with a quarter of cases down to the variant over the same period.

But Greek data on variants can only offer a snapshot of the situation in the country because they sequence about 1,000 cases a week, compared to more than 30,000 in the UK.

The above graph from the Greek Health Ministry shows the proportion of cases checked that were down to different variants. It reveals that the South African variant (yellow) was behind 7.5 per cent of cases in the week to July 11, but 4.4 per cent in the week to July 18 which is the latest available
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The sell is classic Sir Richard Branson. ‘Virgin cruises are for people who hate cruises’ is one of the lines trotted out on board Scarlet Lady.

It could be another way of saying that the aim is to bring down the average age of those on board by a good two or three decades, although the company says it’s about attracting ‘the young at heart’.

Frankly, as the first journalist to board Scarlet Lady this week at Portsmouth, for a four-night cruise around the Channel, I was sceptical. Can a 17-deck leviathan costing £500 million — which will usually host around 2,700 passengers — really offer an edgy, adults-only experience?

Behemoth: Scarlet Lady, a 17-deck cruise ship costing £500 million, will usually host around 2,700 passengers

The cruise-liner, which is the first of four Virgin Voyages ships, is designed for the 'young at heart'

Jane described the decor in Scarlet Lady's 'comfortable' cabins as 'a mix of Ikea and 1970s Habitat'. Pictured is a bedroom in a 'rock star' suite

The adults-only ship is being marketed towards people 'who hate cruises'. Pictured is one of the bathrooms adjoining a suite

Yes and no. Boring buffets have been nudged aside by more than 20 restaurants and bars, many curated by Michelin-starred chefs (at no extra cost — all food, barring exotic extras such as a dollop of caviar, is part of the deal).

A ‘festival-like line-up’ of entertainment means it’s farewell tired old cabaret and hello aerial-combat circus and saucy sexology shows.

Wellness is big, with a boxing ring, basketball court, spin classes, ‘bungee yoga’ and a wrap-around running track. There’s even a tattoo parlour and record shop.

Wellness is big on the ship, with a boxing ring, basketball court, spin classes, and an outdoor swimming pool (pictured)

The 'rock star' suites, pictured, feature a turntable, a rider of only-red jelly bears and a bevy of guitars on the wall

Jane wasn't impressed by the shower in her cabin, feeling shortchanged after she saw the 'rock star' suite version, pictured

The whole experience is controlled via the Virgin Voyages app, which has to be installed in advance. It kept crashing and, when I came to book restaurants and shows, all the good stuff seemed to be sold out. I wasn’t even on board and I was already grumpy.

Fair enough banging on about the boutique experience, but Scarlet Lady, the first of four Virgin liners, is a behemoth. Dwarfing the buildings at Portsmouth, and even the Navy’s largest aircraft carrier, it looks like a giant concrete car park with a bright red boil on top.

But inside it’s a different story. There’s a grand twist of a Hollywood staircase and glamour and glitz in the champagne and caviar bar. Turn a corner and it’s Miami pop art; round another and you’re walking through a tunnel of lights to a Studio 54-esque nightclub. It’s playful and inventive and I started to warm to the ship.

‘We’ve been on more than 60 cruises and this is definitely different,’ said Julie, in her 60s, from North London. ‘It’s quirky.’

All the crew were wearing masks, but probably only around 20 per cent of passengers. Not everyone felt the crowded nightclub and fitness classes were wise, and some people expressed disquiet at the enclosed hot spaces of the spa.

When it comes to dining, there is so much choice, says Jane, mostly served in American-style portions. Pictured is Razzle Dazzle Restaurant

Amenities include a tattoo parlour, a boxing ring, an aerial-combat circus and several shops (pictured)

Every restaurant aboard the Scarlet Lady has its own decor, lighting, music and mood. Pictured is The Wake restaurant

I was expecting fireworks in my cabin but, while comfortable, it didn’t make waves — the decor was a mix of Ikea and 1970s Habitat. The hammock on the balcony was a nice touch, but the bathroom was tiny.

Poking my nose into the ‘rock star’ suites, I felt a bit short-changed. Where was my turntable and bevy of guitars on the wall? I wanted a rider of only-red jelly bears, and by heck, I really wanted a shower I could get into without having to suck in my stomach.

Or maybe I just needed to shed a few pounds. The fitness facilities are impressive and you can get into most of them without too much hassle.

Buffets have been nudged aside by more than 20 restaurants and bars on the Scarlet Lady. Pictured is On The Rocks bar

All food, barring exotic extras such as caviar, is part of the deal. Pictured are diners at the Korean-themed Gunbae restaurant

The crew all wear uniforms, from bright red tailored dresses to relaxed Virgin T-shirts and slacks, or steel grey boilersuits.

Morning yoga was nicely paced and suitable for all levels of bendiness, but the star turn was the VHS workout.

Held in the nightclub, we donned neon leg warmers, headbands and scrunchies for an 1980s-inspired danceathon. Loved it.

High energy: The ship’s entertainment has left cabaret far behind. Instead, passengers can watch acrobatic dramas unfold

TRAVEL FACTS Scarlet Lady is running ‘cruisecations’ (without stops) out of Portsmouth until August 24 from £499. It will launch five-night Caribbean cruises from Miami on October 6 from £525. Prices include food, tips, most soft drinks, the majority of entertainment, group fitness classes and (very patchy) wifi (virginvoyages.com). Advertisement

It’s a good job there’s exercise available because it’s nigh-on impossible not to over-indulge — there is so much choice, mostly served in American-style portions. Every restaurant has its own decor, lighting, music and mood.

The first night I tried Test Kitchen. Its six-course tasting menu looked pretty and came with theatrical thrusts (the trusty dome of steam), but the flavours didn’t really sing. On the other hand, Extra Virgin, the Italian restaurant, was a revelation — some of the best Italian food I’ve eaten outside Sicily.

Entertainment is predominantly free. My jaw hung open for much of the Romeo & Juliet-inspired acrobatic drama Duel Reality, in a mix of awe and terror that someone might die.

I missed the interactive sexologist show, but a 70-something couple said it was ‘quite something’, before wandering off hand in hand.

The ‘young at heart’ line sounds like a good idea, not least because the vast majority of guests were couples between 40 and 70.

‘The shows are good,’ said one seasoned cruiser. ‘But some of it is a bit wacky for me. I had to hide the sex kit in our cabin from my wife!’

He’s referring to the discreet black box in every cabin, called Time To Play. It’s a far cry from chocolates and towel art.

Branson likes to shoot for the stars and his first ship certainly is a novelty — but is it too different for seasoned cruisers, and not different enough to attract a new generation?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Bargain breaks for winter sun-seekers.

Bargains abound for winter holidays, and a combination of low deposits and flexible terms make it easy to secure a deal today and change later if required.

If you’ve missed live music, check in to the Hard Rock Hotel in Tenerife, home to one of the biggest open-air stages in the Canary Islands. Expect over-sized rooms fit for a rock star and everything from hip-hop workshops to music- mixing classes in the kids’ club.

Paradise on the horizon: Jet off from grey skies for beautiful beaches

Pay £60pp to secure holidays from £544pp for seven nights in December, with departures from airports across the UK. Deals at jet2.com.

Quieter holidays come at the swish, adults-only Madeira Gardens hotel perched on a hill on the Portuguese island.

After a visit to Madeira’s quirky capital, Funchal, return to the hotel to relax by the pool, head to the spa or soak up sea views from the rooftop Jacuzzi.

Seven nights in December from £224pp (deposits from £20pp) include flights and are part of ‘early bird’ winter bargains at tui.co.uk.

Visit Madeira’s quirky capital, Funchal. Pictured above are its famous botanical gardens

Opulence is on offer for less this winter with a stay at Domes Of Corfu, right on the island’s blue flag Glyfada beach.

Rooms and suites have a boho-chic vibe and the resort is full of tucked-away corners – walk through forests of pine and cypress or explore scented gardens full of blue jacaranda trees. Expect fiery sunsets looking towards Italy.

Seven nights’ half-board from £1,479pp at travelcounsellors.co.uk. Book soon and extras, including spa experiences and à la carte dinners, are being thrown in.

Long-haul luxury is also cheaper than expected with Abercrombie & Kent, which has knocked £500 off winter holidays in Mauritius.

Deals include The St Regis Resort, promising white-sand beaches, rustling palm trees and warm blue waters.

Perfectly placed between the island’s iconic Le Morne Brabant mountain and the sea, it is also close to world-class dive sites and a growing kite-surfing scene.

Get everything from beachside yoga and meditation classes to butler service and a busy kids’ and teens’ club.

Opulence is on offer for less this winter with a stay at Domes Of Corfu, right on the island’s blue flag Glyfada beach

Seven-night breaks from £1,800pp excluding flights (abercrombiekent.co.uk).

Added extras make holidays in Florida even better value in the New Year.

Book now with Virgin Holidays and get free car hire on a seven-night stay at the Grand Orlando Resort at Celebration.

There are three pools plus a waterfall and slides, tennis and volleyball courts, a sports bar and easy access to Disney World, Universal Studios and other theme parks. From £689pp in January 2022 (virginholidays.co.uk).

Experience the thrills of Florida for less - there are bargains to be had for January 2022

If the Caribbean is calling you, then deep discounts make winter breaks much more affordable.

The marina-side South Point boutique hotel on Antigua has an inviting blue pool set alongside a stretch of soft, sandy beach. There’s a stylish farm-to-table restaurant and a bar serving creative cocktails.

British Airways has negotiated 30 per cent off room rates, so guests can enjoy seven nights, including flights, from £1,389pp in November.

Deposits start at £60pp (ba.com/antigua).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It's a concept that's bringing home the bacon.

Japan's Mipig cafes offer customers the chance to enjoy a cup of tea and snack in the company of adorable 'micro pigs'.

At each of Mipig's four stores, which are getting rave reviews on Tripadvisor, the diminutive hogs run freely around, clamber on laps and make themselves available for petting, much to the delight of the customers.

Boar-dom is not an option: Japan's Mipig cafes offer customers the chance to enjoy a cup of tea and snack in the company of adorable 'micro pigs'

At each of Mipig's four stores, which are getting rave reviews on Tripadvisor, the diminutive hogs run freely around

Paige Philips, 23, from Edinburgh, visited one of the cafes and described the experience as amazing.

She said: 'I had an amazing time visiting Mipig. It was one of the top things I wanted to do on my trip as I love all things small and cute.

'When we arrived, we were given a quick run-through on how to handle the pigs. For example, you had to wait for them to approach you, and you could not pick them up. We were then shown to a floor table in a large room filled with micro pigs.

Paige Philips, 23, from Edinburgh, visited one of the cafes and described the experience as amazing

'The pigs were excitable and adorable, instantly trotting up to us in search of a scratch.

'I was very impressed with the facilities and the apparent care for the animals. The experience seemed as organically organised as possible. I would definitely recommend a visit to all fellow pig-lovers.'

Mipig Café recommends that customers stretch their legs to make it easier for the pigs to climb on their laps – and stresses that the pigs rest in a separate room if they feel tired and a vet regularly checks on their health.

Mipig Café recommends that customers stretch their legs to make it easier for the pigs to climb on their laps – and stresses that the pigs rest in a separate room if they feel tired and a vet regularly checks on their health

The Mipig stores are located in the Shibuya (of busy-crossing fame) and Meguro areas of Tokyo; Koshigaya City, about 25km (15 miles) north of Tokyo, and Osaka

It adds that the animals will occasionally bite people's fingers, mistaking them for food.

The Mipig stores are located in the Shibuya (of busy-crossing fame) and Meguro areas of Tokyo; Koshigaya City, about 25km (15 miles) north of Tokyo, and Osaka.

Customers pay 1,100 yen (about £7/$10) for a half-hour slot, with drinks priced around £4.30/$6 and snacks available to give to the pigs at the Meguro store for 300 yen (£2/$3), though limits are placed on how much they can eat.

Customers pay 1,100 yen (about £7/$10) for a half-hour slot, with drinks priced around £4.30/$6 and snacks available to give to the pigs at the Meguro store for 300 yen (£2/$3)

Taking a trip to one of the cafes could be good for your health. A study led by the University of Leeds found that watching cute animals is good for reducing stress levels and high blood pressure

The pigs will occasionally bite people's fingers, mistaking them for food

Mipig customer Paige said: 'I was very impressed with the facilities and the apparent care for the animals. The experience seemed as organically organised as possible. I would definitely recommend a visit to all fellow pig-lovers'

The Mipig Cafe concept is bringing home the bacon

Photography, meanwhile, is permitted, as long as the flash is off.

Taking a trip to one of the cafes could be good for your health.

A study led by the University of Leeds found that watching cute animals is good for reducing stress levels and high blood pressure.

However, life for 'micro pigs' – also known as 'teacup pigs' - isn't always rosy.

Experts point out that there isn't actually a micro-pig breed. They are normal pigs deliberately malnourished by unscrupulous breeders or the result of years of selective breeding to keep their size down, a process that can sometimes lead to health complications.

Some have been duped into buying a 'micro pig' in the expectation it would never grow beyond around 30kg, and ended up with an animal weighing over 170kg.

Pig sanctuary Pig Inn Heaven says on its 'myth of the micro pig' page: 'Please do intensive research before taking on one of the animals. Pigs can live between 10 and 20 years and can end up as large as 200 kilos.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Fancy a refreshing dip?

Then head to France and dive in, because the water there is particularly lovely - as a stunning travel guide reveals.

Wild Swimming France, written by Daniel Start, reveals 1,000 of the country's most magical wild swimming spots, taking the reader on an 'aquatic voyage into the wild heart of one of Europe's most beautiful countries... from the tranquil river beaches of the Ardeche and the secret canyons of the Languedoc, to the shimmering aquamarine pools of Corsica and the Alps'.

The book, the author states, documents some of the most beautiful traditional swimming locations in France, covering well-known classics and hidden local spots.

And what's more, to make sure you can pinpoint them, each entry contains detailed directions and even map co-ordinates.

Scroll down for MailOnline Travel's pick of some of the book's most eye-catching finds - as well as 10 crucial safety tips...

BRANTOME, PERIGORD VERT: Behold the picturesque island town of Brantome – the Venice of the Perigord region, Daniel points out. The waters here are shallow and clear and best explored by canoe he says, but there is swimming from the town beach or several river spots close by, such as Puy Joubert or Valeuil. Co-ordinates: 45.3638, 0.6528

ANGLES-SUR-L’ANGLIN, NOUVELLE-AQUITAINE REGION: This beautiful French village is overlooked by a romantic ruined chateau, notes Daniel, ‘while below it, the old mill and lily-pad strewn pools seem unchanged since medieval times’. Fancy a dip? ‘Follow the footbridge over the shallows to the little island, and swim in deeper water from the roots of trees,’ says Daniel, ‘or head downstream to the main pool below the island – a popular spot with space for picnics on the riverside.' Co-ordinates: 46.6942, 0.8808

LAC DES HUATS, GAVE DE GAUBE RIVER, PYRENEES NATIONAL PARK: Head here to enjoy a secluded pool, about a kilometre from the larger Lac De Gaube. Co-ordinates: 42.8427, -0.1400

CASCADE D’AITONE, EVISA, CORSICA: A large beautiful mountain pool with a waterfall and surrounded by woodland, notes Daniel. Co-ordinates: 42.2679, 8.8309

RAVIN DE REDEBRAUS, ALPES-MARITIMES: ‘Popular with families, [this is a] little oasis with a deep tub that gets the sun in the afternoon,’ explains Daniel. Co-ordinates: 43.8529, 7.3733

CASCADES DE ST-VINCENT & DES ANGLAIS, VERNET-LES-BAINS, PYRENEES-ORIENTALES: There are a series of impressive falls and white-granite plunge pools on the St-Vincent stream, Daniel reveals. And they’re reached ‘via a pleasant, easy woodland walk’. He continues: ‘Follow yellow waymarks to Cascade de St-Vincent, probably the best for a plunge. Another 500m leads to Cascade des Anglais, also with pools.’ Co-ordinates: 42.5388, 2.4170

CHATEAU DE CENEVIERES, LA TOULZANIE, RIVER LA LOT: Here there is ‘fine swimming at the weir with a view of the beautiful Chateau De Cenevieres above’. Co-ordinates: 44.4623, 1.7567

PONT D’ARC, ARDECHE: The river Ardeche flows through this famous natural arch, with beaches on both sides. Daniel adds: ‘Upstream you can climb up and into a cave tunnel and appear out of a hole high on the inside of the arch. Great for jumps. Incredibly busy – canoe madness – but worth visiting nonetheless.’ Co-ordinates: 44.3837, 4.4186

CHATEAU DE MONTARNAL, VIEILLEVIE, UPPER LOT: At the ‘exquisitely restored medieval hamlet’ of Vieillevie, Daniel reveals that there’s a ‘chateau, tower and chapel, plus a sandy little swimming beach next to the car park’. Co-ordinates: 44.6462, 2.4451

POILLY-SUR-SEREIN, SEREIN RIVER, BOURGOGNE-FRANCHE-COMTÉ, NORTH-CENTRAL FRANCE: Here, not far from the Moulin de Poilly B&B, water chutes through an ‘exquisitely built, old stepped-stone weir’ into a ‘perfect plunge pool’. Co-ordinates: 47.7630, 3.8877

CHATEAU DE VAL ON THE DORDOGNE, AUVERGNE, SOUTH-CENTRAL FRANCE: There are beaches near this ‘fairytale waterside chateau’ but they can get busy. As an alternative, there are quiet rocky shores near the village of Le Monteil that offer ‘lovely views of it’. Co-ordinates: 45.4352, 2.5015

PONT DU DIABLE, THUEYTS, ARDECHE: Here you’ll find ‘jade green, beautifully clear’ water, with a canyon lined by volcanic basalt columns. Co-ordinates: 44.6711, 4.2213

CASTELBOUC, GORGES DU TARN, LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON: The Tarn is an exquisite swimming and canoeing river, says Daniel. And it’s home to the stunning village of Castelbouc. Co-ordinates: 44.3394, 3.4677

LES TOURS, RIVER LA VEZERE, LES EYZIESDE-TAYAC-SIREUIL, DORDOGNE: This spot is a ‘shallow but beautiful stretch of the Vezere under white cliffs with caves and pebble islands’, reveals Daniel. There are deeper pools under the overhanging rocks. Co-ordinates: 44.9496, 1.0216

LE GRAND SAUT, SOURCE DE LA LOUE, JURA MOUNTAINS: Here the Loue river gushes up out of a giant cave in the cliff face and spills into a giant pool. Co-ordinates: 47.0175, 6.2929

LE STYX, VERDON RIVER, PROVENCE-ALPES-COTE D'AZUR: The Verdon River, says Daniel, offers the most spectacular swimming in the region, with ‘crystal-clear river pools’ to be found in some of the wildest parts of the river canyon. He continues: ‘At the legendary Styx the Verdon passes through a gorge of carved white rock, then a cave and eventually disappears in a jumble of boulders.' Co-ordinates: 43.7521, 6.3239

LAC DE GAUBE, PYRENEES ATLANTIQUES: This ‘ethereal, turquoise lake’ with beaches is backed by snowcapped peaks and has a large rock for diving. Co-ordinates: 42.8339, -0.1390

PLAGE DES TEMPLIERS, ARDECHE: This riverside beach on a beautiful S-shaped stretch of the Ardeche is popular with naturists, Daniel reveals. Co-ordinates: 44.3404, 4.5030

FORTERESSE DE CROZANT, LA CREUSE RIVER, CROZANT, NOUVELLE-AQUITAINE: These ‘spectacular clifftop ruins’ are surrounded by water on three sides and are ‘great fun to explore’. Daniel says of the swimming opportunities here: ‘Possible to descend to water on [the right] of final tower but better to swim from the boat launch ramp on the castle side of road bridge D30/D72 - but watch out for tour boats.' Co-ordinates: 46.3945, 1.6248

LOWER FALLS, SILLANS-LA-CASCADE VILLAGE, PROVENCE: Here there’s ‘a great mossy cliff and a huge luminous blue pool adorned with palms and vines’, reveals Daniel. Sadly, he points out, swimming is now prohibited in the main pool due to a risk of rockfalls. However, there are smaller pools (pictured) ‘all the way downstream… until the stream reaches private houses’. And it’s all well-signposted from the village. Co-ordinates: 43.5625, 6.1889

ST-LAURENT-LE-MINIER, LA VIS RIVER, LANGUEDOC: This is a ‘superb and popular swimming hole’ on the ‘beautiful’ Vis river, says Daniel, who adds that the river flows over a high weir/waterfall with deep pools and rock ledges below. Co-ordinates: 43.9247, 3.6624

CALVIGNAC, RIVER LOT: Here you can enjoy wooded river bays with views across to the lofty village of Calvignac, says Daniel. Co-ordinates: 44.4642, 1.7827

PONT DU GARD, GARD: This renowned French swimming spot comes with a multi-level Roman aqueduct, plus rocks for sunbathing and diving. Co-ordinates: 43.94668, 4.53305

CASCADE DE L’ARTIGUE, AUZAT, SOUTH-WESTERN FRANCE: ‘A jade-green pool beneath falls in a delightful mountain valley,’ is Daniel’s summation here. Co-ordinates: 42.7090, 1.4076

CLUE D’AIGLUN, ALPES-MARITIMES: ‘In the mountains behind bustling Nice are some of the most spectacular canyons in France, a land of brilliant-white polished stone, aquamarine pools and wild mountains,’ writes Daniel. ‘Water flowing down from the Alps has carved the soft, brilliant-white dolomite rock into smooth pools, chutes and spectacular rock formations.’ The image above shows the white slot canyon and one of the swimmable marble pools whittled by the region's L'Esteron river. Co-ordinates: 43.8637, 6.9058

GORGES D’HÉRIC, LANGUEDOC: The jade-green Gouffre du Cerisier natural swimming pool sits beneath a waterfall and is ‘set among the towering spires of the Caroux’, says Daniel. And it’s filled with ‘sweet, clear mountain water’. There are many other pools along the well-signposted route from the village of Mons la Trivalle, adds the author. Co-ordinates: 43.5865, 2.9576

LICHERES BARQUE, CHARENTE DEPARTMENT, SOUTHWESTERN FRANCE: The main attraction on this ‘beautiful deep stretch of river’ is the restored wooden ferryboat, says Daniel. There’s a chain to pull it from one bank to the other. Co-ordinates: 45.9010, 0.2229

SOURZAC, PERIGORD BLANC: Sourzac, reveals Daniel, is blessed with ‘pretty riverbanks’ overlooking cliffs and the ancient church of St-Pierre-et-St-Paul, with its caves below. Co-ordinates: 45.0527, 0.3965

LABEAUME VILLAGE, ARDECHE: This is picture shows a ‘blue stretch of the river Baume, a lesser-known tributary of the Ardèche, under towering cliffs’. There’s a beach and a bridge at the village – which is often busy. Co-ordinates: 44.4482, 4.3086

PONT ROMAN DE FANGHETTO, ALPES-MARITIMES: A beautiful plunge pool below a Roman bridge (co-ordinates - 43.8895, 7.5353) mere yards south of the Italian border. There’s another good spot back in France, a few hundred metres upstream (43.8917, 7.5306), says Daniel

Wild Swimming France is out now, written by Daniel Start and published by Wild Things Publishing (£18.99)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A stunning photo showing a spiral of jack fish has won the 2021 BMC Ecology and Evolution annual image competition.

Snapped by Kristen Brown from the University of Pennsylvania, the winning entry depicts the jack fish school at Heron Island in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.

BMC calls it a 'visual metaphor for the spiralling crisis unfolding within our oceans' due to the climate crisis, which is a particular threat to the famous reef on the Australian east coast.

Among the other commended entries in this year's competition are a shot of a wasp and its spider prey in Ecuador, a giant gladiator frog moments before being attacked by a snake, and a doomed crustacean sporting what looks like a 'fur coat' due to a parasitic infection.

Overall winner and best image for 'conservation biology': A school of jack fish in a spiral formation at Heron Island in the Great Barrier Reef

Eulimnogammarus verrucosus, a species of crustacean endemic to Russia's Lake Baikal, is pictured suffering from a parasitic ciliate infection - which makes it look as though it's sporting a 'fur coat'

Section editor Josef Settele at BMC, who recommended the winning entry, said: 'Marine biodiversity sustains life and the health of our planet, but human activities are threatening the well-being of the world’s oceans.

'Kristen Brown’s striking image is a symbol for the need for concentrated efforts to manage biodiversity loss and set conservation priorities.'

Brown herself said the image 'represents both the beauty and bounty of our oceans' as well as 'the spiralling crisis unfolding within the marine environment'.

'Coral reefs with high coral cover and plentiful fish populations like this one at Heron Island on the Great Barrier Reef are sadly becoming rarer,' she said.

'Without a concentrated effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve water quality, coral reefs as we know them are at risk of disappearing within our lifetime.'

In addition to the winning image, the judges also selected an overall runner up, as well as winners in six categories – 'conservation biology'; 'evolutionary developmental biology and biodiversity'; 'behavioural ecology'; 'human evolution and ecology'; 'ecological developmental biology'; 'population ecology'; and 'the editor’s pick'.

The runner-up – which was also best image for ‘evolutionary developmental biology and biodiversity – was snapped by Kseniya Vereshchagina, a biologist at Irkutsk State University in Russia.

It shows Eulimnogammarus verrucosus, a species of crustacean endemic to Russia's Lake Baikal, suffering from a parasitic ciliate infection.

'Ciliates living on weakened crustaceans are capable of forming vast colonies resembling a "fur coat",' said Vereshchagina.

'Unfortunately, the crustaceans dressed in such a "fur coat" are sentenced, since the ciliates parasitising them lead endemics to rapid death.'

The 'population ecology' winner was captured by Roberto García-Roa from University of Valencia, Spain, who also submitted the winning images for the 'behavioural ecology' and 'human evolution and ecology' categories.

It shows soldier termites migrating along a length of abandoned rope in a Malaysian forest.

'Thousands of soldier termites are able to migrate in a complex social environment where each individual has its own mission framed altogether in a global objective: the survivorship and reproduction of the colony,' said García-Roa.

'In this case, these termites used meters of an abandoned rope to move across the Malaysian forest. Once humans disappear, nature recovers its space and uses what is needed to survive.'

Pictured, thousands of soldier termites migrating along a length of abandoned rope in a Malaysian forest. The shot was the winner in the 'population ecology' category

An 'epic scene' showing a battle between a wasp and its much larger spider prey in Tiputini, Ecuador. The shot won best image for 'behavioural ecology'

García-Roa's shot entitled 'The Hunter' (the best image for 'behavioural ecology') depicts a wasp and its much larger spider prey in Tiputini, Ecuador.

'Spiders are one of the most sophisticated hunters on earth,' he said. 'Nevertheless, they cannot escape from what evolution has provided to other species.

'In particular, some groups of wasps are specialised in hunting spiders and use them as a trophic resource for their larvae. I found this epic scene in a wall of a biological station in Tiputini, Ecuador.'

García-Roa's third image (the best image for 'human evolution and ecology') entitled 'Learning to Be Human' shows a researcher using a baboon to study the evolution of human locomotion.

The curious photo of the baboon on a treadmill was captured at the Station of Primatology in the south of France during research into the evolution of bipedalism – walking on two limbs.

Meanwhile, the best image for 'ecological developmental biology' was entered by Chey Chapman, a PhD student studying the mechanisms underlying zebrafsh tissue regeneration at the University of London's Royal Veterinary College.

It shows a zebrafish that regrew its tail fin only two weeks after the appendage was clipped.

'Editor’s pick': 'Eerie Stalker' shows a giant gladiator frog prior to its escape from a snake. Seconds after this photo was taken, the snake struck out at the frog, which managed to get away

Best image for 'human evolution and ecology': 'Learning to Be Human' captures a researcher using a baboon to study the evolution of human locomotion

Many primitive vertebrates such as zebrafsh have a spectacular ability to regenerate various tissues after traumatic injury.

'This image shows the blood vessels in a regenerated zebrafsh tail fin,' Chapman said. 'The cells forming the blood vessels are labelled with a red fluorescent reporter.

'Whether regeneration is a primitive or adaptive trait to environmental conditions is the subject of much debate, and the mechanisms underlying the regeneration process are not yet fully understood.'

Lastly, the editor’s pick is entitled 'Eerie Stalker' and was taken by Dimitri Ouboter from the Institute for Neotropical Wildlife and Environmental Studies in Suriname, South America.

It shows a giant gladiator frog seconds before escaping from an attempted snake attack. Giant gladiator frogs have been previously observed escaping from the jaws of snakes by emitting distress calls, jumping and inflating their lungs, making it harder for small snakes to hold on to them.

Best image for 'ecological developmental biology': A zebrafish regrew its tail fin only two weeks after the appendage was clipped at the white horizontal dotted line

'It isn’t often you come upon the behavioural interaction of two species so I was ecstatic to be able to capture part of it,' said Ouboter.

'I was walking at night surveying some pools when I saw this snake sneak up on a frog. Seconds after this photo was taken, the snake (Helicops angulatus) struck out at this giant gladiator frog (Boana boans).

'The frog got away – all the better as it may have been a meal too big to handle for the snake. If it had succeeded in biting the frog, the fight would have been far from over.

'This species of frog has been observed to escape from the jaws of snakes on at least two occasions, employing multiple defensive techniques such as emitting distress calls, jumping and lung infation, making it harder for small snakes to hold on to them. Excellent survival strategies.'

All the successful entries are detailed in BMC Ecology and Evolution, which is an open access, peer-reviewed journal dedicated to all aspects of ecological and evolutionary biology.

2021 marks the first year of the BMC Ecology and Evolution image competition and follows on from the BMC Ecology competition, which ran for seven years until BMC Ecology merged with BMC Evolutionary Biology to form BMC Ecology and Evolution.

Last year, the winner of the 2020 BMC Ecology image competition was a shot of a magnificent frigatebird chick dying of a viral infection in French Guiana.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fit to fly certificates. Check. NHS double-jab certificates. Check. Passports. Check. Car hire forms. Check. Boarding passes. Check.

But there's something else... oh yes, the pre-UK-arrival antigen tests for generating the return fit to fly certificates.

There was a headache-inducing amount of paperwork I needed to generate for my recent trip to amber-listed France and Spain with my partner and four-year-old daughter – but it was worth it.

The headache-inducing amount of paperwork involved for MailOnline Travel Editor Ted's recent trip to amber-listed France and Spain. On the way back - there were passenger locator forms to fill out. These can be shown to border control printed out or on a phone

THE RULES FOR RED, AMBER AND GREEN-LISTED COUNTRIES RED Before travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book a quarantine hotel package, including 2 Covid-19 tests

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England you must: quarantine in a managed hotel, including two Covid-19 tests AMBER Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – you must take the test in the three days before you travel to England

book and pay for Covid-19 tests – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form You must do these things whether you are fully vaccinated or not. On arrival in England If you are fully vaccinated After arrival in England, you must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two. This applies if you're fully vaccinated under either: the UK vaccination programme

the UK vaccine programme overseas

an approved vaccination programme in Europe or the USA - not all are recognised in England It also applies if you are: taking part in an approved Covid-19 vaccine trial in the UK or the USA

under 18 and resident in the UK, a UK Overseas Territory, the USA or one of the specified European countries If you are not fully vaccinated If you do not qualify under the fully vaccinated rules, on arrival in England you must: quarantine at home or in the place you are staying for 10 days

take a Covid-19 test on or before day two and on or after day eight If you are in England for less than 10 days, you need to quarantine for the time you are here. You need to book day two and day eight travel tests. You only need to take the tests if you are still in England. GREEN Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book and pay for a day 2 Covid-19test – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England You must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two after you arrive. Children aged four and under do not need to take this test. You do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive. You must quarantine if NHS Test & Trace informs you that you travelled to England with someone who has tested positive for Covid-19. If you have been in a country or territory on the red or amber list If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the red list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, you must follow the red list rules. If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the amber list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, and have not visited a country on the red list, you must follow the amber list rules. Source: FCDO. Used under the Open Government Licence. Advertisement

It was worth it to soar in a jet plane once more above turquoise waters, epic mountains and mesmerising white fluffy clouds, to sip rose on sunbaked terraces with the glistening Med in the background and discover hidden coves teeming with fish.

But first, there were the administrative Covid hoops to jump through.

France was our first port of call and to get in – note, at the time - we needed double-jab certificates and a negative PCR or antigen test result and a 'fit to fly' certificate.

The former involved logging onto the NHS app, downloading the certificate and printing it out. The app took security very seriously and scanned my face to match it with my passport photo. This took several attempts.

For the Covid test, we decided to go for the gold-standard PCR (just in case the rules suddenly changed and for extra peace of mind) and turned to The Regenerative Clinic to process it all.

It has its own laboratory on London's Harley Street, so it doesn't need to rely on third-party analysis.

The negative results and certificates arrived the day before our flight.

For the return pre-arrival antigen test we used Qured, which has a clear and easy-to-use website and reasonable prices.

They posted two tests for us to pack that we would then self-administer on a video call with a health professional before flying home.

The final piece of the paperwork jigsaw was the health declaration form demanded by the French authorities, which asked us to confirm that we weren't ill and hadn't been in contact with anyone who had been.

Top tip: EasyJet has a great Covid-19 hub on its website that includes an interactive map. Just click on a country and the entry requirements pop up.

We flew with the airline from Gatwick (my first flight since November 2019) and the experience was very smooth.

An agent from the airline thoroughly examined our fit to fly certificates before we checked in our bags and before too long, we were soaring on a half-empty plane to Marseille.

Where it was apparently 2018.

The border agent pushed all our Covid paperwork to one side and said 'just the passports'.

We took the ferry from Toulon to Mallorca after a few days and bio-security was similarly patchy.

A health declaration control form by the Spanish government had been demanded, but mine wasn't checked as I boarded, though my double-jab certificate was. We had to present that or a negative antigen or PCR test.

The day before we were due to fly back with easyJet from Palma we logged on to Qured for our video-call antigen test, which was straightforward enough. Insert swab, add to solution, drip onto slide, take a picture of the marker together with ID and email to Qured within 30 minutes.

Our fit to fly certificates were emailed that day and the following day, after spending breakfast filling out our passenger locator forms, we found ourselves at the airport in a gargantuan queue that nearly stretched out of the terminal.

An easyJet agent studied our double jab certificates very carefully, but didn't ask to see our fit to fly certificates.

The flight was half empty and the views of Mallorca upon take-off magnificent.

It was a good flight, in an A321 neo, with chirpy service. Then frustration and tedium enveloped us at Gatwick.

We stood in a queue at border control for 90 minutes, among extremely frustrated families. At one point our line was being funnelled past a solitary border control agent, though not for the duration, other checkpoints were opened.

One mother had her baby on a blanket and was gently pulling it along the floor. And one passenger started a group chant of 'we want a third runway at Heathrow'.

When we were eventually called forward my passenger locator form was analysed, together with my passport.

Then through we went. At no point on the journey had my fit to fly certificate been checked, a task that falls to the carrier, I'm told.

The wait at border control, which I later learned was exacerbated by E-gate problems, meant that by the time we reached baggage reclaim the carousel for our flight had switched to another flight.

Is all the amber paperwork worth it? With views like this, yes, says Ted. He snapped this picture as his easyJet flight soared over Mallorca on its way to Gatwick. In the bottom left of the picture is Magaluf. The capital, Palma, can be seen at the top

We found our suitcase and hold-all in the middle of the floor.

A passenger who went through Gatwick border control at the same time as us described the experience as 'hell'.

Gatwick Airport said: 'We are sorry you had this experience as we know the current requirements from Government are incurring more time for admin checks by UK Border Force.

'We are continuing to work with UK Border Force regarding queues at passport control to ensure that best use is made of E-gates where possible and we are hopeful they will be able to support with additional staff as passenger numbers increase.

'In the instance of Sunday [when we landed], there were longer queues due to an issue with UKBF's systems and E-gates that the GAL/UKBF teams responded to, and it's an area we're focused on supporting where we can.

Ted after disembarking his easyJet flight to Marseille from Gatwick in July. It was his first flight since November 2019

The idyllic Cala Pi cove to the south-east of Palma

'We don't want queues of this nature to become the norm and we are looking at mitigation measures to make them more bearable if they appear unavoidable due to delays at the border.

'These include handing out bottled water, kids' activity packs, holding people's place in the queue to allow them to go to the toilet, and ensuring there is strong, free Wi-Fi all along the route.'

The airport spokesperson added: 'With regards to your baggage, I am very sorry to hear this and this is not the level of service we wish to provide our passengers.'

When I relayed my experience to the Home Office, the response was colder, with no apology for the queue.

A Home Office spokesperson said: 'The pandemic is not over. We've said throughout that people should expect delays, whilst we conduct additional checks to protect the vaccine roll-out. We will not apologise for doing whatever is necessary to keep our country safe.'

The spokesperson then claimed there was no queue anyway.

Turning to the 'fake news' playbook, they added: 'MailOnline's claims regarding the number of Border Force staff working at Gatwick and queues are false.

'Border Force works hard to ensure it has the right level of resources to check that passengers are compliant with our border health measures and to maintain border security as travel continues to open.'

Easyjet was approached for a comment, but has yet to respond.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Two young women are lying languorously on the giant Ibiza sign by the airport arrivals terminal in the already simmering mid-morning heat.

A third, her flimsy short skirt fluttering in the breeze, is taking their photograph at this welcoming landmark that lights up at night, rather like this beautiful little island, for so long the Med’s unofficial Party HQ. Today, however, in these strange Covid times, there is more birdsong than Balearic beat hanging in the balmy air.

With Spain firmly on the ‘amber list’, with no quarantine on return for fully-vaccinated travellers, the party island may be open for business — with shops, cafes, restaurants and late-night bars awaiting — but it’s all rather quiet with ‘dance floors prohibited’ and nothing like the usual number of visitors.

Calo des Mort beach (pictured) on Formentera is famed for its stretches of golden sand. Tourists in Ibiza can access Formentera, the smallest of the Balearic Islands, by ferry

The sunshine and decadence of Ibiza attracts the rich and famous each summer, with the likes of singer Shakira holidaying on the island

What this means is that for people like me, who have no desire to dance until dawn, it’s more enticing than ever.

There are glimpses of Ibiza’s famous glamour at the Ushuaia Ibiza Beach Hotel, which pioneered the daytime dance party, and now offers guests The Unexpected Breakfast Experience. This consists of an extraordinary array of sensational fruit and food in an open-air café on the 1.7-mile-long sandy Playa D’en Bossa beachfront.

The pathway to the café is adorned by statuettes of Egyptian-style cats and dogs holding trays in gold, silver and vibrant red. At the entrance stands a life-sized gold alligator. But of course.

The Hard Rock Hotel Ibiza next door still pumps out a dance beat in its main restaurant, but with the clubs that built Ibiza’s reputation for all-night decadence and hedonism remaining closed, there is a subdued feel.

A handful of private jets can usually be seen at the airport — celebrities including Shakira are fans of Ibiza — but the island feels very different.

The long, sandy beaches and sparkling, aquamarine sea are the stars here now and clearly times are changing, as Bob Dylan may have said about the place.

It is rumoured he spent two months living with hippies on Ibiza’s little sister island of Formentera, a short ferry hop to the south, back in 1967.

Ibiza and Formentera, the two smallest of the Balearic Islands, could be said to have benefited from the pandemic. Authorities have been trying for years to rid Ibiza of its hardcore 24/7 party image and have been quick to capitalise on the slower pace of life now.

Ibiza Old Town, the romantic hilltop fortified castle built in the 16th century, is one of the island’s UNESCO World Heritage Sites. But on the day I visit it is pleasantly crowd-free.

In the narrow winding streets leading below, it is still quiet too. But restaurateurs and shop owners are welcoming their first international tourists for many months.

Ibiza Old Town (above), a UNESCO World Heritage Site, has a fortified castle overlooking the streets and harbour below

TRAVEL FACTS Seven nights from £1,199 pp all-inclusive staying at the five-star Grand Palladium Palace Ibiza Resort & Spa with flights from Stansted on September 25 (jet2holidays.com). Further details: safetourism.illesbalears.travel/en. Advertisement

‘Last year our season was two months only because of Covid and it was very difficult for us,’ says Juan Cabrera, manager of La Dispensa restaurant in the heart of the Old Town. ‘I’m so happy people are coming back . . . we are all living with a lot of hope.’

In nearby Jonc, a dress shop selling bright ‘hippy chic’ sequined dresses, manager Maria Jose agrees. ‘Last year it was dead,’ she says. ‘But the beauty of the island is still magical and maybe tourists will like the fact that it’s much calmer. I do.’

In 2019, Ibiza welcomed more than 3.5 million overseas visitors — nearly a million from Britain. Since the island reopened to international tourists this year, the number of flights is slowly building. Some hotels are already 70 per cent occupied.

On the ferry to Formentera, Laura and Sue, in their 40s from Liverpool, were basking in the new Balearic calm. ‘We’ve been coming here for years and love the cool vibe,’ says Laura. ‘We’re a bit old for the club scene, but it is definitely quieter this year and we’ve noticed there are more families and people who are perhaps a bit older than usual.’

Formentera has superb white-sand beaches. For years it has lived in the shadow of its more glamorous sister island. But Ibiza now seems keen to follow its guidelines on eco-friendly tourism, with more bicycles and scooters and fewer cars.

The Posidonia oceanica seagrass on the seabed - which is protected - helps to keep the bright blue water surrounding the island clear

Large tourist developments have not been allowed, and the island’s Posidonia oceanica seagrass, responsible for the crystal waters, is protected.

Ibiza could do well to emulate Formentera, says Jessica, 46, from London, an Ibiza regular. But she warns that the island should also be careful what it wishes for. ‘I think the authorities want to capitalise on the pandemic to promote it as being a “paradise” — making it even more exclusive and pricier,’ she adds.

‘That would be a shame: the original ethos of the place is that it offers freedom for everyone whatever their budgets might be.’ Long may that continue.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

After the farce of France being on the ‘amber plus’ list due to high infection rates in La Reunion — a French territory in the Indian Ocean, 6,000 miles from Paris — the Government’s U-turn to allow trips without a return quarantine for the fully vaccinated has been met with a collective cry of ‘magnifique’!

For francophile holidaymakers and owners of second homes, this is the moment many have waited for — as has the beleaguered travel industry. France is, after all, Britain’s second most popular tourist destination after Spain: in 2019, before the pandemic, 3.6 million of us travelled there between July and September.

The new rules take effect tomorrow at 4am. For a last-minute escape by car, perhaps a getaway to the north of the country makes sense. Here, we have picked some of the best breaks just across La Manche.

GLAMOUR-ON-SEA

Le Touquet is a glamorous seaside resort near Calais. It has a famous expanse of beach and is filled with boutiques

Glam Le Touquet, not far from Calais, is famous for its expanse of beach and 1920s heydays, when Noel Coward and the ‘smart set’ came. But the towns of Somme Bay a little farther along the coast are charming, lesser-known lovelies.

Saint-Valery-sur-Somme lends itself to strolls in the floral old town and the quayside market, cycling or going for a swim at Cayeux-sur-Mer, with its pleasant beach.

Don’t miss: Book a Baie-de-Somme walking tour with English-speaking Maxim, an expert on local nature (visit-somme.com). Do the return leg by steam train — binoculars essential for birdwatching.

Where to stay: Cottages-de-la-Croix-l’Abbe, St-Valery-sur-Somme, is a cluster of three self-catering gites sleeping between four and six; from £600 a week (cottagescroixlabbe.fr).

THRILLS AND CHILLS

Make magical memories with family or friends at Disneyland Paris. Pictured is the resort's hotel

Just over two hours from Calais, the area around the Compiegne forest offers a varied break. There’s plenty to do on the doorstep: a treetop adventure park, Pierrefonds Castle, Chateau de Compiegne. Theme parks Disneyland Paris and Parc-Asterix are within an hour’s drive. Paris itself is less than an hour away by train.

Don’t miss: Visit the forest clearing to see the rail carriage and museum where the World War I armistice was signed.

Where to stay: L’Instant in Morienval is a self-catering gite sleeping 15, from £3,260 for four nights (french-weekendbreaks.co.uk).

FRENCH FIZZ!

There is plenty of culture in the medieval streets of Troyes. Pictured is an old baker’s house

THE RULES WHEN VISITING FRANCE From tomorrow at 4am, France will be on the amber list — so fully vaccinated travellers will not have to self-isolate on return to the UK. However, an antigen/lateral flow test will be required before returning, as will a PCR test on day two. These rules also apply for those aged under 18. France is only accepting fully vaccinated travellers — see ‘entry requirements’ at gov.uk. Children under 12 with an accompanying double-jabbed adult can travel freely. Children aged 12 and over accompanied by fully vaccinated adults must have proof of a negative result from a PCR or antigen test taken within 24 hours of travel. Fully vaccinated adults need not take a test before travelling to France. Advertisement

When it comes to the famous fizz from north-eastern France, it’s the swanky names such as Taittinger in Reims and Moet in Epernay — about a three-hour drive south-east of Calais — that get all the glory.

Instead, tour deeper south into champagne country for quality and authenticity at off-the-beaten-track producers such as Champagne-Monial, in a former monastery overlooking village vineyards. For less sleepy days, there is good shopping and plenty of culture in the medieval streets of Troyes.

Don’t miss: A visit to Essoyes, the summer home of Pierre-Auguste Renoir, where there is a dedicated visitor centre (champagne-ardenne-tourism.co.uk).

Where to stay: Camping-La-Forge-de-Sainte-Marie, in Thonnance-les-Moulins, is a campsite with mobile homes; pitches from £235 a week (laforgedesaintemarie.com/en).

ARTY NORMANDY

With lush landscapes full of timber-framed houses and apple orchards, Normandy — on the northern coast — is best known for its historical sights, from the Bayeux Tapestry to the D-Day landing beaches.

But the area packs a punch for art too: visit Claude Monet’s gardens in Giverny, with the famous water lilies, and more of the places where he found inspiration at nearby Rouen.

Don’t miss: Grab a picnic at the market in Les Andelys — with local cider and pungent camembert — then head up to Richard the Lionheart’s castle, Chateau Gaillard, for sweeping views of the mighty River Seine.

Where to stay: La-Ferme-des-Isles in Autheuil-Authouillet is a boutique B&B, from £417 for four nights (lafermedesisles.com).

LURE OF THE LOIRE

An easy three-hour drive from Caen, the Unesco-listed ‘garden of France’ is where two of the country’s most iconic symbols meet: fairytale chateaus . . . and rosé.

Let’s explore: A visit to the spectacular Chenonceau Castle in the Loire Valley is a must

Plan days combining both. A visit to eye-popping Chateau-de-Chenonceau — its reflection dazzling in the waters beneath — is a must. Then amble along the River Cher to Montrichard for a tasting at Monmousseau winery.

Don’t miss: Include Fontevraud on your itinerary. It’s Europe’s largest abbey, with contemporary twists such as modern art and virtual-reality tablets bringing visits to life.

Where to stay: Domaine-de-Chateaufort in Langeais is a self-catering chateau sleeping up to 18 people; from £9,930 a week (domainedechateaufort.com).

MAGIC ST-MALO

Gallic charm: 'St-Malo is a contender for France’s best-looking ferry port,' writes the Daily Mail's Lucy Shrimpton

HOW TO GET THERE A crossing for a car and up to nine passengers on Eurotunnel is from around £250 return (eurotunnel.com).

Brittany Ferries has Portsmouth-St Malo crossings from around £460 return for a car and up to nine passengers (brittany-ferries.co.uk). Portsmouth to Caen and Cherbourg, Plymouth to Roscoff and St Malo, and Poole to Cherbourg also available.

P&O Ferries has Dover-Calais crossings from around £220 for a car and up to nine passengers (poferries.com).

DFDS has Dover-Calais crossings from around £250 return for a car and up to eight passengers (dfds.com).

Eurostar is set to increase its current severely pared-down services — returns from London to Paris this month are from about £160 (eurostar.com).

Skyscanner shows Ryanair Stansted-Bordeaux returns from £56, or British Airways Heathrow-Paris returns from £130, both this month (skyscanner.net).

More information: france.fr/en; uk.ambafrance.org. Advertisement

With grand maritime mansions and ramparts overlooking golden sands, St-Malo is a contender for France’s best-looking ferry port: just roll off the boat, park up and head straight for the beach. Brittany has always been a favourite with Britons and no wonder. There are boutique shops galore, boat trips, mast-filled quaysides and the Grand Aquarium.

When you venture out by car, medieval Dinan and la belle epoque Dinard are the nearby musts.

Don’t miss: Discover the wellbeing benefits of seawater therapies. Try a seaweed body-wrap or even a whole spa day at Les-Thermes-Marins spa in St-Malo.

Where to stay: Hôtel-le-Grand-Bé, St-Malo, has doubles from £615 for four nights (legrandbe.com/en).

BRITTANY FOR KIDS

Leave the ferry in Roscoff and you’ll soon discover there’s no happier child than one with a fishing net in one hand, a crepe in the other: that’s why the Celtic-flavoured département of Finistere in Brittany’s far west is a favourite with families.

Think rocky coves, sandy beaches, granite cottages, abundant seafood and stripy sailing tops — rather like a French Cornwall.

Don’t miss: The riviera resort of Benodet on Finistere’s south coast has horseriding, sailing, surfing and mini-club play activities for little ones right on the beach.

Where to stay: Camping Port de Plaisance, in Benodet, has chalets/mobile homes sleeping four-plus from £634 a week (yellohvillage.co.uk).

ATLANTIC COAST

The coastline south of Nantes and north of La Rochelle is in the département of Vendée, known for attractive fishing harbour St-Gilles-Croix-de-Vie, big beach resorts such as St-Jean-de-Monts, and marshlands dotted with fishermen’s cabins on stilts.

It is also home to holiday island Noirmoutier, where the whitewashed houses with their blue shutters could make you think you were in Greece.

Don’t miss: Include a day inland at France’s historical theme park Puy du Fou, known for its spectacular shows.

Where to stay: Domaine-le-Sherwood in Notre-Dame-de-Monts has beachside villas sleeping four-plus from £1,179 a week (kombak.eu).

OH, ILE DE RE!

Head to fortified St-Martin-de-Re where you can watch the elegant French go by and saunter around chic shopping streets

Don't be put off this excursion by the cost of the toll-bridge from La Rochelle on the mainland; see it rather as the measly entrance price for one of France’s most idyllic (and sunny) islands. Expect turquoise sea, long golden sand beaches and charming seaside towns such as fortified St-Martin-de-Re, where you can watch the elegant French go by and saunter around chic shopping streets. Almost everyone cycles everywhere, thanks to a network of flat paths passing oyster stalls, salt marshes and fabulous beaches including Le-Bois-Plage, all of which are completely safe for children of all ages.

Don’t miss: Enjoy a sundowner and low-key outdoor concert sitting on the harbour edge in the gorgeous little port of La-Flotte.

Where to stay: Palais-des-Gouverneurs residence in St-Martin-de-Re has apartments/studios sleeping four from £1,083 a week (pierreet vacances.com/gb-en).

DORDOGNE DAYS

Seek out market days in characterful old towns such as Sarlat-la-Canéda (above) for truffles, goat’s cheese and more

OK, so this one’s a bit of a drive south . . . but here’s a département in France’s south-west where you can find your off-button. Spend days fishing, canoeing and taking dips at safe river beaches. Seek out market days in characterful old towns such as Sarlat-la-Canéda, Bergerac and Perigueux for truffles, goat’s cheese, heaps of sweet strawberries and walnuts.

Don’t miss: The prehistoric cave-art at Lascaux IV in Montignac.

Where to stay: Huttopia Sarlat has glamping options, sleeping four to six from £489 a week (europe.huttopia.com/en).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

No sooner do I reach my room on the 10th floor (with private balcony) than I’m pinged. But it’s nothing more serious than a WhatsApp from reception welcoming me and asking ‘Should you need anything...’ etc.

‘Impressive,’ I reply.

But, then, everything about this latest Nobu in London’s Portman Square (the second in the capital and 13th around the world) is impressive, even if some cameos - such as British sculptor Ivan Black’s five-metre-long installation hanging in the two-storey lobby (below), featuring rotating metal fins - might not suit all tastes.

The second Nobu hotel in London has opened - the 13th in the world - and it is located on Portman Square

'There’s not a lot going on in my room - and that’s the point,' writes The Inspector

Nobu London Portman Square 'exudes confidence' and has a minimalist aesthetic that has a 'wonderfully calming effect'

Robert De Niro is co-founder of Nobu, along with the ‘black cod miso’ specialist chef Nobu Matsuhisa, and apparently it was his idea to open the 249-room hotel during the pandemic, then close it, then open it again.

Possibly as a result, it exudes confidence. The minimalist aesthetic has a wonderfully calming effect; staff float rather than walk. There’s a Pilates studio in the basement, and the first-floor restaurant, with its open kitchen, can sit up to 200 people, with a further 50 outside on the terrace.

There’s not a lot going on in my room - and that’s the point. Sliding doors, Japanese tea set by the bed, Oriental lanterns, framed calligraphy, press-button shower. Absolutely no clutter.

Eating on the terrace is on a first-come-first-serve basis and it’s chocka so I’m given a table upstairs. It’s outrageously expensive (expect to pay £100 a head with not much to drink) but the people-watching comes free.

Most diners look like they’ve just got off their yachts - or sunbeds. All are glowing.

The first-floor restaurant can seat up to 200 people, with a further 50 outside on the terrace

The Inspector says of Nobu's restaurant: 'It’s outrageously expensive (expect to pay £100 a head with not much to drink) but the people-watching comes free'

Double rooms at Nobu London Portman Square start from £345 per night

My waiter recommends an ‘entry level’ glass of sake for £16. I love the tuna and salmon bite-sized tacos and sashimi salad but am still hungry.

‘The baby tiger shrimp with three sauces is one of our most popular dishes,’ says the waiter. But it turns out to be a big disappointment - a bowl of tempura shrimp with three little dips. Scampi with an inflated price.

Breakfast is served in the bar area near the lobby. I fancy the full English but am not sure if it’s appropriate (nobody else is having it). So it’s coffee and yoghurt with a few trendy berries - and I feel in the zone.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

It's not quite on a par with Cloud City in Star Wars – but the designs for a new mini city in the sky in Toronto are eye-opening nevertheless.

Renderings have been released showing a proposed downtown community in the city comprising nine new towers linked by bridges that contain housing units, gardens and recreational facilities.

The project is called Orca Toronto, and if it gets the go-ahead, will also be impressive down below, with a multi-tiered public park featuring open lawns, playgrounds, walking trails and bike paths interwoven around the base of the towers.

The Orca Toronto project would comprise nine new towers linked by bridges that contain housing, gardens and recreational facilities

Orca Toronto would incorporate a public park featuring open lawns, playgrounds, walking trails and bike paths

Shops, restaurants, and cafes would be directly connected with the park's outdoor areas on several levels, with access provided by ramps, escalators and elevators.

The entire development would be built on top of the 100-metre-wide railway lines just west of the CN Tower that lead to Union Station.

This means, said Safdie Architects, the firm behind the Orca Toronto design, that the downtown area would be reconnected to the city's waterfront.

The entire development would be built on top of the 100-metre-wide railway lines just west of the CN Tower that lead to Union Station

The firm's founder, Moshe Safdie, said: 'As the city has expanded westward, the railway lands have increasingly become a brutal barrier between the King West Community and the growing waterfront district.

'Our design aspires to forge a reconnection in the community fabric by creating a lively park that is economically viable and promises a unique destination experience for Toronto.

'As an isolated park is unlikely to generate the diversity of activity required to animate the neighborhood, our design integrates amenities for city life like shops, restaurants, and offices into the park itself, drawing in residents and visitors alike.'

The project incorporates nine towers in total - a corner office tower and eight residential towers with approximately 3,000 units of housing.

Shops, restaurants, and cafes would be directly connected with the park's outdoor areas on several levels, with access provided by ramps, escalators and elevators

Sean Scensor, partner and lead architect on the project for Safdie Architects, said: 'This project is a study in balance and integration - between open space and density, landscape and building, private development and public interest'

Moshe Safdie said: 'As the city has expanded westward, the railway lands have increasingly become a brutal barrier between the King West Community and the growing waterfront district. Our design aspires to forge a reconnection in the community fabric by creating a lively park that is economically viable and promises a unique destination experience for Toronto'

The project - in partnership with Craft Development Corporation, Kingsmen Group, Fengate Asset Management and Arup Engineering - is under public review with the city of Toronto

The linked residential towers, said Safdie Architects, 'offer connection as well as shared indoor and outdoor amenities at multiple levels to encourage interaction among residents and foster a sense of community'.

And collectively, 'the towers and the bridges between them frame dynamic views of Toronto's skyline as one moves around the site'.

Sean Scensor, partner and lead architect on the project for Safdie Architects, added: 'This project is a study in balance and integration - between open space and density, landscape and building, private development and public interest.

'A great public park will only be realised by combining the resources of the public and private sector, not only to solve the challenge of decking over the active rail corridor, but also to ensure the park's quality and maintenance into the future.'

The project - in partnership with Craft Development Corporation, Kingsmen Group, Fengate Asset Management and Arup Engineering - is under public review with the city of Toronto.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Holiday cottage giants - owned by private equity firms - have been named the worst in Britain following a deluge of complaints over refunds and prices.

Sykes and Hoseasons, which have been the focus of criticism during the pandemic, placed bottom in a consumer survey carried out by Which?.

Both have been at the centre of action by the Competition & Markets Authority (CMA) over the failure to pay refunds to customers who were banned from travelling due to lockdowns.

First place in the Which? survey went to Rural Retreats (image from website above)

Hoseasons (image from its website left) and Sykes (right) have been the focus of criticism during the pandemic

At the same time, customers have used social media to criticise the firms for imposing punishing increases in prices at a time families were effectively banned from taking foreign holidays.

Which? surveyed more than 2,400 members to assess their experience with the major holiday cottage providers in terms of customer service, value for money and the quality of the accommodation. Sykes came bottom with a customer score of 70 per cent versus 71 per cent for Hoseasons.

The consumer champion said: 'Sykes received a refund satisfaction score of just 52 per cent. Additionally, of those who did manage to go ahead with their Sykes booking, some still complained about poor experiences, with one in 10 saying they were dissatisfied with their stay.

'Despite being one of the cheapest providers, the company only received three stars for value for money, and three stars for customer service.

The Landmark Trust was the runner-up in the survey ranking. Pictured is one of its holiday lets

'While some customers spoke of positive experiences, one recent customer reported that their cottage was invaded by flies, another described their experience with an "aggressive owner" and said their accommodation was "not fit for purpose", while a third said "the Sykes website was inaccurate in about five respects".'

Which? added: 'Hoseasons fared better in terms of handling cancellations, with a refund satisfaction score of 71 per cent among those who had a booking cancelled by the company.

'In the main survey though, it still only managed to muster three stars in most categories, including customer service, value for money, and quality of cottages among those whose holidays went ahead.'

Sykes was bought by the private equity Virtuvian Partners for a reported £375million in 2019 and it is also part-owned by a second private equity firm, Livingbridge. It has grown rapidly over the past five years and now controls 24 brands and businesses, including Pure Cottages Group and Carbis Bay Holidays.

Hoseasons is part of the Awaze group, which is owned by another private equity giant - Platinum Equity.

Last year, the CMA took action against Sykes and Hoseasons following thousands of complaints they had been refusing to provide full cash refunds to all customers whose holidays could not go ahead.

Which? warned Britons planning to book holidays in the UK that they should seek out firms with a good track record on service and refunds.

Last year, the CMA took action against Sykes and Hoseasons following thousands of complaints they had been refusing to provide full cash refunds to all customers whose holidays could not go ahead

First place in the Which? survey went to Rural Retreats, which specialises in luxurious holiday homes and has around 600 high-end properties.

It was followed by The Landmark Trust, the National Trust, which was identified as being relatively good value, and Classic Cottages, which has more than 1,000 properties in the south and west of England.

The editor of Which? Travel, Rory Boland, said: 'Restrictions on our freedoms may have lifted considerably since last summer, however it's clear that many of the risks posed by the pandemic will be here for some time to come - so it remains vitally important to make sure your money is safe when booking a holiday, whether it's abroad or in the UK.

'Our research has found that paying a little more for a holiday cottage in the UK is not only likely to give you a better holiday experience, but also ensure that you will get your money back without hassle if the pandemic prevents you from travelling.'

Sykes Holiday Cottages said: 'We take any issues or complaints of this nature very seriously and we believe the findings of this research are not a true reflection of our business or the holiday lets we manage.

We believe the findings of this research are not a true reflection of our business or the holiday lets we manage Sykes Holiday Cottages Sykes Holiday Cottages

'Our business has been serving the market for 30 years and this year we will host more than two million customers in our 19,500 properties. We have a very high standard for our properties and have won best large holiday cottage booking company at the British Travel Awards for eight consecutive years.

'Throughout this crisis, we have been working hard to protect both our customers and our owners. We have refunded or rearranged bookings for all those impacted and our customer services team have worked around the clock to make that happen. We will continue to work hard for our customers, helping them to enjoy every minute of their holidays at any one of our handpicked holiday cottages.'

Hoseasons said: ‘We strongly feel this survey doesn’t accurately represent the views of our customers, millions of whom choose Hoseasons every year. The data within the Which? report only reflects the opinions of 81 customers, whereas our third party independent reviews show that of 130,000 customers surveyed, 94 per cent say they would book with us again.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Like many of us, I spent a great deal of the past year dreaming of the time when it would be possible to travel abroad.

In my case, it was a particularly powerful yearning, something to offset a wretched few months during which the long shadow of Covid had been compounded by the shock of a cancer diagnosis.

After a prolonged period in which life was dominated by a gruelling chemotherapy schedule, my husband John and I were both delighted when we were finally able to book a trip to our favourite sunflower-strewn corner of France.

Sarah Standing, pictured her her husband John, travelled to France having recently completing a course of chemotherapy

We knew that we would have to jump through some bureaucratic hoops to get there — but we could little have envisaged the stress and monumental expense we would face.

From mountains of paperwork to the spiralling cost of Covid tests pre-departure and on return, it is no exaggeration to say that our longed-for holiday was hijacked both by ludicrous red tape and the naked profiteering of the private companies making merry on the back of our indecisive, hamstrung Government.

Sadly, my experience is one shared by millions of British holidaymakers this summer, many of whom have faced crippling costs in order to take their family on a longed-for foreign break.

As the Daily Mail has admirably highlighted, for a family of four the various required tests on departure and re-entry to the UK can reach a staggering £1,000 — with reports yesterday that tests can cost up to five times the price of a return flight to Europe.

In all, this additional cost may not be far off the entire budget for a family’s holiday — for some, this could put foreign travel out of reach altogether.

As the Daily Mail has admirably highlighted, for a family of four the various required tests on departure and re-entry to the UK can reach a staggering £1,000 — with reports yesterday that tests can cost up to five times the price of a return flight to Europe

And those who do stump up must navigate a Wild West marketplace with hundreds of ‘government-approved’ test providers charging anything from £50 to an eye-watering £475 for a single test (on average, holidaymakers are paying £93 for a post-return PCR).

While, yesterday, Professor Stephen Bustin, an expert on PCR testing at Anglia Ruskin University, said that a ‘fair’ price would be closer to £20.

If this naked profiteering sounds familiar, that is because just over a year ago the provision of PPE to our frontline health workers was also outsourced to a bewildering array of private-sector companies awarded lucrative contracts to fulfil this vital service.

You might think the Government would have learned its lesson after the ensuing outcry, particularly given that foreign travel was the carrot they dangled at the start of the vaccine roll-out.

They could have made the process as simple as possible, with a centralised system providing access to free — or at least cheap — tests, and a straightforward traffic- light system in which only the unvaccinated or those returning from high-risk countries, would need to worry about quarantine and multiple Covid tests.

That is what travel industry leaders — and a swathe of the general public — repeatedly requested of ministers.

But instead, the Government sat back as the British public has been ripped off and exploited by a system which has rapidly descended into a farce.

The Government sat back as the British public has been ripped off and exploited by a system which has rapidly descended into a farce

That’s certainly the word that springs to mind given the pictures in the Mail yesterday of the overflowing PCR test drop-off box of one of the ‘government-approved’ providers — making a mockery of travellers’ desperate and expensive endeavours to do the right thing.

Of course, there are some who believe that those of us who booked a trip abroad this year are hoist by our own petard. Why not wait a few more months, they cry.

The answer is that after more than a year of on-and-off lockdown, with its social isolation and the hell of home-schooling for many, a holiday is the one thing people could look forward to, an enticing slice of freedom which beckons for the double-vaccinated. Or so we were promised.

My husband John and I both count ourselves among that number. Following five months of chemotherapy for the non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma with which I was diagnosed at the start of the first lockdown, our spirits were lifted by the prospect of a trip across the Channel for some much-needed recuperation.

Given that my immune system remains compromised, we had deliberately chosen somewhere remote.

But, in common with every other holidaymaker this summer, our plans nonetheless unfolded against a backdrop of endless form-filling, as well as a compulsory PCR test prior to departure (as was the rule for France, despite both of us being double-jabbed), for which we paid £210.

While fairly confident of the result, I was keenly aware that whatever our vaccine status, a positive test result would scupper our entire trip at a stroke, and I couldn’t help thinking about the horribly magnified stress for those who are travelling in larger groups or with children.

Thankfully, our tests came back negative, and the following day we boarded our flight to Toulouse, greeted with nonchalance by the French authorities on our arrival.

So far so good. But ten days into our break I awoke early to learn that the UK’s Covid rules had changed overnight.

France was now deemed an ‘Amber Plus’ country, and unless John and I could get home within 72 hours, we would be required to isolate for ten days on our return.

What followed next was little short of a nightmare, our precious last days spent huddled over a computer with sporadic wifi (this was rural France, after all), desperately trying to change our flight on a website that crashed within hours of the Government’s announcement.

Realising we couldn’t get back before the deadline, there was nothing else for it but to download more passenger locator forms and liaise with our local chemist back home in Pimlico, London, getting it to deliver two testing kits — one for day two, the other (to ‘test and release’ from isolation) for day five — to await our return.

The cost? An eye-watering £500.

Two days before our departure, meanwhile — our holiday well-being now more or less evaporated — we had to make a 90-minute round trip to the nearest town for more tests to be deemed ‘fit-to-fly’.

Despite this flurry of costly negative tests, we still had to then plunge ourselves into isolation at home on return, dutifully sending off our day two and day five tests, only to receive no notification on the results of the latter. What on earth was the point?

The whole thing left me furious. As a nation we are a largely obedient bunch, dutifully following the rules that have been given to us in these uncertain times.

We have done the same with our holiday plans, only to find ourselves treated with what feels like little less than contempt.

The Government is, at least, finally taking some notice. This week the competition watchdog announced it had launched an investigation into these rip-off coronavirus tests for holidaymakers.

It’s certainly a step in the right direction, but one which comes much too late for the majority of us who have already paid an extortionate price for our small slice of summer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The oldest part of Ellenborough Park dates back to 1485; George III stayed in the house on advice from doctors keen that he should take in Cheltenham’s spa waters; the Earl of Ellenborough — who added many of the turrets and towers you see today — was made Governor General of India by the Duke of Wellington in 1842; and from 1947 to 1972 the Oriel Private School for Girls occupied the house, hoping to become a rival to Cheltenham Ladies’ College.

This is all explained to us at check-in, thanks to a sergeant-major type (tall, broad, authoritative) who knows his stuff and is keen to share it.

It is indeed an extraordinary building — or series of buildings, the last of which was built in 2010 when an outdoor swimming pool was put in. There are 61 rooms. Ours is in the new wing and it’s a big disappointment.

The oldest part of Ellenborough Park dates back to 1485 and George III stayed there on advice from doctors, keen that he should take in Cheltenham’s spa waters

The small window overlooks the pool surrounded by sun loungers when what we want are green fields, gardens or, at least, a view of Cheltenham race course at the front of the house.

It’s a big room but it’s dark, dingy and soulless. What’s clear is that hotels have raised their prices dramatically in a bid to make up for lost ground.

Who can blame them when demand is so high? But we’re paying a whopping £444 for dinner, bed and breakfast — and for that price this room is not good enough. Always ask to switch if you’re not happy with the room you’ve been given is my rule — but I can’t be bothered. It’s a Saturday night and probably full to capacity.

The Inspector had hoped for a room at Ellenborough Park that afforded him a view of Cheltenham race course

Dinner in the oak-panelled restaurant is a fussy affair. My mozzarella, tomatoes and watermelon starter is so tiny that we have to order the bread basket, and I’m pleased we do because the lamb rump with peas, leeks and goat’s cheese is also on the meagre side.

And here’s another thing: the allowance for dinner is £40, which really doesn’t get you far when the main courses come in at around the £26-£32 mark. With the bread, some olives, one starter, two main courses and a couple of side orders — our bill climbs to £146.

We’re woken by children splashing about in the pool. They’re having a great time — lucky things. I’m tempted to join them.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A tense exchange between an American Airlines employee and a disruptive traveler was captured on video then posted to TikTok Tuesday - another in an ongoing slew of recent unruly air passenger incidents.

In an apparent recent dispute at DFW International Airport in Dallas over wearing a mask on a flight, a passenger insulted an airline worker, calling the woman 'a b***h.'.

A gate attendant interjected: 'You can find another airline to fly, I'd suggest (taking) Spirit (airlines)'.

He tells the unidentified woman in the video, the comments were 'totally uncalled for, totally inappropriate, we don't tolerate that crap.'

When the woman attempts to deny her use of profanity, he says, ''Don't lie. You already did that once, when you took your mask off and put it in your pocket.'

'If you don't follow procedure, it's end of discussion,' he tersely added, before turning her away from the gate.

'You can find another airline to fly, I'd suggest (taking) Spirit (airlines)' the employee told the unidentified woman, who had just previously called his co-worked 'a b***h'

'Don't lie,' the airline worker told the woman when she attempted to deny her use of profanity. 'You already did that once, when you took your mask off and put it in your pocket'

Tuesday's scene has become an unfortunately familiar one for most airline workers, with the Federal Aviation Administration reporting nearly 100 cases of unruly airline passengers in the past week alone.

According to updated figures released by the FAA Tuesday, there have been 3,509 unruly passenger reports in 2021. The majority of the reported incidents - 2,605 to be exact - are related to 'noncompliance with the federal mask mandate that remains in place for flights and public transit.'

Meanwhile, out of those reports, 581 investigations were initiated into the incidents. Of those investigations, 87 resulted in some kind of penalty.

The FAA launched just 183 investigations last year, and only 146 in 2019.

The FAA states that out of 3,509 unruly passenger reports, 2,605 were mask-related with 581 investigations initiated into unruly passenger reports so far this year

Under federal law, no passenger may 'assault, threaten, intimidate, or interfere with a crew member in the performance of the crew member's duties aboard an aircraft being operated.'

The FAA also may impose fines up to $37,000 per violation in unruly passenger cases.

The Hill reports that the agency issued a $10,500 fine to a passenger who refused to wear a mask onboard earlier this month.

The FAA issued a $10,500 fine to a passenger who refused to wear a mask onboard earlier this month.

The July 8 report said another eight passengers either refused to wear a face mask, consumed alcohol they brought onto the plane, or assaulted passengers or flight crew members.

Combined, those nine passengers received a total of $119,000 in fines.

Darby LaJoye, Transportation Security Administration acting administrator, said Tuesday that there had been more than 85 reported physical assaults against TSA agents since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic last year. Twenty-five of the assaults have been reported since the end of May alone.

'Passengers do not arrive at an airport or board a plane with the intent of becoming unruly or violent,” LaJoye said in a statement. “However, what is an exciting return to travel for some may be a more difficult experience for others, which can lead to unexpected, and unacceptable, behaviors.'

In response to ongoing reports and incidents of unruly passengers, including one last month where a man bit two TSA officers in Denver, the TSA announced plans to resume self-defense training in early July. It had been postponed in the coronavirus pandemic last March.

It was not clear whether or not the woman from Tuesday's TikTok video received any kind of fine or punishment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Aficionados of Croatia have long regarded the country as having it all. Fabulous cities laden with treasures, glorious beaches, craggy coastline, thrilling countryside and a fascinating history.

What’s more, Croatia offers great value for money. So here’s our guide for this summer… just make sure you get there before the crowds return.

CITIES OF CULTURE

Living history: The city of Dubrovnik, located on Croatia's south coast, is known as the Pearl of the Adriatic

Dubrovnik, pictured, features high 16th-century walls, medieval churches and monasteries — plus a cable car up to Mount Srd to enjoy spectacular views of the coast

Dubrovnik is known as the Pearl of the Adriatic and it’s easy to understand why, with its high 16th-century walls, medieval churches and monasteries — plus a cable car up to Mount Srd to enjoy spectacular views of the coast.

Meanwhile to the north, Split, Croatia’s second biggest city, was first settled in the 3rd century BC. Its historical centre is a UNESCO World Heritage site, and it’s home to many first-rate seafood restaurants. Further north still is Sibenik in Dalmatia, another fine historic city, conquered by the Republic of Venice in 1116.

Rijeka (pronounced ree-acre) is next up on the coastline, a major port that was a European Capital of Culture in 2020 (sadly missing out on visitors due to the pandemic).

One of its most popular attractions, aside from its impressive castle and National Theatre, where ballet shows and opera concerts are held, is the Galeb (‘seagull’ in Croatian), a former Yugoslav naval vessel commandeered by communist ruler Marshal Tito.

Split, Croatia’s second biggest city, was first settled in the 3rd century BC and its centre is a Unesco World Heritage site

Sibenik in Dalmatia is another fine historic city. It was conquered by the Republic of Venice in 1116

He transformed into his lavishly furnished pleasure pad for entertaining guests such as Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. He even sailed up the Thames in it to visit Winston Churchill, too.

Add in Pula and Rovinj, former Roman settlements on the coast (Pula is home to a splendid amphitheatre), and Zagreb, the lively inland capital, with its cafes, art galleries and museums (including the weird and wonderful Museum of Broken Relationships) — and there is more than enough for the most avid culture vulture to get their teeth into.

HOW TO DO IT? Seven-day self-drives combining Zagreb and the Plitvice lake district from £1,175pp B&B including flights, hotels and car hire (regent-holidays.co.uk).

Seven nights at Hotel Dubrovnik Palace from £1,108pp B&B on August 19 with Gatwick flights and private transfer (tui.co.uk).

Seven nights at the Jupiter Luxury Hotel in Split from £724pp B&B in August with Heathrow flights (britishairways.com/holidays).

BEST OF THE BEACHES

Zlatni Rat Beach on the island of Brac is often used on tourist board adverts for the country, such is its beauty

Saharun Beach on the island of Dugi Otok features a lovely half-mile curve of smooth white stones and crystal-clear water

On the island of Hvar - made famous by the arrival of the jetset, including Hollywood celebrities and British royals - take a break from the bars and nightclubs for the quiet beach at Pokrivenik

Superb beaches are to be found all along the coast, although they tend to be smaller than those elsewhere in the Med, with grainier sand or pebbles. Often hotels will have no beach at all, merely a jetty or rocky area with steps into the water.

Among the best beaches are the ones at Murvica on the island of Brac in Dalmatia, Zlatni Rat Beach (also on Brac and often used on tourist board adverts for the country such is its beauty), Bacvice beach in Split, and Punta Rata near Makarska in Dalmatia, tucked away beneath Mount Biokovo.

Another top recommendation is Saharun Beach on the island of Dugi Otok, with a lovely half-mile curve of smooth white stones and crystal-clear water.

Meanwhile, on the island of Hvar — made famous by the arrival of the jetset, including Hollywood celebrities and British royals (Prince Harry once went with friends for a wild weekend) — take a break from the bars and nightclubs for the quiet beach at Pokrivenik.

HOW TO DO IT? Seven nights at the TUI Blue Adriatic Beach from £911pp all-inclusive from Gatwick on August 6 (tui.co.uk).

Seven nights at Hotel Croatia by Cavtat Bay, from £929pp half-board with London flights and transfers on August 11 (tropicalsky.co.uk).

Seven nights at the Valamar Lacroma Dubrovnik Hotel from £849pp B&B with Gatwick flights and private transfers (flightcentre.co.uk).

HEAD FOR THE HILLS

Often called the ‘golden island’ because of its renowned shimmering sunsets, Krk is a favourite of Croats

An aerial shot of the island of Cres, which is much loved by birdwatchers with its rare colony of European griffon vultures, golden eagles, peregrines and kestrels

VILLA THRILLERS 14 nights at a four- bedroom villa sleeping eight in Cavtat near Dubrovnik from £4,046 in August excluding flights; use code DU050 (croatianvillas.com).

14 nights at the Lapad Residence four-bedroom villa with a pool sleeping eight in Lapad near Dubrovnik from £14,059 in August excluding flights (jamesvillas.co.uk).

Seven nights in Villa Demetra on the outskirts of Porec in early September from £2,798, sleeping eight, flights excluded (villa plus.com).

Try oliverstravels.com, tuivillas.com and vrbo.com.

Flights available from jet2.com, tui.co.uk, ba.com, easyjet.com. Advertisement

Away from the coast, Croatia’s undulating landscape with well-maintained trails through national parks and lakes has long attracted hikers.

Some of the best adventures are to be had in the wilds of Risnjak National Park (home to the Risnjak mountain range, with remote mountain huts and fantastic views), Northern Velebit National Park (the country’s newest national park with more mountain trails) and Plitvice Lakes National Park. There is also the rugged Paklenica National Park, and Krka National Park, with waterfalls, lakes and a Franciscan monastery.

Some of the islands also have good hiking paths, particularly Lopud and Mljet.

HOW TO DO IT? Seven nights on a guided Croatia: Islands and Mountain tour covering Paklenica and Krka national parks plus the island of Brac, Dubrovnik and Split from £1,199pp B&B, with flights in early September and all activities included (exodus.co.uk). Seven nights on a self-guided Castles to Coast Walk on the Istrian peninsula from £1,729pp B&B with luggage transfers between hotels and flights in August (headwater.com).

Seven nights at Alana Beachclub at the foot of the Paklenica National Park from £1,779pp half-board plus four evening meals with Gatwick to Zadar flights on August 20 (neilson.co.uk).

ISLAND HOPPING

With so many islands (around 1,200) it’s hard to know where to begin. But this is all part of the joy of island-hopping — you never quite know what’s coming next. Either catch ferries, use bridges from the mainland or sail yourself.

Often called the ‘golden island’ because of its renowned shimmering sunsets, Krk is a favourite of Croats; many have summer homes there. Expect pretty bays and secret coves near Malinska.

Meanwhile, a 50-minute ferry from Split, the island of Brac is home to Europe’s oldest stonemasonry school, robust local red wine and some great beaches.

The island of Lokrum near Dubrovnik has a naturist beach (if that’s your thing), while the island of Cres is much loved by birdwatchers with its rare colony of European griffon vultures, golden eagles, peregrines and kestrels.

HOW TO DO IT? Six-night skippered flotilla holidays in southern Croatia from £1,158pp excluding flights (responsibletravel.com). Six-night skippered yacht charters from Dubrovnik to the islands of Korcula, Hvar and Vis from £3,399pp B&B, based on four sharing, with flights and transfers (abercrombiekent.co.uk).

Eight nights with a full day’s private sailing and stays on the islands of Korcula and Hvar from £2,950pp with flights (originaltravel.co.uk).

Additional reporting: Julia Mora and Jo Fernandez
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

On my arrival at Bath Spa station, Dylan is standing by a pink electric bicycle and trailer combo that has a big No 15 painted on it.

He loads my luggage into the trailer, offers me a map and water, then pedals away, leaving me to wander up to the hotel in a reverie, past the Roman baths, 15th Century abbey, and Britain’s finest collection of Georgian architecture.

When I get to Great Pulteney Street, the electric bike is parked outside like a modern-day sedan chair and the entrance is garlanded by flowers. My luggage is already in a first-floor room that overlooks what is possibly the most beautiful street in Britain – two sides of perfect honeyed limestone houses squaring off against each other.

No 15 Great Pulteney is a hotel with a 'sense of fun,' writes The Mail on Sunday's Sarah Turner. Pictured is the room she stayed in, featuring a doll’s house that hides the coffee machine

The hotel is a good base for exploring the city of Bath with its famous Roman baths and 15th Century abbey

Luxury: One of the beautiful bathrooms

Now owned by three brothers, it is a hotel with a sense of fun. What was the coal cellar is now a vaulted spa – look up and you can still see where the coal was once poured through at street level.

All the rooms are different, including one with dried herbs in the manner of a Georgian still room, and Sarah, the spa manager, delivers a serene two-hour treatment.

A pantry just a few steps away from my room has mini bottles of milk and jars of fizzy cola and flying saucer sweets for guests. The sense of fun extends to the bar on the ground floor where the tables are modern-day vitrines, with elegantly heaped collections of 1980s costume jewellery in them.

If Bridgerton (where some of the series was filmed) did a hotel, it would be like this one – Georgian life reimagined with high levels of wit.

At the end of Great Pulteney Street, the Holburne Museum (holburne.org) has Gainsboroughs plus an exhibition of Canaletto’s paintings of Venice. The show runs until September 5.

If the weather is fine, head with a picnic full of sandwiches and scones from No 15 to nearby Sydney Gardens.

The rooms: There are 40 spread across two buildings, plus two cottages that back on to Henrietta Park. Tones are kept light and there are lovely touches of humour – mine had a doll’s house hiding the coffee machine.

All come with a turntable and a library of vinyl to choose from. Mini teepees are set up in the rooms before arrival if children are sharing with you, while babysitting comes courtesy of Norland nannies.

The USP: Georgian immersion in the heart of the city.

The food: Modish British cuisine comes with minimal fuss but maximum taste. Expect ribeye steak and proper chips, followed by the chef’s interpretation of a Double Decker bar for pudding. At breakfast, bread comes from Bath’s famed Bertinet bakery; and keeping in the spirit of this hotel, I opt for the crumpets with homemade marmite over sourdough with avocado.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Days out for ice-cream lovers.

Nothing says summer like an ice cream, and this year families can find plenty of unusual places to indulge in the latest flavours.

In Cheshire, the long-established Ice Cream Farm has grown into a theme park with rides, attractions and what the Guinness Book Of Records has certified as the biggest ice-cream parlour in the world.

What a scoop: Nardini’s by the Clyde dates from 1935 when its Italian founders moved to Scotland

Children can play in sweet-themed areas, including a Rocky Road track for miniature cars, a Marshmallow Mound of trampolines and a Honeycomb Canyon full of sandpits and water features.

More than 50 flavours of ice cream are on sale at the farm near Chester, including Jammy Dodger, Bakewell Tart and Bubblegum.

The ice-cream tree with colourful scoops on its branches is a great backdrop for family photos. There is even a drive-thru for last-minute cones and tubs as you leave.

Rides cost from £4.50 per person (theicecreamfarm.co.uk).

Nardini’s, a beautifully restored Art Deco cafe in Largs, has become a tourist attraction in its own right.

Often described as an ice-cream palace, rather than a mere parlour, it seats 200 customers in a building overlooking the Clyde that dates from 1935 when its Italian founders moved to Scotland.

The Ice Cream Farm in Cheshire has grown into a theme park with rides, attractions and what the Guinness Book Of Records has certified as the biggest ice-cream parlour in the world

The menu offers 32 flavours as well as the famous Clyde Coast Extravaganza – with 12 scoops of ice cream and 16 toppings, it’s a sundae for the whole family to share (nardinis.co.uk).

In the Peak District, sweet-toothed visitors can take guided tours at Thorpe Farm near Hathersage to see how the ever-changing range of Hope Valley ice creams are made.

Bring sleeping bags and you can stay near its creamery in one of five bunk houses. From £150 a night, families can have sole use of dormitory-style rooms with up to eight beds (hope-valley.co.uk).

London offers ice-cream walking tours with free tastings galore. Pictured is a tasty treat from Gelupo in Soho

To make your own ice cream, look no further than The Avenue Cookery School in Wandsworth, South-West London. Children can get their hands messy in 90-minute classes while there are also adults-only alternatives where flavours include grapefruit and gin granita. Classes cost from £60pp (theavenuecookeryschool.com).

London also offers ice-cream walking tours with free tastings galore. Guides promise extra helpings of history as groups are led through the cafes of Soho and Covent Garden in search of scoops.

Find ice-cream tours under ‘food adventures’ at notintheguidebooks.com or under ‘tours and walks’ on funzing.com. Expect to pay about £40pp for a three-hour walk.

Grab an ice cream from The Little Ice Cream Company in Felixstowe, Suffolk, and enjoy it on the beach

For those in a party mood, Sandwich & Scoop or Sandwich & Sundae events are on offer at The Little Ice Cream Company in Felixstowe in Suffolk.

The shop’s ‘cow to cone’ production uses milk from a Holstein herd grazing just outside the town, and while it already offers some 80 flavours, its staff are always looking for something new.

Make a suggestion online and if it passes the taste test, it could go on sale later in the summer (littleicecreamcompany.co.uk).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What a shame the Prime Minister has opted to take a holiday in Britain later this summer rather than in one of the traditional hotspots he and his advisers have put on the fiendishly complicated and now largely discredited amber or green lists of countries.

A couple of weeks with Carrie and Wilf in Greece or Spain would have given him a 'sense of perspective', as politicians like to put it – specifically about what British travellers are having to put up with when trying to obey the ever-changing rules on testing.

And let's not forget that we are talking about travellers in general – perhaps those who need to be abroad on business or visiting sick relatives, for example – and not holidaymakers in particular.

It's a perspective that can only lead to one conclusion: The Government is presiding over a system that is out of control. And not just out of control but not making much sense either.

Yes, it is good news that more countries have been moved on to the green list and that the bamboozling 'amber plus' list has been dispensed with all together.

Had the Prime Minister (right) opted to take couple of weeks holiday with Carrie and Wilf in Greece or Spain, it would have given him a 'sense of perspective', as politicians like to put it – specifically about what British travellers are having to put up with when trying to obey the ever-changing rules on testing. Pictured: The Johnson family on holiday in Scotland in 2020

But it's hard not to see this as a move to appease increasingly irate Tory MPs rather than the result of a carefully thought out, integrated policy on travel – something that has been sadly lacking ever since the pandemic began.

As for testing, many holidays have been ruined even before they started as some testing firms have failed to get people's results back to them in time, meaning that travellers have had to fork out hundreds of pounds on rebooking their flights.

And insisting that even those who have been double-jabbed must take a costly PCR test two days after they have returned to the UK from green and amber list countries has given free licence for companies to fleece travellers by charging exorbitant fees for what often is a shoddy service.

And why a PCR test, anyway? Surely people should be allowed to take a far cheaper lateral flow test on arriving back in the UK and, then, if that proves positive, arrange for the more conclusive PCR test.

What makes all this especially galling is that the testing companies are on the Government's 'approved' list of practitioners – not that you have to do much to be approved.

There are more than 400 such companies listed on the official website, charging anything from £19.95 to £399 for a PCR test (around £175 on average).

But now it has also emerged that a vital part of this expensive testing debacle has been found wanting.

As the Tory MP and chairman of the transport committee, Huw Merriman, has pointed out: 'Of all the PCR tests from arriving passengers that came back positive in the three week period from 1 July, only 5 per cent were then genome sequenced'.

There are more than 400 such companies listed on the official website, charging anything from £19.95 to £399 for a PCR test (around £175 on average) [File photo]

Genome sequencing is the process by which different strains of the virus can be identified and a vital means of spotting new and possibly more dangerous variants – which is surely a key issue in testing.

Certainly, most people accept that some form of testing should be mandatory when coming back from red-listed countries with high infection rates (most likely a PCR test) – but not when returning from countries that have both lower rates of infection and similar high rates of vaccination to the UK.

This now includes Spain, the most popular holiday destination for Britons – and yet ministers are advising travellers to take a PCR test even though it isn't mandatory.

The danger is that our successful vaccination programme will end up being undermined by the Government's woeful travel strategy.

Opening the door to travel should mean not just changing the rules on quarantining but radically changing the requirements on testing, too.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The Government’s travel traffic light system has been topsy-turvy for so long that it’s no wonder many of us doubted whether we would enjoy a holiday abroad this year.

So this week’s announcement that those who are double-jabbed may visit ‘amber’ listed countries without having to quarantine on return to the UK from July 19 is hugely welcome. Suddenly, popular ‘amber’ holiday spots such as Spain, France and Greece have effectively turned ‘green’.

All you need to do is show your Covid pass on the main NHS app or an NHS letter showing that you are fully vaccinated.

The announcement that those who are double-jabbed may visit ‘amber’ listed countries without having to quarantine on return to the UK from July 19 has provided hope for holidaymakers

The main caveat, as far as British rules are concerned, is that an antigen test is required 72 hours before returning home and a ‘day two’ PCR test is required on return to the UK. This applies to both adults and children.

It is also essential to keep an eye on foreign entry rules as well as the Foreign Office advice on whether ‘non-essential’ travel is permitted — listed at gov.uk — as this is important for travel insurance validity. However, Grant Shapps, the Transport Secretary, did tell the House of Commons on Thursday that the Foreign Office ban on non-essential travel to amber countries would be lifted by July 19.

So here’s our guide to some of our most popular ‘amber’ countries . . .

GREEK GETAWAY

Glorious Greece: Return flights are available to Santorini, Rhodes, Corfu and Athens from less than £75 in August. Pictured is Paleokastritsa Bay in Corfu

WHAT IF I FALL ILL ABROAD? Inform the authorities if you become unwell and stay in your accommodation for the required quarantine period. Most travel insurance policies cover Covid-related medical expenses including accommodation costs as well as repatriation, but make sure before purchasing a policy. Check your European Health Insurance Card. If still in date, it can be used to receive treatment in the EU. If it has expired, apply for a Global Health Insurance Card at nhs.uk. Advertisement

Restaurants, bars and beaches are operating as normal, although masks are required indoors — as they are on public transport such as ferries between the islands.

A four-metre social distancing rule is in place on beaches. Archaeological sites are open, including the Acropolis. Live events are happening with strict safety protocols observed. Meanwhile, a Blue Freedom scheme to vaccinate citizens over 18 on islands by the summer has met its targets — and Greece is ‘delighted to be welcoming tourists again’, says the tourist board. See discovergreece.com.

In 2019, 3.4 million Britons went to Greece, making it our seventh most popular destination. Return flights are available to Santorini, Rhodes, Corfu and Athens from less than £75 in August on Skyscanner.net.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Those with proof of double-vaccinations taken 14 days before travel do not have to self-isolate when travelling into Greece.

You can also visit without a Greek quarantine if you are not double-vaccinated but have taken a PCR Covid test with a negative result within 72 hours before travel or an antigen test with a negative result within 48 hours prior to travel. This rule applies to children aged over 12. All visitors must fill in a Passenger Locator Form by at least the day before travel (travel.gov.gr).

LET’S GO!

Budget: 14 nights at the Liakoto Apartments in Kardamill in the Peloponnese from £1,425pp self-catering on August 14 from Gatwick (sunvil.co.uk).

Mid-range: Seven nights at the Marpunta Resort on the island of Alonnisos in the Aegean Sea from £1,209pp B&B on August 25 from Gatwick (olympicholidays.com).

Luxury: A week at Angeliki villa on Corfu from £3,460 sleeping eight, flights extra (cvvillas.com).

ITALY IN BALANCE

Italy currently has a five-day quarantine requirement for all UK arrivals. Pictured is Rome's Trevi Fountain

WHAT COVID TESTS MUST WE TAKE? Some countries require travellers aged over 12 to show proof of a negative PCR test. These are usually taken up to 72 hours of arrival and can be ordered online and returned by post, or taken at a High Street store or clinic.

All travellers aged over 11 returning to the UK must show proof of a negative ‘pre-departure’ lateral flow test, which is taken while on holiday (within 72 hours of their return to the UK). These tests can be ordered online and packed in a suitcase. Qured offers ‘pre-departure’ tests from £39 which are taken during a short video call with a nurse, with results within an hour (qured.com).

Travellers aged five and over returning from an amber-list country must then show proof of a negative ‘day two’ PCR test taken within 48 hours of arrival back in the UK. These can be ordered online, taken at home and returned in the post, or administered at the airport on arrival through companies such as ExpressTest, which has units at Heathrow, Gatwick and Birmingham airports (£69, expresstest.co.uk). They can also be administered at a High Street store. Boots offers ‘day two’ tests from £99 (boots.com).

Some companies offer ‘testing packages’ for travel to amber-list countries. Randox, for example, offers the above three tests for £129 (randoxhealth.com).

All tests must be carried out by a government-approved company (list available at gov.uk). Advertisement

Attractions such as the Colosseum in Rome require you to wear face masks and to take a temperature check. You must also book online at least a day in advance for this and other museums. Meanwhile, face masks are mandatory in public outdoor places where social distancing (of one metre) is not possible and while indoors in public places. Restaurants are open but ‘dance clubs’ are closed.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: As England fans who wanted to watch the quarter-final game against Ukraine held in Rome discovered, it is tough to visit Italy now. Due to concerns there about the Delta variant in the UK, measures are in place that require all British citizens to produce proof of a negative Covid antigen test taken in the 48 hours prior to entering Italy (children under six exempt).

A Digital Passenger Locator Form must also be completed. Then, on arrival, you must go into self-isolation for five days, at the end of which another antigen test is required. These rules could be relaxed later in the summer. More information at salute.gov.it on the ‘Covid, travellers’ page.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at Hotel La Perla by Lake Garda from £895pp half-board on August 21 from Manchester (tui.co.uk).

Mid-range: A fortnight at Orca villa in Scopello on Sicily from £4,039 sleeping eight on August 28, flights excluded (jamesvillas.co.uk).

Luxury: Seven nights at Casa alla Scala on Sicily from £4,271 sleeping six in August, flights extra (thethinkingtraveller.com).

CROATIA CALLS

With more than 1,000 islands and scores of tucked-away beaches and secluded coves on 3,750 miles of coastline, Croatia is an enticing prospect for a summer holiday in the Med with plenty of social distancing guaranteed. It’s good value, too. Face masks are required to be worn outdoors in public places when you cannot maintain a distance of 1.5 metres. Cafes, bars, restaurants and casinos are open with a closing time of midnight.

Nicola Brnjac, the country’s tourism minister, wants to save the summer for the nation’s tourist industry . ‘It is our duty to provide all the prerequisites for a safe and comfortable trip,’ she says.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Proof of a double-vaccination or of a negative PCR test taken 72 hours prior to arrival or a negative antigen test 48 hours prior to arrival — or a doctor’s certificate that you have recovered from Covid between 11 and 180 days before going. Children under the age of 12 do not need to take a test before travel if accompanied by an adult who passes the entry requirements. It is also necessary to have proof of your booked accommodation. See the government’s tourist board website for more information: croatia.hr.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at Villa Plava in Sibenik on the Dalmatian Coast from £1,940 sleeping six in August, flights excluded (oliverstravels.com)

Endless possibilities: You could soon be wandering around a fishing village on Croatia’s Brac Island

Mid-range: Seven nights at the Hotel Park Plaza Histria in Pula on the Istrian Riviera from £1,005pp all-inclusive on August 15 from Birmingham (firstchoice.co.uk).

Luxury: A week at Villa Ivette in the Split region in August from £10,485 sleeping eight, flights extra (croatianvillaholidays.com).

CAN I STILL GET A GOOD DEAL? Q. How do I prove I am double-jabbed? A. The majority of amber countries will accept evidence from the NHS app showing you have had both jabs. Alternatively, call 119 to request a letter of proof, which will be posted to the address registered with your GP in five days. These will also be accepted. Q. Will I need to queue for six hours at passport control coming home this summer? A. Transport secretary Grant Shapps doesn’t rule it out. Peak-time delays are now one to two hours and a union official has warned that queues could be three times as long because of the influx. The e-gates are due to be upgraded in the coming weeks. Q. Are there any good deals out there? A. Yes, but be quick as easyJet alone reported a 400 per cent increase in sales on Thursday. Return flights to Athens, pictured, were as cheap as £77 for mid-August on skyscanner.net yesterday. Q. What about the rules for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland? A. The devolved administrations had yet to approve the same plans for ‘amber’ countries. Q. Is travelling with children possible? Obviously, they have not been vaccinated. A. Yes, but entry requirements vary by country. See our guide and visit gov.uk. Q. If I have only just had my second jab a few days before travel is that OK? A. No, you are ‘fully vaccinated’ only when the second jab has been given 14 days previously. WE’RE HERE TO HELP If you need advice, the Holiday Guru can answer your questions. Email us at holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk. Advertisement

SLIP TO CYPRUS

Cyprus requires a test on arrival — see below — so that may put a lot of people off. But those who are determined will find the island quieter than ever, with clear roads making it perfect for a day trips and exploring the interior.

Face masks must be worn both inside and outdoors in public places, with a £260 fine for transgressions. A requirement for a SafePass has been put in place for entering certain shopping malls and catering establishments (see gov.uk).

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: UK visitors must take a PCR test with a negative result within 72 hours of arrival. They must then take a PCR test on landing in Cyprus and self-isolate until the result is emailed, which usually takes three hours. Under-12s exempt.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights from £650 half-board at Hotel Atlantica in Paphos on August 11 from Stansted (tui.co.uk).

Mid-range: Seven nights at Olympic Lagoon Resort Paphos from £1,412pp all-inclusive on August 8 from Manchester (jet2holidays.com).

Luxury: A week at Villa Anissa from £3,544 sleeping six in August, flights extra (oliverstravels.com).

BARGAIN BULGARIA

Expect bargain prices for packages to Black Sea resorts when tourism gets up and running properly again in Bulgaria. Also expect fines of up to £450 for those who break the current ‘strictly enforced’ Covid rules.

Masks must be worn at all times in indoor public spaces and outdoors when not 1.5 metres apart from others, with careful checks that proper masks are being used, not scarves tied around the face. Plastic face shields are also not permitted.

However, if you are sitting in a restaurant, café or bar (open at 50 per cent capacity) it is fine not to wear a mask. Also, joggers and others exercising do not have to wear masks. Children under six do not have to wear them either. An official Emergency Epidemic Situation is in place until the end of this month.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Since the beginning of this month, Bulgaria has operated a travel traffic-light system of its own — and the UK is on its ‘orange’ list. This means that you can travel if you are double-vaccinated and have been so for 14 days before visiting. If you have a doctor’s certificate showing that you tested positive for Covid between 11 and 180 days before travel, this is accepted too. So is proof of a negative PCR test within 72 hours of travel or a negative antigen test taken 48 hours before. Under 12s are exempt.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at the Hilton Sofia from £485pp on August 29 from Stansted (thomascook.com).

Mid-range: Seven nights at the Riu Palace Sunny Beach from £812pp all-inclusive on August 9 from Glasgow (tui.co.uk).

Luxury: Seven nights at Wave Resort in Pomorie near Bourgas from £920pp all-inclusive on August 6 from Manchester (jet2holidays.com).

ESPANA: OLE!

Tourism accounts for 12 per cent of Spain’s GDP and regions are desperate to attract us back. Pictured is the Sagrada Familia in Barcelona

SO WILL WE BE COVERED? The most vital consideration for insurance is that you should only visit a country to which the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office advises it is fine to go for non-essential reasons. If the country is not on this list, policies from the vast majority of insurers will be invalidated (battleface.com is one of the few exceptions). To check, go to the page for the country you wish to visit at gov.uk, where this travel advice is given. Currently, for example, it is fine to go to Spain, Greece or France on holiday — and Grant Shapps, the Transport Secretary, said this week that FCDO advice against visiting all ‘amber’ destinations would be lifted by July 19. But he also said advice could change at short notice — so checking is essential. Remember that insurance companies generally will not cover against a holiday cancellation caused by the pandemic. The consumer group Which? (which.co.uk) has a useful ‘Travel Insurance’ advice page, as does the Association of British Insurers (abi.org.uk). Advertisement

Spain is our No.1 holiday destination, attracting more than 18 million visitors in 2019.

Currently, it is not mandatory to wear face masks in outdoor public spaces where 1.5 metres social distancing can be maintained, but they must be worn indoors and on public transport. Tourism accounts for 12 per cent of Spain’s GDP and regions are desperate to attract us back. Some regions have even begun offering free travel insurance covering foreign visitors in the event of a Covid infection, including Andalucía, the Balearic Islands and the Costa Cálida.

These policies cover visitors from overseas who stay in official tourist accommodation for medical expenses, repatriation and the accommodation costs of extending a stay should you fall ill. See andalucia.org/en/travel-assistance-insurance; safetourism.illesbalears.travel/en/health-tourism and murciaturisticaes/en/covid_travel_insurance.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Double-vaccinated visitors must have proof of having had two jabs at least 14 days before travel. Those not double-vaccinated can also go to Spain if they have evidence of having taken a negative Covid PCR (or equivalent) test within 48 hours of travel (lateral flow antigen tests are not accepted). Children under 12 are free to travel without having been tested.

All visitors must complete a Health Control Form (Spain’s equivalent of the Passenger Locator Form) within 48 hours of departing for Spain. See travelsafe.spain.info.

The Balearic and Canary Islands are both on the UK Government’s ‘green’ list, so anyone can go and not have to quarantine on return to the UK. However, travellers must meet the Spanish Government’s entry requirements.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at the Riu Costa del Sol in Torremolinos from £895pp all-inclusive, including flights, on August 18 from Gatwick (tui.co.uk).

Midrange: Seven nights at the Iberostar Selection Marbella Coral Beach resort from £1,343pp B&B on July 31 from Gatwick (sovereign.com).

Luxury: Seven nights in Villa Roca, overlooking the sea in the Costa Blanca, from £5,128 per week in August, sleeping six, flights extra (oliverstravels.com).

PORTUGAL PEACE

A spike in Covid cases in the past week has seen an 11pm curfew being imposed in some areas including Lisbon, Porto and Albufeira — which may put off some. However, restaurants, cafes and bars are open with social distancing — the only difference from a usual summer being the requirement to wear masks at all times in public places, plus the 11pm cut-off in some spots. A rigorous Clean and Safe nationwide hotel policy is in place to maintain hygiene standards. More information at visitportugal.com.

Entry requirements: To avoid a 14-day quarantine on arrival you must show that you have been double-vaccinated at least 14 days before arrival. Children under 12 are exempt if they are travelling with a fully vaccinated adult. All travellers, even those double-vaccinated, must also have taken a PCR test 72 hours prior to travel or an EU-approved antigen test 48 hours before travel.

All should complete a Passenger Locator Card before arrival as well (portugalcleanandsafe.pt).

The Portuguese Atlantic island of Madeira is on the UK Government’s ‘green’ list, so anyone may go without facing a UK quarantine on return.

However, all visitors must have proof of a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours of travel.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at Tui Blue Falesia in Olhos d’Agua in the Algarve from £732pp half-board on August 29 from Gatwick (tui.co.uk).

Mid-range: Seven nights at Albufeira Sol Hotel and Spa in the Algarve from £976pp all-inclusive on August 1 from Manchester (jet2.com).

Luxury: 14 nights at Villa Camilla in the Algarve from £32,226 in August, sleeping ten, flights extra (akvillas.com).

MAKE IT MOROCCO

Mask-wearing is obligatory in all public places including parks and while walking on streets in Morocco. Pictured are two camels near Marrakesh

Colourful: Spices in a Moroccan souk

International flights to Morocco resumed on June 15. On entry to cafes and restaurants your temperature should be taken, you will be asked to disinfect your hands and you will be required to wear a face mask when not sitting at tables. One-way systems are in operation. Mask-wearing is obligatory in all public places including parks and while walking on streets.

Although Covid rates are stable, Morocco has tough rules in place including a curfew from 11pm to 4am. A failure to observe restrictions could lead to a three-month prison sentence or a fine of £105.

Morocco was becoming an increasingly important Mediterranean destination for Britons before the pandemic with as many as 95 flights a week in 2019, most people visiting its colourful and lively capital, Marrakesh, as well as the Atlas Mountains. Further information: visitmorocco.com.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Double-vaccinated travellers who had their last jab at least 14 days prior to travel can enter without taking a Covid test. Other travellers must have proof of a negative test taken within 72 hours of boarding planes. Those entering by ferry must take a Covid test during the journey. Children under 11 are exempt from tests. All visitors must complete a Public Health Passenger Form before arrival (onda.ma/form.php).

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at Riu Tikida Palmeraie in Marrakesh from £724pp all-inclusive on August 9 from Manchester (firstchoice.co.uk).

Mid-range: Seven nights at Riad Africa in Marrakesh from £1,197pp B&B on August 14 from Gatwick (easyjet.com).

Luxury: Seven nights at Dar Tigamino near Marrakesh from £4,377 sleeping nine, flights extra (cvvillas.com).

FRENCH ADVENTURE

Nice in Nice: View over the French resort. Only adult holidaymakers who are fully vaccinated are permitted to enter France

French Covid rules come with a Gallic twist — as well as advising you to use antibacterial hand gels regularly, avoid touching your face and not shake hands, further advice includes: ‘Do not greet people with kisses on the cheek.’ Masks must be worn indoors in public places, on public transport, in taxis and when attending open-air markets or railway stations.

Restaurants and bars have been open with social distancing since June 9, allowing groups of up to six. Yesterday, nightclubs were allowed to open their doors, too. Further information at gouvernement.fr/en/coronavirus -covid-19.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Only adult holidaymakers who are fully vaccinated are permitted to enter France. If they are travelling with children, those under the age of 11 do not need any documentation.

Children aged 11 and over, however, will need proof of either a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours of travel or a negative antigen test taken within 48 hours of going. Visitors must also sign a ‘declaration sur l’honneur’ (sworn statement) that you do not have Covid symptoms and have not been in contact with anyone who has Covid within 14 days of departure.

LET’S GO!

Budget: Seven nights at La Villa Tosca hotel in Cannes on the French Riviera from £626pp on August 21 from Gatwick (easyjet.com).

Mid-range: Seven nights at the Crowne Plaza Toulouse from £898.50pp on July 25 from Heathrow (britishairways.com).

Luxury: Seven nights on a Tailor-Made Normandy trip, staying at luxury hotels in Cherbourg and Deauville, from £1,380pp B&B with ferry crossing (kirkerholidays.com).

MONTENEGRO

There may be no current direct flights from the UK to Montenegro but that is due to change in the next few weeks. Pictured is Kotor Old Town

With its pretty coves featuring tucked-away beaches, its excellent seafood restaurants and historic castles, Montenegro makes a great choice — and this summer, without the crowds, it should be lovelier than ever.

There may be no current direct flights from the UK but that is due to change in the next few weeks. Face mask-wearing indoors in public places is a must, as is wearing them outdoors where you cannot keep two metres distancing; the fine for transgression is as much as £1,715.

ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: Fully vaccinated travellers who got their last jab more than 14 days ago may enter. So can those with a PCR test taken within 72 hours of travel, or those with an antigen test taken within 48 hours of travel. Under-fives are exempt.

LET’S GO!

Budget: 14 nights at the Iberostar Herceg Novi near Tivat from £1,216pp all-inclusive on August 19 from Gatwick (easyjet.com).

Mid-range: Seven nights at the Iberostar Bellvue in Budvar from £770pp all-inclusive on August 18 from Gatwick (easyjet.com).

Luxury: 14 nights at On The Rocks villa in Tivat from £6,089 in August sleeping six, flights extra (jamesvillas.co.uk).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The owner of the Crowne Plaza and Holiday Inn hotel chains swung back to profit in the first half of the year as loosening travel restrictions provided a much-need boost for the accommodation industry.

Intercontinental Hotels Group recorded an operating profit of $138million following a strong recovery in demand over the spring and summer months compared to the same time last year.

Its Holiday Inn Express brand saw the greatest increase in gross revenues, growing by around $700million to $2.7billion thanks to high demand in Greater China and the Americas.

Recovery: IHG's Holiday Inn Express brand saw the greatest increase in gross revenues, thanks to high demand in Greater China and the Americas

On a revenue per available room (RevPAR) basis - a standard measure used by the hospitality sector - the group's sales almost doubled in China and rose by more than a quarter in the Americas.

However, bookings in all regions remain significantly lower than their pre-pandemic levels due to tough international travel rules, with trade in Europe, Middle East, Africa and Asia continuing to be severely depressed.

Even as demand started to improve in May and June, IHG's total occupancy rates were 21 per cent down on the comparable period two years ago, while RevPAR was more than 40 per cent lower.

The firm has had to rely heavily on domestic excursions for their business, but even in high-performing markets like China and the Americas, tourists have not visited major cities in larger numbers.

This could be because they have wanted to avoid more crowded places where the risk of becoming infected by Covid-19 is higher.

Tourism-dependent companies in big cities like London, such as museums, theatres, and conference centres have also been forced to temporarily close their premises for much of the last year.

Quieter year: IHG's bookings in all regions remain significantly lower than their pre-pandemic levels due to tough international travel rules hitting demand, especially in big cities

They also rely heavily on foreign travellers, which combined with the imposition of travel restrictions, has caused a massive knock-on effect for the hotel sector.

Nonetheless, IHG's chief executive Keith Barr expressed optimism about the firm's results, commenting that the 'actions we have taken during the last 18 months position us well to exceed our pre-pandemic level of growth and profitability.'

He noted that nearly half of the company's hotels had seen RevPAR in July recover to their equivalent amount in 2019, and that there had been a resurgence in group activity and corporate bookings.

'While there is a risk of trading volatility in the balance of the year, and discretionary business trips, group bookings and international travel will take time to fully recover, we are confident in the strength of IHG's future prospects,' he added.

Resurgence: IHG chief executive Keith Barr said that nearly half of the company's hotels had seen RevPAR in July recover to their equivalent amount in 2019

IHG opened 132 hotels with 17,400 rooms and signed more than 200 during the reporting period and is planning to launch a new luxury brand in the coming weeks to complement its Six Senses, Regent and Kimpton brands.

Danni Hewson, a financial analyst at online trading platform AJ Bell, said this move by IHG 'suggests it reckons regular foreign travel might be dominated by wealthier holidaymakers in the future amid the extra costs and complexity of jetting overseas.

'InterContinental's model should, in theory, leave it well-positioned to rebound as the economy recovers, given it does not have lots of capital tied up in owning hotels.'

She warned, though, that this model 'does arguably give it less control over the pace of growth, with its hotel estate expanding much more slowly than that of rivals like Marriott and Hilton in the first half of the year.'

Laura Hoy, an equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, further observed that IHG's Chinese market is looking more vulnerable following the reintroduction of Covid restrictions there in June to try and stem cases linked to the Delta variant.

'There’s no telling,' she adds, 'whether this will continue as variant concerns set in, but we’re mindful that China seems to be a few steps ahead of the rest of the world when it comes to the pandemic.

'If lockdowns ramp up through the rest of the summer, it could be a bleak forecast for other regions, which would chip away at IHG’s already precarious recovery.'

Shares in IHG closed trading 0.6 per cent lower at £47.05 on Tuesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Holiday-starved Britons have rushed to book breaks to Croatia since it was added to the 'green list'.

Skyscanner recorded an immediate daily surge in bookings of up to 50 per cent for 2021 holidays there following the change in status by the government.

The travel site has also charted a 199 per cent increase in searches week on week for the holiday hotspot in the wake of the announcement.

There has been a recent spike in bookings for travel to Croatia. Pictured is Dubrovnik

The top-booked Croatian airports are Split, Dubrovnik and Zagreb.

The average return airfares for these destinations, booked since the announcement, are £165 for Split, £174 for Dubrovnik and £132 for Zagreb.

Croatia was moved to the green list on Wednesday, July 14, meaning Britons don't have to quarantine following a visit. It was then added to the 'green watchlist', indicating a risk of going amber.

Looking ahead to the October half-term, Skycanner also released early flight search data that reveals travellers are showing interest in long-haul trips to winter sun destinations.

The most popular searches have been for Bangkok, followed by Bali and New York.

Las Vegas is the fourth most-searched destination for an October getaway and Tokyo is fifth in the ranking.

Jon Thorne, Skyscanner's traveller expert, said: 'In a pre-pandemic "normal year" October and half term, in particular, is a very popular time for a family getaway abroad, and we would usually see British travellers searching on Skyscanner for destinations such as Canary Islands and Dubai for some short-haul winter sun.

Skyscanner's data shows Bali is the second-most-searched destination for an October getaway

'With an ever-changing travel situation, interestingly we're seeing a highly responsive travel community start to dream of bucket list trips again with attention instead turning to destinations further afield such as Bali and Bangkok.

'Historically travel bookings - and flights in particular - have often been notoriously inflexible. However, the events of the past year have forced airlines and hotels to take a more flexible approach, coupling amendable bookings with extremely attractive pricing.

'This seems to be fuelling a new mindset among British travellers and we have seen a noticeable increase in interest around flexible bookings. Bookings which fall under these policies are highlighted on our site, clearly showing travellers how to book travel that can be adjusted easily if needed, without incurring extra costs.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

This is not quite Stellenbosch in the Western Cape. Even so, the late evening sun picks out row upon row of vines that slope up the hill towards a ridge of tall, mature trees.

Couples are sitting outside with an assortment of wines produced on the estate — sparkling, red, white and rose. Walkers are out with their dogs; joggers huff and puff. Just outside Dorking.

Denbies is the biggest winery in the country, with 260 acres of vines. It's also one of the first to open a hotel, with 17 rooms in a new and unsympathetic annexe next to the original farmhouse.

Denbies Vineyard Hotel in Surrey features 17 rooms in a new annexe next to the original farmhouse

One of the rooms at Denbies. The Inspector wasn't keen on the interiors and said his room felt 'stark' and 'clinical'

This soulless modern block is in sharp contrast to the surrounding lush, rambling countryside.

It's like something you expect to find at a golf club after the committee has decided that rooms might make for a good additional revenue stream.

I'd hoped for earthy, but got tinny. My room is stark, clinical. The headboard is made from a form of plastic; the bath is plastic. There's nothing on the walls except a print of a street in Dorking. There's a picture light with no picture.

Al-fesco option: The Inspector describes the hotel's vine-side patio as 'attractive'

Denbies is the biggest winery in the UK, with 260 acres of vines

Dinner is served in the conservatory of the farmhouse, and the Inspector described the food as 'fresh and wholesome'

TRAVEL FACTS Denbies Vineyard Hotel is located at London Road, Dorking, Surrey, RH5 6AA. B&B Doubles start from £165. For more information call 01306 876777 or visit denbies.co.uk. Rating: Advertisement

Dinner and breakfast is served in the conservatory of the farmhouse, a light and airy space which spills out on to an attractive patio.

Along with the menu, I'm handed some tasting notes about the wines and go for the Bacchus 2018, described as 'fresh and full, with flavours of melon and lime and a crisp dry finish'.

'But could I also try a little of the Flint Valley?' I ask.

'Of course you can,' says the restaurant manager.

Turns out that the Bacchus is heavy-going and I can't find its 'crisp dry finish'. But the Flint Valley is excellent.

'Could I change the Bacchus for the Flint Valley?'

'Of course you can.'

The menu is simple; the food fresh and wholesome, although some people might wish for red meat rather than just chicken or fish.

In the morning, there's time to check out some other Denbies diversions: a yoga and Pilates room, farm shop, plant centre, brewery, take-away cafe, and the 'vineyard train' is stationed ready for its first tour of the day.

There's a lot going on at Denbies and the reputation of its wines is growing. But as a place to stay, it still needs some fermentation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olympic gold medallist Sally Gunnell checks in to our travel Q&A

Olympic gold medallist Sally Gunnell checks in to our travel Q&A.

She talks about her favourite city, a memorable trip to Florida, her first holiday - in Norfolk - the travel item she finds indispensable, and more.

YOUR FIRST HOLIDAY?

Hemsby, a seaside resort in Norfolk, where we used to stay in a cabin on the beach owned by my uncle Tom and had many a family holiday.

MOST MEMORABLE TRIP?

South Seas Island Resort on Captiva Island, Florida, where my husband Jon and I got married. We were lucky enough to have family and friends join us too.

WHAT IS YOUR FAVOURITE CITY?

It has to be Barcelona, where I won my Olympic gold medal. I’ve been back many times, most recently around my 50th birthday where I was able to show around friends who joined me for the celebrations.

DO YOU KEEP FIT WHEN TRAVELLING ABROAD?

I always go running wherever I travel because it’s a great way to get to know the area.

WHAT DO YOU NEVER TRAVEL WITHOUT?

Elizabeth Arden’s eight-hour moisturiser. It’s a great all-rounder (to smooth hair frizz, shape brows, remove mascara, moisturise cracked lips and much more).

South Seas Island Resort on Captiva Island (pictured) in Florida is Sally's most memorable trip

ANY TRAVEL DISASTERS?

In the Maldives, we arrived at the main airport for our flight home and realised we’d left all our passports in the hotel room safe. We had to rebook our return flight, and travel via Doha in Qatar, which is not the best fun you can have with three young children.

NEXT TRIP?

Other than September’s UK cruise on Princess Cruises’ ship Sky Princess (as a guest speaker), my husband and I are hoping to get back to the Maldives in November.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Hidden at the bottom of vertiginous cliffs or beneath a sweep of high mountains, coves offer the perfect escape for adventurous travellers keen for a coastal getaway without the crowds.

Whether it’s a brief dip or a languorous picnic on the beach, these are the places I head to when I need a deep, soothing breath of sea air with just my family for company.

From distant Welsh gems to easily overlooked wonders on the Essex coast, these are our most beautiful secret coves.

Grebe Beach, Cornwall

Grebe Beach is a Cornish delight with sweeping views over the English Channel and a surprisingly tropical feel

Set on the beautiful Helford Passage, a short walk through the woods east of the pretty hamlet of Durgan, Grebe Beach is a Cornish delight.

Lush banks, replete with Scots pine and oak tumbling down from the low cliffs, and sweeping views out to the English Channel give this hidden beach a surprisingly tropical feel.

The late naturalist Roger Deakin said swimming here was akin to breast-stroking through the Limpopo, and it’s easy to see why. The water here is calm and perfect for a languid dip on a hot afternoon.

Stay: National Trust-owned Quay Cottage in Durgan, overlooking the Helford River, is available for a minimum of two nights from £329 (nationaltrust.org.uk).

Monkey Beach, Essex

This tranquil spot on Essex’s hugely underrated Mersea Island is a dream for beachcombers, sandcastle-builders and children.

On the eastern side of the island, close to Clacton-on-Sea, the beach is crossed by boardwalks and tiny creeks that appear at low tide.

Pack a net and bucket and search for oysters, or pop up a windbreak and enjoy the peace this corner of England has to offer. Make sure to join the queue for Company Shed, which serves oysters and fresh fish.

Stay: The beautiful, 300-year-old Monkey Beach Cottage costs from £695 a week (monkeybeachcottage.co.uk).

Burnham Overy Staithe, Norfolk

Burnham Overy Staithe in Norfolk, where you can spot marsh harriers and seals

More of a creek than a cove but no less beautiful for it, this place is a boaters’ paradise. The long tidal range means small vessels which dot the harbour spend much of their time listing on dry mud, but the winding path that cleaves to the creek and heads over the dunes and on to Holkham beach means it’s easy to reach open water by foot if sailing isn’t your thing.

Pack binoculars – marsh harriers swoop across the vast open expanses, as do lapwings, while common and grey seals can often be spotted in the water.

Stay: The Hero, with B&B from £155 a night (theheroburnhamovery.co.uk).

Torrin, Loch Slapin, Skye

Loch Slapin has a beach that's loomed over by Beinn na Caillich to the east and Bla Bheinn across the water to the west

Just north of Torrin, a mountain stream flows out into the eastern reaches of Skye’s spectacular Loch Slapin.

The small beach is loomed over by Beinn na Caillich to the east and Bla Bheinn across the water to the west, with handy parking for those who want to camp or explore the nearby Torrin pools.

The latter are a less crowded and equally beautiful alternative to the wildly popular and frequently overrun pools at Glenbrittle. This is a place to come and feel the vastness of the Scottish countryside, with otters frolicking in the shallows.

Stay: Skye Mountain Lodge has B&B from £60pp a night (skyemountainlodge.co.uk).

Anstey’s Cove, Devon

Hideaways: Anstey’s Cove in Devon is reached after a trek through woodland

Just off the South West Coast Path between Torquay and Babbacombe, this is one of the English Riviera’s finest beaches. Sure it’s shingle rather than sand, but that hardly matters when the water glitters in the summer sun and you’re kicking back in a rented deckchair while enjoying an ice cream from the beachside cafe.

The walk here is spectacular, too, downhill through woodland. This is a beach that rewards those who make a bit more effort when it comes to finding a place to lounge.

Stay: Cary Arms & Spa, on the coast north of Anstey’s Cove, has rooms from £127 a night (caryarms.co.uk).

Blue Pool Bay, Gower

Named after a deep rockpool which appears on the beach at low tide, Blue Pool Bay is arguably the most picturesque of Gower’s beaches. Accessible via a steep footpath or from Broughton beach when the tide is out, the sea here is dramatic, the views of the cliffs making it worth pulling on your walking boots for. The Blue Pool is popular with swimmers but caution is advised, especially when the tide is rising. Likewise, riptides make bathing in the sea dangerous.

The cove disappears at high tide, so check tide times before setting out.

Stay: Coast House, from £75 B&B a night (enjoygower.com/coasthouse).

Porth Trecastell, Anglesey

Known by locals as Cable Bay, after the telephone cables that ran from here to the opposite shore in Ireland, Porth Trecastell is a perfect, sheltered cove and one of the finest in Wales.

It’s popular with families, with ample sand for playing and excellent rockpooling, and surfers and kayakers will also find much to love here thanks to swells from the Irish Sea. Rock climbers will be in their element when low tide reveals excellent routes up the cliff faces.

Take a wander along the western headland on the Anglesey Coast Path and explore the Neolithic burial chamber of Barclodiad y Gawres.

Stay: Sandy Mount House, north of Porth Trecastell, has rooms from £90 a night (sandymounthouse.co.uk).

Browns Bay Beach, County Antrim

Rooms at Ballygally Castle Hotel in County Antrim cost from £114 a night

At the northerly tip of the Islandmagee peninsula in County Antrim, Browns Bay Beach, tucked around a headland and away from the churning waves of the Irish Sea, is a dream spot for swimmers. The waves here don’t tend to get too big and the water quality is excellent, meaning that keen dippers will find much to love.

For those who’d rather stay on dry land, the remote location and views along the coast make it perfect for a short walk. Dogs are allowed, too, with a handy car park making it easily accessible.

Stay: Ballygally Castle Hotel, set in a stunning 17th Century building, has rooms from £114 a night (hastingshotels.com/ballygally-castle).

Jenny’s Cove, Lundy Island

Jenny’s Cove on Lundy (general view of the island above) is named after a merchant ship carrying gold dust and ivory that was wrecked there in 1797

Sail to Lundy from Ilfracombe or Bideford in North Devon between April and October and explore some of the UK’s most wild and rugged coastline. Jenny’s Cove, on the island’s north-west coast, named after a merchant ship carrying gold dust and ivory that was wrecked here in 1797, is its most fascinating beach.

Overlooked by coastal defences thought to have been built to protect against piracy, the cove and its surrounding cliffs are now home to a puffin colony, as well as to razorbills and guillemots.

Stay: Old Light, Lundy’s former lighthouse, is available on a self-catering basis, sleeping four people, from £339 for four nights (landmarktrust.org.uk).

Ardwell Bay, Dumfries and Galloway

A remote beach on the western side of the Rhins of Galloway peninsula, Ardwell Bay faces directly out on to the Irish Sea, with Northern Ireland on the horizon.

Those who venture this far west are rewarded with solitude and a chance to explore the region’s ancient history at Doon Castle Broch, a clifftop fortress said to date back some 4,000 years to the Iron Age.

It’s not uncommon for dolphins to surf on the waves that pile into the sandy bay. Seals are also easy to spot, along with myriad wading birds.

Remote: Part of a preserved Neolithic farmstead on a small island in Orkney

Stay: The spectacular Knockinaam Lodge has rooms from £205 a night (knockinaamlodge.com).

Bay of Moclett, Orkney

Tiny Papa Westray is accessible by the world’s shortest flight – the hop from neighbouring Westray takes just a minute and a half.

Once on this tiny island, the beautiful Bay of Moclett ticks all the boxes for beach-lovers – a sweep of fine white sand with sparkling azure water in summer.

Walkers can undertake a circuit of the entire island, including a visit to the oldest standing house in Northern Europe and St Boniface Kirk, one of only two Orkney churches that survived the Reformation and are still in use.

And visit the Knap of Howar, a preserved Neolithic farmstead.

STAY: Holland Farm, a renovated farmhouse, is available from £300 for seven days – but check local closures due to Covid rules (01857 644250).

Bulcamp Marshes, Suffolk

Where the River Blyth winds its way towards the North Sea at Walberswick lies some of the East of England’s finest marshland. Its southern shores enjoy right to roam access, meaning you can ramble out to the water’s edge where numerous channels, creeks and coves appear between the reeds.

Pack binoculars as the land here is part of the wider Walberswick National Nature Reserve. Loomed over by Blythburgh church, also known as the Cathedral of the Marshes, this is a place ripe for exploration on colder days.

Stay: The Anchor at Walberswick has B&B from £100 a night (anchoratwalberswick.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Maureen Lipman checks in to our travel Q&A

This week actress Maureen Lipman checks in to our travel Q&A.

She talks about the item she can't travel without, her most memorable trip, the food she misses most when she's abroad - and more...

FAVOURITE HOLIDAY SPOT?

The Greek islands. There is something about the colours of the sea and sky, plus the food and it’s relaxing. I’ve made many friends in the northern part of Zakynthos.

HAVE YOU COPED WITH TRAVEL?

I’m not a natural traveller. Guido, my late partner, had been virtually everywhere but I find some elements of travel enervating.

YOUR MOST MEMORABLE TRIP?

About 20 years ago my brother, who was on the board of a Canadian railroad company, fixed a trip across the country for us on a glass-topped train. It was wonderful.

FOOD MISSED MOST OVERSEAS?

Actually, it’s tea.

CAN’T TRAVEL WITHOUT?

Mosquito repellent or lemons with cloves.

WHAT’S YOUR FAVOURITE CITY?

As well as my home city, London, it’s New York and Tel Aviv.

Maureen reveals Tel Aviv in Israel is one of her favourite cities in the world

FAVOURITE REGION IN BRITAIN?

I have a fondness for out-of-season seaside resorts. Guido and I drove around North and West Wales — a dazzling place.

EARLIEST HOLIDAY MEMORY?

Yorkshire coast holidays. As a child, all you need is a bucket, spade and sand.

FIRST TRIP ABROAD?

Rimini with friends aged 16. We were excited beyond belief — and so innocent.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Adventurous days out in the great outdoors.

No one wants to be indoors when the summer sun is shining, and it’s not too late to book some brilliant experiences that will make staycations even more memorable.

A day to remember can begin with a new Breakfast With Red Squirrels experience in the Lake District. After an early start, you’ll join a guide and a small group in a well-concealed RSPB hide near Haweswater reservoir.

New wave: Try the thrilling sport of wind-winging in Hampshire

Open up a specially prepared breakfast picnic box as you look out across mossy woods to spot the endangered creatures. Then take a guided hike to see how local efforts are helping red squirrels to thrive.

The experience is one of more than 70 days out on offer in national parks this summer.

Another is the Fossils, Forage & Feast day on the North York Moors. Group leaders take guests hunting for ammonites, Jurassic fossils, dinosaur footprints and Whitby jet – a gemstone formed from decaying wood that washes up on the town’s beaches.

You’ll then explore hidden coves on the coast near Boggle Hole before scouring rock pools for seaside snacks to cook on a bonfire on the beach at the end of the day. An evening of star-gazing can follow.

Visit nationalparks.uk/experiences for the full list of days out. Prices start at about £30pp.

There’s more adventure on offer in Wales, where den-building, bushcraft and survival skills are taught at Plas Menai, the National Outdoor Centre on the banks of the Menai Strait near Caernarfon. Half-day courses begin at £35.

Other courses for youngsters include mountain-bike skills sessions on dirt tracks and forest trails. Parents and grandparents can relax in the centre’s Coast Cafe or Seaboard Bar while their children head to the hills. There are also plenty of day-long courses for sailors and swimmers. Visit plasmenai.co.uk.

The latest watersports are taught on a lagoon near Calshot in Hampshire, where the New Forest National Park reaches the sea.

Rare: Go red squirrel spotting in the Lake District

Paddle-boarding and kitesurfing are always popular, but this year staff at Nomadic Kitesurf are offering extra sessions to introduce wind-winging.

The new sport has to be seen to be believed – you stand on a surf board that rises on a ‘foil’ a foot or so over the surface of the water as you hold on to an inflatable wing. Small-group or private lessons can get you aloft and racing across the lagoon within a day.

Half-day introductory classes with equipment cost from £120 – go to nomadickitesurf.com.

Back on dry land, the whole family can join forces in a tongue-in-cheek treasure hunt. Researchers and writers with the Treasure Trails group have created hundreds of hunts in towns and villages across the country. Choose from three key themes: playing amateur detective in a light-hearted murder mystery, chasing spies in an international adventure, or solving clues that guide you towards traditional hidden treasure.

The Segway tour around Leeds Castle in Kent takes groups across rolling fields

Sign up to a hunt from £9.99, then download a booklet stuffed with stories and clues and set off on any day you want.

The answers that guide you from point to point may be hidden in plain sight on buildings or landmarks, but there’s a helpline if you’re really stuck on a clue. Learn more at treasuretrails.co.uk.

A visit to Leeds Castle in Kent can be made more adventurous by booking a Segway tour around the perimeter, with plenty of help so everyone is ready to roll.

The half-hour Scenic Tour takes groups across rolling fields while an Adventure Tour goes further afield. It costs from £23 with segwaytours.co.uk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cases in region at highest yet, with over 2,000 cases recorded from July 10-16

Tourism bosses are warning holidaymakers to get tested for Covid before heading to Cornwall because hospitals are filling up and cases are rising in resorts.

The region's council is also asking people to buy and pack Covid testing kits before travelling so they can regularly use them while there.

The latest statistics show Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly have 383 cases per 100,000 people, below the England figure of 525.

But cases in the county are at their highest yet, with over 2,000 cases recorded between July 10 and July 16 - up from the previous record of 1,997.

Visit Cornwall's chief executive is asking visitors to see this holiday season as a 'summer of understanding', while the council is asking visitors to 'respect local communities in holiday hotspots.'

Cornwall Council is also asking people to buy and pack Covid testing kits before travelling so they can regularly use them while there (pictured: the seaside village of St Ives)

A crowded Towan Beach in Newquay, Cornwall, is pictured above as holidaymakers enjoy their summer holiday in the region today

Dark purple regions show where the latest case rate is more than 800 per 100,000 people over a seven-day period, where purple shows a case rate of between 400-799 and dark blue shows a case rate of 200-399. High cases can be seen in the tourist resorts of Padstow and Newquay

Cornwall Council added that as tourist hotspots get busier, they are 'asking everyone to try and keep a distance between people and wear a face covering if a business asks you to as they are protecting their staff as well as you.'

What are visitors being advised to do? Test yourself and your family before setting out and while you are in Cornwall;

Get your jab when offered and make it a priority before you set out on holiday, ideally 14 days before your trip so you have the most protection;

Help local health services by bringing your medication with you and calling your own GP if needed;

Call 111 instead of turning up at a hospital, unless it's a life-threatening emergency as hospitals are working at full capacity;

Be aware of the anxiety some may be feeling as they emerge from restrictions;

Respect those who choose to wear masks;

People with symptoms advised to get a PCR test and for those without symptoms to have a lateral flow test twice a week. Advertisement

Rachel Wigglesworth, director of public health for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, said: 'We're glad that so many people want to come and spend time in our beautiful county, but we ask that you are respectful and help us to keep the virus under control.

'Please enjoy your holiday and make wonderful memories here because it's a special place - but remember that our local communities will have to live with the consequences if case numbers increase.

'Businesses might still have reduced numbers inside a venue or ask you to wear a face- covering in small, enclosed spaces. And we ask that you also wear a face-covering using our public transport.'

Malcolm Bell, Chief Executive of Visit Cornwall, added: 'We ask and hope that everyone on a day trip within Cornwall and the wider region, as well as our staying visitors we see this holiday season as a 'Summer of Understanding..'

'We all need to understand that the virus will have a great summer of spreading infection if we allow it to, by not sticking to the guidelines.

'The virus will also cause strains on our public and health services, as well as problems when staff must self-isolate in hospitality, so please be on your guard and be patient and understanding when disruptions happen - no one is responsible it is just life in the ongoing pandemic crisis.

'Please enjoy a great break or holiday, be on your guard and be patient and understanding.'

It follows a top expert claiming last month that Covid infections were rising in Cornwall because of the thousands of Britons who flocked to the coast for a staycation over half-term.

Visit Cornwall's chief executive Malcolm Bell (pictured above) is asking visitors to see this holiday season as a 'summer of understanding'

Cases in the county are at their highest yet, with over 2,000 cases recorded between July 10 and July 16 - up from the previous record of 1,997 (pictured: Fistral Beach in Newquay)

Professor Tim Spector, who runs the country's largest symptom-tracking study, suggested No10's strict foreign travel rules had led to increased mixing and spreading in the seaside county.

Government figures at the time showed that 147.8 people per 100,000 tested positive for the virus in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly in the week leading up to June 18 — up from 60.7 in the previous seven-day spell.

Professor Spector said Cornwall's climbing infection rates may also be due to the three-day G7 summit earlier this month, which saw crowds gather to welcome the leaders of world's richest nations.

He called for holidaymakers to stay vigilant when enjoying staycations this summer to ensure outbreaks are kept under control.

Boris Johnson pictured taking part in a press conference on the final day of the G7 summit in Carbis Bay, Cornwall, on June 13

US President Joe Biden and First Lady Jill Biden arrive for the G7 meeting at Carbis Bay Hotel in St Ives, Cornwall, on June 11

Professor Spector said: 'Data this week shows rates in former hotspots, such as Scotland and the North West of England, continuing to plateau.

'At the same time, top UK holiday destinations like Cornwall are emerging as new areas with rapidly increasing cases.

'I think this is down to a number of factors, including the sudden influx of holidaymakers over half term, as well as the recent G7 summit and a previously unexposed local population.

'We need to remain vigilant of these UK holiday destinations as summer holidays approach, and ensure that we minimise outbreaks by following government guidelines.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

When it comes to wildlife photography, Rahul Singh knows what he's doing. From a tiny bird using a flower petal as her bathtub to a magnificent egret caught mid-landing and a bunch of cute monkeys sitting in a tree — Singh has captured some of nature's most incredible moments. Click through to see some of his amazing photos...

Singh has captured hundreds of photographs around his home in Jalpaiguri, India over the past few years. But snapping this tiny bird cooling off in a flower petal full of water was a 'once-in-a-lifetime moment' for him.

'I visited a place where there were bushes of these ornamental bananas to take photos of sunbirds sucking nectar from it,' Singh told The Dodo. 'Everything was going as usual when, suddenly, I was shocked that the crimson sunbird started taking a bath in the water stored in the banana flower petal.'

He quickly took out his camera and started snapping the beautiful moment. Sharing his photographs on Instagram, Singh wrote: 'In India, the Autumn days are hot and humid but the nights are pleasant. In the morning, dew drops are found on the edge of grass, flower petals and sometimes water is stored in the flower petals.'

He continued: 'A Crimson Sunbird female refreshing herself with the water which is stored in the petal of an ornamental banana flower as if nature creates a floral bath tub for her.'

'I was literally stunned to see this unusual behavior,' Singh said. 'I kept my camera's shutter button pressed as the bird took her bath.'

'It’s amazing how nature can surprise us,' the photographer told The Dodo.

Bird photography is a true passion for Singh who also snapped this mesmerizing shot of a hungry purple sunbird snacking on a flower. You can distinguish a male from a female sunbird from the bird's metallic blue feathers and maroon chest.

Pictured: A female purple sunbird enjoying an afternoon treat. Female sunbirds usually have an olive back and yellow stomach, as seen here.

Singh zoomed in extremely close to get the detail in this chestnut tailed starling's wide eye. The bird is seen here sitting on a stunningly bright coral flower.

It's not just small birds that catch Singh's eye. This photograph shows a common hawk cuckoo glaring back at his camera.

Singh captured an egret landing in water — and its magnificent white wingspan — in this photograph. The bird was most likely hunting or coming home to rest after a flight as they usually hang around marshes.

This photograph captures a pair of blue tailed bee eaters. The richly colored birds usually live along the water, but look distracted by the nearby snapper in this picture.

Another Singh photograph shows a green bee-eater bird in all its glory — showing off its fabulous coloring and wingspan.

This shot shows an incredibly beautiful oriental white-eye bird gracefully perched on a tree branch. This type of bird is generally only found on the Indian subcontinent.

According to the photographer, this shot shows a 'common shelduck captured at Gajoldoba wetlands'.

Singh captions this photo: 'Close up of Indian peafowl'.

And while Singh has captured his fair share of incredible feathered photos, his other animal shots are just as stunning. He captured this photo: 'Gray langur posed as if it was doing "Baddha Konasana",' more commonly known as butterfly pose.

Another shot shows a mother and child gray langur monkey sitting in a tree.

Singh captured this photo: 'The greater one horned rhinoceros'!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Camping has come to the rescue of the great British summer holiday as thousands of new pitches have sprung up in ‘pop-up’ sites across the country. And the good news is that there are still plenty of spaces free this July and August.

‘You can’t magic up more self-catering cottages and hotel rooms but with camping we’ve got so many amazing countryside locations that we’re able to flex up,’ says Jonathan Knight, of camping website Cool Camping.

It has added 5,000 new pitches to its books in the past few months, and only 60 per cent of its camping and glamping sites are full in August. It’s a story echoed by other camping operators, with Pitchup reporting that it added more than 1,000 new campsites to its books in 2021.

Save our summer! Camping website Cool Camping has added 5,000 new pitches to its books in the past few months

It’s all down to changes in the law brought in last year which doubled the length of time temporary sites can be pitched – from 28 to 56 days. Now, from diversifying farmers setting up a no-frills site in a spare field to country estates which team up with professional companies to provide something more elaborate, everyone’s getting in on the act.

Glamping aficionados Canopy and Stars have introduced Camp Out 2021, bringing bell tents to 12 tranquil destinations across the UK. There’s still peak summer availability at a collaboration with Oliver Bonas on Devon’s Flete Estate. Six pop-up bell tents have been fashionably dressed with furniture and accessories from the lifestyle store, and a bell tent for two costs from £90 per night (canopyandstars.co.uk).

Knight explains that the best summer availability is for holidaymakers prepared to be flexible – either by considering less obvious destinations or by travelling during the week rather than at weekends.

Luxury on site: A coffee cart at Purple Badger Camping, which is located on the borders of Rutland and Leicestershire

Purple Badger Camping, on the borders of Rutland and Leicestershire, is less than ten miles from Leicester city centre but surrounded by woodland and wildlife, with two idyllic fishing lakes. There are nine spacious camping pitches and a three-night stay costs from £75 for a pitch for up to five people (coolcamping.co.uk).

New site Plum Camping at White House Farm is set near a secluded fruit orchard on the outskirts of Norwich and perfect for exploring the Broads and rural Norfolk. A three-night stay starts from £144 for a grass pitch for up to six, or £288 for a bell tent (coolcamping.co.uk).

Woodfrys Farm is set on a 25-acre smallholding within walking distance of the picturesque Dorset town of Shaftesbury. It’s a 40-minute drive to the Jurassic Coast, but with pitches overlooking a lake and a clear chalk stream that’s ideal for paddling, why leave the campsite at all? A week’s stay is from £269 for a pitch for up to six (coolcamping.co.uk).

A bell tent at Cloud Nine Glamping, which is coming to Dorset, Norfolk and the Cotswolds this summer

The team behind Cornwall’s Boardmasters festival have set up Cloud Nine Glamping and their sites offer an enticing mix of luxurious furnished bell tents, a long list of family-friendly activities, and top-notch food and drink. Their site in the Cotswolds still has good availability for its opening fortnight from July 19, with prices from £107 per family, per night (cloudnineglamping.com).

Kymani, new for this year and also founded by festival organisers, includes seven bijou campsites. They still have midweek August availability at their sites at Godstone, Surrey, and Charlton Park, Wiltshire, from £100 per person per night (kymanigetaways.com).

Wild Canvas Camping, on the banks of the River Great Ouse in the grounds of the Turvey House Estate in Bedfordshire, is a pop-up of tents from the organisers of the Tipi Field at Glastonbury. For August only it will offer local food, a bar, family-friendly workshops, a wellbeing yurt and DJ. A three-night stay is from £180 for a pitch for up to eight, or £480 for a furnished teepee sleeping up to six (coolcamping.co.uk).

Pooch perfect: Most campsites will welcome well-behaved family pets

Those who prefer to (whisper this) rough it might also find more availability in scenic locations. New pop-up campsite Suffolk Wild Camping, in Woodbridge, offers basic loos and there are no showers, but what it lacks in facilities it more than makes up for with its atmospheric location on the flatlands around the River Debden.

Three nights costs from £105 for a pitch for up to six (coolcamping.co.uk).

Set on a working farm, Stitchpool Camping, near South Molton on the edge of Exmoor in Devon, has added capacity and upgraded some facilities. There’s plenty of summer availability and pitches are from a bargain £18 per night, with each pitch allowing up to 12 people (pitchup.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Ball checks in to our travel Q&A

This week singer and actor Michael Ball checks in to our travel Q&A.

He talks about a holiday to Cornwall at the age of five, his first trip abroad to Sardinia, why St Lucia is his dream destination - and more...

EARLIEST HOLIDAY MEMORY?

When I was about five, my parents took my brother and me for a bucket-and-spade holiday in Newquay, Cornwall. My dad even hired a surfboard and tried his best with it, despite there being no waves during our stay.

FIRST TRIP ABROAD?

Sardinia about 1970. We stayed at the newly opened Forte Village and had a fantastic time. Everything was an exciting experience for me, including getting on the plane and being rewarded with the window seat. We climbed to reach a hilltop temple and spent time on the glorious beaches. Brilliant.

FAVOURITE FOREIGN DESTINATION?

Cathy [Michael's partner] and I love Majorca and have been visiting for the past five years, other than 2020. We discovered a wonderful villa in Port d'Andratx. It seems greener than the rest of Spain and is so diverse. I love the people, food, beaches and villages.

STRANGEST THING YOU'VE EATEN WHILE TRAVELLING?

In Shanghai, I visited a traditional Chinese restaurant and ate bullfrog — it was disgusting.

WHAT'S YOUR DREAM HOLIDAY?

Cathy and I are beach people. We'd stay in a villa with all the facilities of a hotel without a cloud in the sky. You can't beat St Lucia. In 2019 we stayed at Sugar Beach and that was the perfect dream holiday.

Michael once ate a bullfrog - and said it was 'disgusting'

Michael says his dream destination is St Lucia. He went there in 2019 with his wife, Cathy

WHAT CAN'T YOU BE WITHOUT?

My Kindle. I've been known to read a book on it every two days.

EVER HAD A SCARY FLIGHT?

To welcome in the new millennium, I sang in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and stayed on Pangkor Laut Island. We had to fly back to the international airport for the trip home, but the plane used must have been as old as the hills. A storm was approaching but the pilot decided to fly and it was terrifying.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Holiday Guru is always on hand to answer your questions.

This week he steps in to help a reader who isn't internet savvy - and wants to know how he can tackle the necessary travel forms for a trip abroad.

Q. I am a senior citizen without a smartphone, so could someone please tell me how I can travel abroad again. The Government’s passenger locator form has to be filled in online two days before returning to the UK. I feel it is most unfair on older travellers like me who are not computer savvy.

Robert Hall, Nottingham.

The Guru helps a reader who isn't internet savvy - and wants to know how he can tackle the necessary travel forms for a trip abroad

A. We agree, but the Government says that travel during the pandemic requires this procedure. Best to explain to your hotel and arrange use of a computer and for the form to be printed. Most hotels should oblige. An internet cafe/business centre is an alternative. Then show the print-out to border and airline officials.

Q. My husband tested Covid positive on July 15 and completed his isolation. We are due to travel to Greece on August 16, but he has been informed by the NHS Test and Trace that he is exempt from a PCR test for 90 days as he could show a false positive result. If this is so, might he produce a false positive for the antigen/lateral flow test required before returning to the UK from Greece?

Judith Maddran, via email.

A. Such a result is highly unlikely. However, were it to occur, you are advised to take a second test to check. If this is the same, contact the British Embassy in Athens to explain your predicament (0030 210 7272600). Given your husband will have an NHS ‘proof of recovery’ letter, he should be able to fly back. The British Embassy can advise further.

Before returning, he will also need to purchase PCR tests for his return to the UK, despite being technically exempt. This is an anomaly that a Department for Transport spokesman, with refreshing honesty, admits ‘doesn’t make a lot of sense’.

Q. Were Spain and other countries to be suddenly put on the ‘red list’, requiring a stay in a quarantine hotel on return, would there be enough such hotels to cope? I fly to Majorca from Bristol soon and cannot even find a designated quarantine hotel near Bristol Airport, just in case the worst happens.

Amanda Thomas, Saltash, Cornwall.

A. The good news is that the Government said this week that Spain is unlikely to go on the ‘red list’ any time soon. For quarantine hotels see ‘Booking and staying in a quarantine hotel if you’ve been in a red list country’ at gov.uk — for queries call 020 7429 9732.

Q. I have a holiday booked to Cuba in October with Virgin Holidays. It is on the ‘red list’. Can I cancel now and get a refund — or swap to another holiday?

Cheryl Taylor, via email.

One reader wants to know her options after booking a holiday to red-list Cuba

A. Either wait until Virgin Holidays cancels closer to the departure date, when a refund will be forthcoming, or change your holiday to another location/date for free.

See ‘Your holiday is in safe hands’ at virginholidays.co.uk. The consumer group Which? has just given Virgin Holidays — and 41 other travel companies — the thumbs up for its flexible booking arrangements (see ‘Holiday Checker’ at which.co.uk).

WE’RE HERE TO HELP

If you need advice, the Holiday Guru is here. Email holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Holiday Guru is always on hand to answer your questions.

This week he turns his attention to the extremely confusing world of Covid travel tests...

Q. My 18-year-old daughter has had one jab and has proof of recent recovery from Covid on her NHS app. Greece will accept this, but can she also re-enter the UK without quarantine?

Catherine, via email.

NHS tests cannot be used for foreign travel purposes. You will have to pay for one

A. No. Exemption from quarantine on return from ‘amber’ countries such as Greece is dependent on having two jabs if you are over 18.

See the Greek entry requirements page and latest Government travel ‘traffic light system’ rules, both at gov.uk — for Scotland (gov.scot), for Wales (gov.wales).

Q. My wife and I are going to Tenerife and are fully jabbed. Please could you advise on the standard of lateral flow/antigen tests needed prior to returning?

Lee Darrah, via email.

A. Exact standards are complicated and explained at ‘Coronavirus testing before you travel’ on gov.uk. To keep things simple, two options are available: either book a lateral flow test to take with you from an officially recognised UK supplier such as Qured.com (£39) or ask your hotel, rep or a local pharmacy for a trusted test centre that meets ‘fit to fly’ standards. Such tests are usually about £26.

Q. On return from Spain, can I take a free NHS PCR test?

Stephen Macqueen, via email.

A. No. NHS tests cannot be used for foreign travel purposes. You will have to pay for one.

Q. I am travelling to Northern Ireland soon. Do double-jabbed visitors from England require tests?

Paul Donald, Essex

A. You are advised to take a lateral flow test (NHS tests are OK here) before travel, then on day two and day eight of being in Northern Ireland. On return, the same procedure is advised. Note that this is merely a recommendation not a rule. See ‘Coronavirus: travelling within the Common Travel Area’ at nidirect.gov.uk.

If you have two jabs you can travel to any ‘green’, ‘green watchlist’ or ‘amber’ country

Q. It’s hard to navigate government websites about what tests I need to travel. I’m double jabbed. Help!

Delia Worth, via email.

A. If you have two jabs you can travel to any ‘green’, ‘green watchlist’ or ‘amber’ country — with the UK government requiring that you take a lateral flow/antigen test 72 hours before returning home, and a PCR test on return by day two. However, some countries may have test requirements and this varies country by country. You must check ‘entry requirements’ for your destination at gov.uk.

Q. I have booked a holiday in Crete. Can I complete my return Passenger Locator Form before I go?

Jenny Pritchard, via email.

A. Unfortunately not. Forms must be submitted in the 48 hours before arrival in the UK. Best to find somewhere to arrange a print-out in Crete.

WE’RE HERE TO HELP

If you need advice, the Holiday Guru is here. Email holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Somerset Maugham, somewhat bitterly, once described Monaco as a sunny place for shady people. While it is true that it is used as a tax haven by oligarchs and tycoons, the description is unfair.

Monaco is a constitutional monarchy that has been run on and off for over 700 years by the House of Grimaldi, from its family seat of the Grimaldi Palace.

This once sleepy Principality was transformed in the late 1850s when the Blanc family bought the licence to build a casino and persuaded Prince Charles III to rename a downmarket seaside area known as Les Spelegures (Den of Thieves) to Monte Carlo (Mount Charles). By 1869, the casino was making so much money that the Principality could afford to abolish income tax for residents.

Somerset Maugham, somewhat bitterly, once described Monaco as a sunny place for shady people. But Frank Mannion says that description is unfair

Monaco's photogenic Old Town, which is perched on a rocky hill and home to the Grimaldi family’s palace

Our first destination is the luxurious five-star, Hotel Hermitage Monte-Carlo, in a fabulous location, 200 yards from Casino Square.

This elegant hotel, designed in the Belle Epoque style, is in immaculate condition and is a wonderful, and discreet, place to stay. Hotel guests have access to the amazing 6,600m sq (71,041sq ft) Thermes Marins Monte-Carlo spa, complete with a heated indoor pool (which we had all to ourselves) and a fabulous view of the sea.

Our beautiful suite, with its muted colour design and evocative wallpaper panels, Louis XV-style furniture and marbled bathrooms, is spacious and has a wonderful view of the harbour and the Palace of Monaco.

At night the harbour twinkles with the lights and reflections of the superyachts. Who knew that the Grimaldi Palace basks in a nocturnal orange glow?

The sensational lobby inside the luxurious five-star Hotel Hermitage Monte-Carlo, which is in a fabulous location, 200 yards from Casino Square

One of the stunning suites at Hotel Hermitage Monte-Carlo. Frank says his accommodation was beautiful, spacious and had a wonderful view of the harbour and the Palace of Monaco

Frank says the Hotel Hermitage Monte-Carlo 'is in immaculate condition and is a wonderful, and discreet, place to stay'. Pictured is a terrace in one of the junior suites

Hotel Hermitage Monte-Carlo guests have access to the Thermes Marins Monte-Carlo spa (pictured)

The Thermes Marins Monte-Carlo spa covers 6,600m sq (71,041sq ft) and has an outdoor hot tub

Breakfast at the Hermitage is in the magnificent Winter Garden set under a dreamy cupola by Gustav Eiffel.

Casino Square, a two-minute walk away, has never looked more captivating, having undergone a multi-million-pound renovation. It is now mostly pedestrianised allowing for safer selfies to be taken in front of the famous casino - the Casino de Monte-Carlo. It is possible to buy tickets to visit it, although it is ironic that citizens of Monaco are not legally allowed to gamble there.

Casino Square is 'carparazzi' heaven with Lamborghinis and customised sports cars jockeying for pole position outside the coveted parking spots outside the casino.

Casino Square, Frank says, is 'carparazzi' heaven, with Lamborghinis and customised sports cars jockeying for pole position for the coveted parking spots at the front of the Casino de Monte-Carlo

It is possible to buy tickets to visit the casino, pictured, although it is ironic that citizens of Monaco are not legally allowed to gamble there

All week the Hermitage Hotel was a hive of activity as the scene of the Monaco Auction Week, where classic cars and watches, rare jewellery and a collection of Hermes handbags were auctioned in the ballroom.

There were elegantly dressed high rollers raising their paddle and being outbid by unseen telephone bidders. A 1955 Mercedes-Benz 300 SL Gullwing sold for over €1.4m (£1.2m/$1.65m). The most sought-after item was the Birkin 30 Nil Bleu Jean crocodile handbag. Despite being 17 years old and its handles having a slight discolouration, it sold for a whopping €65,000 (£55,000/$76,000), prompting deep sighs in the room from the unlucky bidders.

The immortal words of Lady Bracknell from Oscar Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest sprung to mind: 'A Handbag? For €65,000? Some people can resist everything except temptation.'

Oscar Wilde had visited fin de siècle Monaco as a friend of the first American Princess of Monaco, Princess Alice. She stood by Wilde during his trial and imprisonment, and Wilde dedicated one of the fairytales in his A House of Pomegranates to 'H.S.H. Alice, the Princess of Monaco'.

Alice was married to Prince Albert I who was a keen explorer and oceanographer. The Prince established the truly magnificent Oceanographic Museum of Monaco in 1910. Kids will love it, with over 6,000 specimens on display, including Grimaldichthys profundissimus long thought to be the deepest-living fish in the ocean. Princess Alice is credited with catching the first specimen, near the Cape Verde Islands using a fish trap Prince Albert invented.

The 'magnificent' Oceanographic Museum of Monaco, which was established by Prince Albert I, a keen explorer

The Museum also features a shark lagoon and aquariums, where you can come face to face with piranhas, seahorses, clownfish and stonefish with their deadly spines, and marvel at curious sea turtles.

Prince Albert I passed his love of the ocean to his great-great-grandson, Prince Albert II, the current Sovereign Prince of Monaco, who is passionate about ocean conservation and hosts an annual Monte-Carlo Gala for the Global Ocean. In 2017, he presented an award to that well-known eco-warrior, Leonardo DiCaprio, in the beautifully ornate Salle Garnier, known as the jewel of the Casino de Monte-Carlo (the Monte-Carlo Opera House now hosts several performances there each year, with plenty of reasonably priced tickets available in the winter season).

Prince Albert’s wife, Princess Charlene, a former Olympic swimmer, is also a water lover. I was astonished to see her in the sea racing state-of-the-art water bikes with an unlikely companion – mixed martial arts champion Conor McGregor, with whom she is embarking on a 180km (111-mile) voyage next month to raise awareness for water safety in aid of the Princess Charlene of Monaco Foundation.

The best restaurant for a family lunch is Le Grill, perched on the eighth-floor terrace of the newly refurbished Hotel de Paris Monte-Carlo.

Le Grill restaurant, pictured, has a panoramic view of the Mediterranean from its eighth-floor terrace. It is in the newly refurbished Hotel de Paris Monte-Carlo

The panoramic view from the terrace of the Mediterranean adds to the exhilarating sensory experience. Franck Cerruti, the talented chef, works with the treasures provided by the abundant natural habitat of the Riviera.

This is best exemplified by the aptly named Menu Escapade Romantique at €65 (£55) per person - dishes include a mouth-watering Andalusian gazpacho with lightly cooked San Remo Gamberoni and duck breast cooked in a fireplace, roasted peaches and 'dolce forte' sauce, finished off by mountain blueberries crumble or the marvellous Hotel De Paris traditional chocolate souffle.

To walk off lunch, head to the beguiling Princess Grace Rose Garden.

Those feeling more intrepid should head for Fort Antoine, an 18th-century military fortress and watchtower with a bewitching promontory position overlooking the bay.

In the summer season, it transforms into an open-air theatre space, and even though tickets are free, they need to be booked online in advance. The Fort itself was heavily damaged in World War II but was later rebuilt.

Fort Antoine, an 18th-century military fortress and watchtower, which Frank says has a 'bewitching promontory position overlooking the bay'

Although Monaco was officially neutral in the war, it was twice occupied by the Italian Army, but the Germans drove them out after the fall of Mussolini. After the Allies liberated the Principality in September 1944, the future Prince Rainier III joined the French Army and took part in the liberation of Alsace, and was awarded the American Bronze Star Medal for his bravery.

In 1955 the Hollywood movie star, Grace Kelly, arrived in the south of France for the premiere of The Country Girl (for which she later won an Oscar). The late Olivia de Havilland played a real-life match-maker, setting up Grace Kelly and Prince Rainier III on a date.

There are some memorable black-and-white photos of their first date, with an official photographer in tow as the Prince showed Grace around the Palace and his private zoo in the Palace gardens, while a tiger looks on curiously at the glamorous new arriviste.

The couple married the following year, with Kelly becoming Her Serene Highness Princess Grace of Monaco. The 'wedding of the century' took place at the 19th century St Nicholas Cathedral in April 1956, attended by Cary Grant, Ava Gardner, Gloria Swanson and Aristotle Onassis, and watched by 30million around the globe. The marriage made the Principality world famous.

The majestic 19th-century St Nicholas Cathedral, where Grace Kelly became Her Serene Highness Princess Grace of Monaco when she wed Prince Rainier III

The Cathedral, with its majestic white marble altar, is worth a visit. It is also the final resting place of Prince Rainier III and Princess Grace.

Avenue Princess Grace, in the nearby Larvotto district, is the most expensive street in the world, located naturally enough in the most expensive ward in the Principality, where average apartment prices are $16m (£11.5m/€13.5million).

Monaco consistently ranks number one in the world for millionaire density, with over 30 per cent of residents having a net worth of over £1million, with several members of the mythical Three Commas Club, an exclusive 'club' reserved solely for those with a net worth in the billions.

But it’s also the location of the Principality’s most popular sandy beach - Larvotto Beach. Most importantly, it has free public access. If you fancy a day trip to Monaco, just bring your own towel, or you can hire a parasol and sunlounger from the beach club.

Monaco's most popular sandy beach - Larvotto Beach - which has free public access and proximity to good eateries

There are plenty of good eateries nearby including Mozza on Rue du Portier for good Italian dishes in an authentic trattoria with marble tables and red leather seats, and Maya Jah, a buzzy eatery that offers thrilling Mediterranean cuisine with oriental flavours, and is a sister restaurant to the equally excellent and popular Thai/Japanese restaurant Maya Bay, in the nearby Rocabella building.

Maya Jah is a stylishly designed restaurant, with a lively terrace and with a €22 three-course set lunch menu offers value for money.

At night, it comes into its own with a DJ setting the scene for a trendy crowd to experience a memorable meal with show-stopping cocktails and fabulous dishes where you are whisked off to the Orient without ever having to leave the Mediterranean.

Mozza restaurant on Rue du Portier, which Frank says is for good Italian dishes in 'an authentic trattoria with marble tables and red leather seats'

The Maya Jah restaurant (pictured) serves up show-stopping cocktails and fabulous dishes 'where you are whisked off to the Orient without ever having to leave the Mediterranean', says Frank

In walking distance of Larvotto Beach and Casino Square is The Metropole Monte-Carlo Restaurant, in a fabulous dining room designed by Jacques Garcia and a pretty tree-lined terrace offering a refreshing Mediterranean breeze.

This mise-en-scene complements an inventive menu such as a starter of green beans 'al dente' in a mimosa salad with Solange Imperial caviar, or a sardine with green asparagus and lemon confit from nearby Menton, followed by blue lobster spaghetti with a spicy and coral emulsion.

This is French haute cuisine at its finest and is enhanced by impeccable and friendly service and a tempting selection of desserts from its famous trolley that will drive younger members at the table wild with excitement.

However, you'll need to be patient if you want to eat there as it's currently closed due to renovation work and won't reopen until April 2022.

For the final two nights, we move just beyond the eastern border of the Principality to the Green Globe-certified Monte-Carlo Beach hotel in the enclave of Roquebrune-Cap-Martin. This is a truly delightful five-star resort hotel on the sea with a private beach. It features two outstanding restaurants – the more casual Le Deck combines delicious sea-food dishes, friendly service and an unexpectedly buzzing scene that is as fun as Club 55 in St Tropez.

The Monte Carlo Beach hotel, pictured, is a five-star property by the sea with a private beach

Frank says that Le Deck restaurant, pictured, at the Monte-Carlo Beach hotel 'combines delicious sea-food dishes, friendly service and an unexpectedly buzzing scene that is as fun as Club 55 in St Tropez'

Monte-Carlo Beach hotel's Elsa eatery is the first organic Michelin-starred restaurant, with 'stupendous' views of the sea

Elsa, on a terrace with a stupendous view of the sea, is the first organic Michelin-starred restaurant. It alone is worth travelling to, just to sample the irresistible cooking of the charming chef, Benoit Witz.

And the breakfast? The best in the Cote D’Azur, with the acai and berry porridge being particularly delicious.

Our modern suite is beautifully designed with an ocean view, a terrace to watch the spectacular sunsets, and steps to take us directly to the sea or the Olympic-sized swimming pool, complete with its dual-level diving boards.

Just down the road from the hotel is the newly reopened Cap Moderne site, featuring Le Corbusier’s wonderful Cabanon holiday cabin and the neighbouring E-1027, the influential villa built by Eileen Gray that's perched on the Cap-Martin cliff face. The villa had been graffitied by Le Corbusier (much to Gray’s chagrin) and used for target practice by the Nazis, but it has now been lovingly restored and it is an architectural joy to behold.

Even though Monaco is the second smallest state (after the Vatican), measuring the size of Hyde Park, it is also the most densely populated country in the world, albeit with only 38,000 inhabitants. The busy streets in and around Casino Square seem like a distant memory in this stunning seaside oasis of calm.

Cap Moderne features Le Corbusier’s Cabanon holiday cabin and E-1027, the influential cliff-face villa built by Eileen Gray (pictured)

The enchanting hilltop village of Eze, which is known for its picturesque narrow cobbled streets

Until the mid-19th century, the Principality of Monaco was much larger and bordered the village of Eze, to the west, and the seaside town of Menton, to the east. Both are within easy reach of Monaco.

Eze is an enchanting hilltop village that offers breathtaking views of the sea and hills below. The Exotic Garden, with its spectacular collection of cacti, received the Royal imprimatur with a visit from known horticulturalist Prince Charles.

In the summer heat, the picturesque narrow cobbled streets of Eze, with its charming boutiques, offer some welcome shade.

It is an old truism that the better the view from a restaurant, the worse the food will be. Les Remparts at Chateau de la Chevre d’Or, one of the best restaurants in the Cote D’Azur, disproves that theory. In the summer of 2019 Barack and Michelle Obama were hosted there by Eze resident Bono of U2, where they feasted on the likes of octopus as a bolognese sauce, potato cream and smoked paprika and confit lamb shoulder, eggplant caviar moutabal-style and raita yoghurt.

Les Remparts restaurant at Chateau de la Chevre d’Or - one of the best restaurants in the Cote D’Azur

Barack and Michelle Obama enjoyed lunch with U2's Bono at Chateau de la Chevre d’Or in 2019 (pictured)

Inside the two-Michelin-starred La Chèvre d’Or Gourmet Restaurant at Chateau de la Chevre d’Or

Guests can enjoy vintage Champagnes as well as couture pastries at Chateau de la Chevre d’Or's bar, pictured

Walt Disney was a frequent visitor to Eze and was friendly with the owner of La Chevre d’Or and an apocryphal story goes that Walt dreamed up the Magic Kingdom while staying there. Pictured is the hotel's pool

The chef’s signature dessert is his take on a Menton lemon – simply mouth-watering. Walt Disney was a frequent visitor to Eze and was friendly with the owner of La Chevre d’Or and an apocryphal story goes that Walt dreamed up the Magic Kingdom while staying there.

It is not hard to imagine, since Eze feels like a fairyland of make-believe. If you still haven’t found what you’re looking for, the nearby and less pricey Les Terrasses D’Eze is a lovely family-friendly four-star hotel, whose piece de resistance is an infinity pool and a dreamy restaurant terrace, both of which have a sensational view of the Mediterranean below.

Menton, famous for its springtime Lemon Festival, is only a kilometre from the border with Italy. It was a favourite holiday spot of Queen Victoria, and when she started visiting the south of France in the 1880s, it went from being a place where elderly British aristocrats went to convalesce to being a fashionable holiday destination.

The piece de resistance at Les Terrasses D’Eze, a lovely family-friendly four-star hotel, is its infinity pool, pictured

The dreamy restaurant at Les Terrasses D’Eze, which has a terrace with a sensational view of the Mediterranean below

In fact, Queen Victoria described it in her diary as 'beloved and beautiful Menton'. She stayed at the cosy Chalet des Rosiers. For those seeking a piece of Victoriana, the chalet is now available to rent on Airbnb. It is worth doing a day trip from Monaco, just to see the delightful Marriage Registry designed by Jean Cocteau, with his signature flamboyant murals, and the Jean Cocteau Museum, showcasing the work of this incredible polymath, displaying some of his ceramics and artworks, including his Grecian-style label for the 1947 vintage of Mouton Rothschild.

The elderly Queen Victoria wasn’t so keen on Monaco and reputedly drew the curtains of her carriage when passing through this supposed den of iniquity on her way to Cap Ferrat, 14km from Monaco to the west. If only Queen Victoria had lived long enough to enjoy the best and most beautiful hotel in the French Riviera, Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat.

Originally opened in 1908, the Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat oozes movie-star glamour from the moment the entrance gates open. It is no wonder that it has enchanted the likes of Elizabeth Taylor, Diana Ross and Winston Churchill. Gustav Eiffel designed the soothing Rotonda overlooking the tropical garden and the dramatic funicular taking guests down to the famous cliff-top heated salt-water pool and fabulous poolside restaurant, Club Dauphin, feels like something out of a Bond movie.

The Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat, which Frank says is the best and most beautiful hotel on the French Riviera

Originally opened in 1908, the Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat oozes movie-star glamour from the moment the entrance gates open, says Frank

For those looking for a deeper summer tan, this is the place to go as the cape is known as 'Little Africa', with the average temperature a couple of degrees higher than the rest of the coast.

The pool is large and divine, and if it all looks refreshingly familiar, it’s probably because of its scene-stealing role in Dirty Rotten Scoundrels starring Michael Caine.

The suites and bathrooms are exquisite and have thoughtful touches like a water-proof pillow to rest your weary head on in the bathtub. Yoric Tieche creates culinary masterpieces at the Michelin-star restaurant Le Cap, in the most romantic setting imaginable. Heavenly desserts are conceived by Florent Margaillan, the imaginative executive pastry chef (and a former Dessert Champion of France), while the team at the impressive Spa give the best massages.

Frank describes the suites and bathrooms at the Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat as 'exquisite'

For those looking for a deeper summer tan, Frank says Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat, pictured, is the place to go as the cape is known as 'Little Africa', with the average temperature a couple of degrees higher than the rest of the coast

A dramatic funicular takes guests down to the cliff-top heated salt-water pool and poolside restaurant, Club Dauphin

Frank says of the service at Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat: 'Every guest is made to feel like an Oscar-winning movie star'

To crown it all, the hotel has the most elegant breakfast buffet on the Cote D’Azur. The helpful and friendly staff make every guest feel like an Oscar-winning movie star – no surprise that the French Government awarded it the coveted 'Palace' distinction for superseding the five-star category.

It's one of many gems on the glittering French Riviera, with Monaco an ever-sparkling pink diamond - its beaches are pristine, crime is practically non-existent and you can follow in the footsteps of James Bond if you visit. Never Say Never Again and Goldeneye were both filmed in the sumptuous surroundings of the Salle Europe in the Casino of Monaco.

A trip to the city-state is bound to leave you stirred, not shaken.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Listening to the sound of waves, eating fish and chips and watching the world go by are Britons' favourite things to do beside the seaside, according to a recent survey.

In total, 66 per cent of UK adults polled named listening to the sound of waves as their top coastal pastime.

A further 62 per cent said they enjoy tucking into fish and chips and 61 per cent said they like watching the world go by best.

Two youngsters enjoy fish and chips from Giacopazzi’s in Eyemouth

Meanwhile, 57 per cent of those quizzed in the YouGov poll, commissioned by VisitScotland, can't resist a seashore ice cream, and a further 57 per cent like strolling the boardwalk.

The survey, with a sample size of 2,103, also revealed that 98 per cent of UK adults have been to the seaside and, despite the UK's unpredictable weather, 38 per cent like to sunbathe on the beach.

Other recent findings by VisitScotland show that almost two-thirds of people are keen to revisit places in Scotland they haven't been to for years. Some are doing so in a different way, either by trying new activities such as paddle-boarding and canoeing, or by staying in different accommodation, such as a glampsite or a luxury hotel.

Eating ice cream is one of the nation's favourite seaside pleasures, according to a new survey

VisitScotland is encouraging people to take a holiday at the seaside this year to help the tourism industry recover from the impact of the pandemic.

Suggested trip locations include Nairn, 'a relaxing and friendly seaside resort' in the Scottish Highlands; Arbroath in Angus, with its historic harbour; Irvine, with its award-winning beach; Eyemouth, with its 'fine coastal scenery', and Burntisland, which sits on the Fife Coastal Path.

Chris Greenwood, VisitScotland's senior tourism insight manager, said: 'As we celebrate the Year of Coasts and Waters 20/21 there's never been a better time to visit the seaside. Scotland's coastline is stunning, full of golden sandy beaches, dramatic cliffs, spectacular marine life and lots of history and heritage.

Hotspot: Irvine boasts an award-winning sandy beach (pictured) and a bustling town centre

'It is where families have holidayed for generations and with so many holidaying at home this year, we're increasingly seeing people seeking out experiences that they maybe haven't enjoyed since childhood, coupling nostalgia with a desire to recreate new memories with loved ones.

'The seaside is the perfect spot to embrace water wellness and enjoy a break away from it all while being mindful of water safety.

'In the wake of Covid-19, it is important that Scots support local businesses, and Scotland's seaside locations are ready to welcome visitors on a staycation, serving stunning scenery, mouth-watering food and drink or a totally new experience.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The UK government no longer advises against all but essential to the whole of Greece, including all of its idyllic islands, which run into the thousands.

While some of the more popular isles draw in the crowds, there are plenty of other outcrops waiting to be discovered.

Read on to learn about some of Greece's lesser-known spots, which serve up sublime scenery, fascinating history and a sense of calm, and the best types of accommodation still available to book...

In the footsteps of Spartans... and party-loving gods

The rugged Mani peninsula is one of Greece’s most isolated and starkly beautiful regions

The Diros Caves is home to one cavern that is more than a mile long and can be explored during a 40-minute boat trip

The rugged Mani peninsula, the middle prong of the Peloponnese, is one of Greece’s most isolated and starkly beautiful regions, with the Taygetus Mountains running down its spine. Its people claim direct descendancy from the ancient Spartans.

Tucked away near the bottom of the peninsula is Citta dei Nicliani, a rustic but chic hotel in a restored 18th Century tower, with just seven rooms plus two new interconnecting suites in a separate building.

It makes a great base from which to explore the surrounding wild scenery, perhaps walking to abandoned hilltop forts or immersing yourself in the ancient history of Sparta and Mystras.

Swim in rocky coves a short drive away, and visit the Diros Caves – one is more than a mile long that can be explored during a 40-minute boat trip. A week’s B&B costs from £647pp, excluding flights (cittadeinicliani.com).

For some dramatic mountain and lake scenery, head to Epirus in northern Greece, where you can stay in a lodge in the heart of the Zagori region, visiting cheese farms and vineyards as well as quaint villages with medieval arched stone bridges spanning babbling rivers.

Original Travel has a week’s fly-drive that includes hiking the impressive 3,281ft-deep Vikos Gorge with a guide before continuing to the scenic sandstone pinnacles capped by monasteries at Meteora.

One of the stunning monasteries in Meteora, perched on a sandstone pinnacle

The glorious Mylopotamos beach on the Pelion peninsula, which is blessedly free from mass tourism

While the monasteries are among the most-visited sites in mainland Greece, the company’s guides use hidden trails known only to the locals that follow in the footsteps of the first monks who arrived in the area in medieval times.

A separate visit explores one of the six remaining monasteries once the day-trippers have left, ending with a magical view of the sun dipping behind the rocks. Six nights’ B&B costs from £1,660pp with flights (originaltravel.co.uk).

Alternatively, follow the gods, who, according to Greek legend, chose the Pelion peninsula between Athens and Thessaloniki for their revelries, but which is blessedly free from mass tourism.

With pretty villages, lush forests and hidden beaches, the area where Mount Pelion drops into the sea has a sprinkling of small pensions – or guesthouses – rather than big hotels. Greeks come here to ski in the winter and to swim in the summer.

Ionian Island Holidays has a number of villas in the area, including the simply furnished two-bed Villa Jason, with private pool in the village of Horto. A week-long trip, with flights, transfers and car hire, costs from £971pp (ionianislandholidays.com).

The tiny islands that will make a huge impression

The stuff of legend: The colourful harbour in Symi is one of the prettiest in the Aegean

Ikaria in the Aegean is one of the world’s Blue Zones – places where people live the longest as a result of their healthy diet and easy-going lifestyle

The Pedi Beach Hotel is located on the laid-back Dodecanese island of Symi, which is too small for its own airport and can be reached by ferry from Rhodes

Arriving at the laid-back Dodecanese island of Symi is part of the experience – too small for its own airport, it is reached by ferry from Rhodes. But it is worth it to be greeted by superb views of one of the most picturesque harbours in the Aegean, with its colourful red-roofed houses, all of which are listed buildings.

There are superb sea views, too, from rooms at Pedi Beach Hotel, which is right on a pebbly beach in the pretty village. A week’s B&B costs from £1,059pp, with flights and transfers (sunvil.co.uk).

Sunvil also runs holidays to Ikaria in the Aegean, which is one of the world’s Blue Zones – places where people live the longest as a result of their healthy diet and easy-going lifestyle.

The local goat’s milk, olive oil, organic vegetables and red wine must help, as well as the beautiful setting of sandy beaches and lush hillsides. Just don’t make too many journeys on the tortuous roads in the mountainous interior, which might make you feel you’ve shaved years off your life.

Stay in the Erofili Hotel by the fishing village of Armenistis, and take a dip in the seawater pool or in the sea at nearby Livadi Beach. A walking trail through the pine forest starts here, linking four villages and spanning 15 miles. Seven nights’ B&B costs from £978pp with flights and transfers (sunvil.co.uk).

It may be one of Greece’s most popular holiday destinations but Crete still has some off-the-beaten-track areas. In the remote, rugged landscape of the Asterousia Mountains in the south, a collection of 20 cottages form Thalori Retreat, which takes its name from its position between the sea (thalassa) and mountain (ori). With plenty of wood and stone, the stylish cottages – some contemporary, others more traditional – share a pool surrounded by rocks, and a restaurant on the site of an old monastery that uses produce from Thalori’s own farm.

The owner, Markos, takes guests on a number of complimentary activities, including a sunrise walk to Mount Kofinas, a cooking lesson, horse riding and a hike to the Monastery of Koudouma. Mountain biking, wine tasting and fishing can also be arranged. A week’s half-board with flights and car hire costs from £1,451pp (simpsontravel.com).

There are superb sea views from rooms at Pedi Beach Hotel, which is right on a pebbly beach

The Erofili Hotel by the fishing village of Armenistis on Ikaria boasts stunning coastal vistas

The sunny rooms at the Erofili Hotel are the perfect place to unwind after exploring the local walking trails

For a similar eco-village in the wilderness feel, try Onar on Andros, just a couple of hours by ferry from Athens. In the protected wetlands of Ahla Valley, this collection of 14 cottages lies between a white-sand beach on a secluded bay and a rockpool fed by a waterfall. Built from stone, wood and river reeds, with white and earthy interiors, the cottages make the perfect base to get away from it all.

Take a boat trip from the beach to explore the coast, which is scalloped by more than 70 beaches, or head inland on one of the networks of old shepherds’ footpaths to explore this lush island which feels a touch more Scottish Highlands than Cyclades. At night, dine on organic fresh produce from the vegetable garden. A week’s B&B costs from £1,255pp with flights and transfers (redsavannah.com).

Also in the Cyclades, The Rooster has just opened on the under-the-radar island of Antiparos, offering a luxuriously contemporary take on an authentic Greek hotel. With 17 beautifully designed suites, villas and houses, it is an ideal place to relax, with plenty of privacy and space.

A spa, with glorious views of the Aegean, offers ila treatments and yoga, and there is a farm-to-table restaurant. A week’s B&B costs from £2,800pp with flights via Athens (scottdunn.com).

Among the Ionian islands, Kefalonia may have become busier since its 2001 starring role in the film of Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, but there are still quiet corners, including the small peninsula of Cape Liakas, which doesn’t attract day visitors thanks to its no-through-road and a rocky beach rather than a stretch of sand.

Here, a group of 19 individually owned and decorated villas are available for hire, each with sea views. There are sunloungers and shade at the rocky shore, or it’s a five-minute drive to a sandy beach. A network of footpaths weaves among the lemon and olive trees – it’s a mile-and-a-half hike to the village of Spartia.

The simply decorated Villa Aris sleeps up to six and has its own pool and private garden. A week for four costs from £1,264, excluding flights (freelancevillas.com).

In the Cyclades, The Rooster has just opened on the under-the-radar island of Antiparos, offering a luxuriously contemporary take on an authentic Greek hotel. With 17 beautifully designed suites, villas and houses, it is an ideal place to relax, with plenty of privacy and space. Pictured, the view from a garden view villa

Little Paxos is an hour’s boat ride from Corfu, and comes with a laid-back atmosphere hanging over its prolific olive groves

A ferry ride away, Ithaca may be famous for being the home of the legendary hero Odysseus, but it is much sleepier than neighbouring Kefalonia. Stay on an organic olive oil farm on the island’s shores, with just four eco-luxe villas on the seven-acre Levendis Estate.

On a hillside with sea views, the villas are set within their own gardens and share a pool, open-air cinema and a large library. Enjoy a massage using herbs grown on the estate, practise yoga in the pavilion, or walk to the nearby beach. A villa for two costs from £2,200 a week, or £2,500 for four, with car hire but excluding flights (oneoffplaces.co.uk).

Meanwhile, little Paxos is an hour’s boat ride from Corfu, and comes with a laid-back atmosphere hanging over its prolific olive groves.

Hire a boat to see the best bits, pottering around the coast to stop at Galazio beach, which is accessible only by water, and to marvel at the natural rock arch of Kamara. Better still, head over for lunch at one of the tavernas on Paxos’s smaller, vine-covered neighbour, Antipaxos.

Villa company Scott Williams has many properties on Paxos, including the simple stone Koulka House, with a pool, sleeping four in the hamlet of Kastanida on the west coast. A week in Koulka House costs from £830, excluding flights (scottwilliams.co.uk).

Lunar landscapes – and island-hopping in style

On volcanic Milos, explore the lunar landscape and soft sandy beaches along a shoreline that also features sea caves

You can hire a catamaran complete with skipper and chef to sail round the less-well-known Cyclades, including the mountainous island of Kythnos, pictured

Why settle for one island when you could squeeze in lots more? Take in the imposing Chora town on a rocky hill on Serifos, and the vineyards and olive groves of Sifnos, where trails lead to little monasteries or a medieval fortified village (be sure to try the local speciality of mastelo – goat or lamb marinated in red wine and cooked in ceramic pots).

On volcanic Milos, explore the lunar landscape and soft sandy beaches along a shoreline that also features sea caves. Inntravel has a ten-night walking trip in September starting in Athens, including B&B but not flights, from £1,095pp (inntravel.co.uk).

You can also hire a catamaran complete with skipper and chef to sail round the less-well-known Cyclades. Tick off Serifos and Sifnos, Naxos and Paros as well as the wild, mountainous island of Kythnos.

Walk to Cape Kefalos to the ruins of a medieval city or visit the monastery of Panagia Kanala, and take a dip in the water off the beautiful Kolona beach. A week for eight costs from £2,900pp including food, drinks and mooring fees but not flights (sailsterling.com).

Prices are the cheapest available for a week from August to the end of October. All properties had good availability at the time of going to press.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The world's most deadly roads have been revealed - and presented in a series of maps - with new research outing the A1010 as the UK's worst stretch of tarmac.

Findings show that the road, running from Tottenham to Waltham Cross, has a rate of 12.7 accidents per one million vehicle-miles driven – nearly nine times the national average.

Meanwhile, in the US Interstate 45, spanning north from Galveston to Dallas, has been shown to be the deadliest thoroughfare, with five fatal accidents for every 100 miles.

In Europe, findings revealed the M-06 in the Ukraine, which connects Kyiv to Chop, as the most dangerous route to take. In 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, there were 757 road accidents with almost 200 fatalities

The A1010, running from Tottenham to Waltham Cross, has a rate of 12.7 accidents per one million vehicle-miles driven – nearly nine times the national average

In North America the Pan-American Highway, which crosses El Salvador from north to south, has been outed as the worst road. It claimed 184 deaths in 2016

In the US, the Interstate 45 spanning north from Galveston to Dallas, has been shown to be the deadliest thoroughfare, with five fatal accidents for every 100 miles

THE WORLD'S DEADLIEST ROADS Researchers, commissioned by insurance company Budget Direct, used information gleaned from government websites, news reports and transport associations to generate a report detailing the world's deadliest roads. Given that some road ratings are defined by accidents, some are defined by deaths and the years quoted aren't the same for all, it's hard to create a defined global ranking. However, the team picked out the roads with the most extreme accident rates to highlight the worst of the lot: NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA El Salvador - Pan-American Highway The Pan-American Highway, which crosses El Salvador from north to south, claimed 184 deaths in 2016 making it the most dangerous road in North and Central America. SOUTH AMERICA Bolivia - Death Road, aka Yungas Road (in La Paz) Bolivia's 'Death Road', officially called Yungas Road, weaves through the Cordillera Oriental mountain chain and is mostly less than 10ft wide with a sheer drop on one side. Between 200 and 300 people perish on it each year. Thankfully, the authorities built an alternative route, and Death Road is now reserved for thrillseekers. EUROPE Ukraine - M-06 Kyiv-Chop The M-06, which connects Kyiv to Chop, is the most dangerous route to take in Europe. In 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, there were 757 road accidents with almost 200 fatalities. SOURCE: Budget Direct MIDDLE EAST & CENTRAL ASIA Israel - Highway 90 The Dead Sea Highway, part of Israel's Highway 90, which links Metula and the northern border with Lebanon, is deemed the worst road in the Middle East and Central Asia. The route features old foundations dating from the 1960s and there are no barriers between the left and right lanes. Since 2003, 233 people have died on the road and 700 have been seriously injured. ASIA & OCEANIA Bangladesh - Dhaka-Sylhet highway (N2) In Asia and Oceania as a whole, the worst road is located in Bangladesh. The Dhaka-Sylhet highway (N2) in Sylhet claimed 250 lives in 2020 alone. AFRICA Ghana - Accra to Cape Coast Road In Africa , the road with the deadliest reputation is the Accra to Cape Coast Road in Ghana, which connects Accra to Cape Coast. Between 2004 and 2011, there were 6,104 accidents and 7,465 casualties. Advertisement

Researchers used information gleaned from government websites, news reports and transport associations to generate the report and produce infographics showing the deadliest roads for different regions around the world.

In Europe, findings revealed the M-06 in the Ukraine, which connects Kyiv to Chop, as the most dangerous route to take.

In 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, there were 757 road accidents with almost 200 fatalities.

For thrillseekers, researchers hit upon an extreme road in Iceland. Route 622 along the northwestern coast is bordered by cliffs and it runs along the Dyrafjiordur and Arnarfjordur fjords. As the weather gets so extreme in the winter, the road is closed altogether for half the year.

The site www.dangerousroads.org describes Route 622 as being 'insanely beautiful', but cautions 'if you have a Jeep, 4x4 experience, time and steel nerves, it is possible to drive this road'.

Moving back to North America, while the Interstate 45 in the US is prone to many accidents, there is an even worse road in the region. The Pan-American Highway, which crosses El Salvador from north to south, claimed 184 deaths in 2016 making it the worst road of the lot.

Dangerousroads.org says that some of the main risks include 'high temperatures, landslides, steep drop-offs, livestock in the road and impassable sections during the wet season'.

Researchers also highlighted several other dangerous routes in North America. These are located in Canada (the Revelstone Golden saw 38 fatal crashes from 2004 to 2013), in Jamaica (the Bustamante Highway has claimed no fewer than 90 lives since 2005 and 15 alone in 2011) and in Mexico (on the Mexico-Queretaro Highway there were approximately 3,500 accidents, 3,300 injuries, and 584 deaths between 2009 and 2015).

Nicaragua's roads are also some of the most dangerous in North America 'due to pedestrian recklessness, disrespect for traffic signals, and blunders of design', according to local commentary. In a single year, sixteen people died on a 12km stretch of the NIC-4 where it meets the NIC-20 on the route to Masaya.

In Asia and Oceania the worst road is located in Bangladesh. The Dhaka-Sylhet highway (N2) in Sylhet claimed 250 lives in 2020 alone. Another killer route can be found in Cambodia. National Road 4 from Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville witnessed 90 casualties per day during Khmer New Year in 2005, compared with an annual average of 40 per day

In Australia, 100 people die on the roads every month, with 2,500 or more seriously injured. The worst spot in the country is the M4 Western Motorway from Concord to the M7 in Sydney (pictured)

In Australia, 100 people die on the roads every month, with 2,500 or more seriously injured. The worst spot in the country is the M4 Western Motorway from Concord to the M7 in Sydney.

Around 94,000 vehicles drive this 24km stretch every day.

It saw six deaths and 788 'casualty crashes' in a five-year period, making it the 'highest risk' area – although the Hume Motorway/Freeway has the greatest overall number of crashes involving death or injury.

But in Asia and Oceania as a whole, the worst road is located in Bangladesh.

The Dhaka-Sylhet highway (N2) in Sylhet claimed 250 lives in 2020 alone.

Another killer route can be found in Cambodia.

National Road 4 from Phnom Penh to Sihanoukville witnessed 90 casualties per day during Khmer New Year in 2005, compared with an annual average of 40 per day.

Along with Death Road in Bolivia, other treacherous roads in South America can be found in Ecuador, Argentina, and Peru

Its name should serve as a warning but this road in Bolivia, the most dangerous in South America, continues to attract thrillseekers. Officially called Yungas Road, it weaves through the Cordillera Oriental mountain chain and is mostly less than 10ft wide with a sheer drop on one side

In South America, there is a driving route nicknamed 'Death Road'.

Its name should serve as a warning but this road in Bolivia, the most dangerous in the region with 200 to 300 drivers and passengers perishing on it each year, continues to attract thrillseekers.

Officially called Yungas Road, it weaves through the Cordillera Oriental mountain chain and is mostly less than 10ft wide with a sheer drop on one side.

For this reason, it's the only place in Bolivia where cars must drive on the left – a safety measure to make seeing the edge of the road easier.

Thankfully, Bolivian authorities built a safer alternative route, and Death Road is now reserved for gutsy tourists.

Along with Death Road, other treacherous routes in South America can be found in Ecuador (in 2019 there were 1,027 accidents and 67 deaths on the Aloag-Santo Domingo), in Argentina (the country's Route 9 accounts for seven per cent of the accidents throughout the country) and in Peru (there have been so many accidents on the Pasamayo Serpentine aka 'The Devil's Curve' - a 15km stretch with 22 curves - that the Ministry of Transport is reportedly unable to provide an accurate total).

In Africa, the road with the deadliest reputation is the Accra to Cape Coast Road in Ghana, which connects Accra to Cape Coast. Other deadly routes include the Mombasa Road to Nairobi, Kenya, and the Plumtree-Bulawayo-Harare-Mutare Highway in Zimbabwe

Moving over to Africa, the road with the deadliest reputation is the Accra to Cape Coast Road in Ghana, which connects Accra to Cape Coast.

Between 2004 and 2011, there were 6,104 accidents and 7,465 casualties.

Another deadly road on the continent is the Mombasa Road to Nairobi, Kenya. In 2019, 27 people died on it during an eight-month period.

Meanwhile, in Zimbabwe, the Plumtree-Bulawayo-Harare-Mutare Highway saw 569 accidents in 2016 and in Cameroon, the United Nations actually classified its National 3 as one of the world's most dangerous roads back in 2014.

The National 3, also known as the Douala-Yaoundé road, features dozens of commemorative plaques that mark lost lives.

Nearly one-third of the country's 3,000 annual accidents occur on this road every year.

In the Middle East and Central Asia, the Dead Sea Highway, part of Israel's Highway 90, is deemed one of the worst roads with old foundations dating from the 1960s and no barriers between the left and right lanes. It has claimed 233 lives

In the Middle East and Central Asia, the Dead Sea Highway, part of Israel's Highway 90, which links Metula and the northern border with Lebanon, is deemed the region's worst road, with old foundations dating from the 1960s and no barriers between the left and right lanes.

Since 2003, 233 people have died on the road and 700 have been seriously injured.

Erez Kita, the head of a safe-driving NGO, told researchers: 'Highway 90 continues to claim lives as a result of poor infrastructure, which is unforgiving to human error. It's a 50-years-old road, and its infrastructure should have been upgraded. It's always easiest to blame the drivers, but not every mistake should end in death, and the infrastructure is meant to protect drivers even if they make a mistake.'

Other dangerous roads in the region can be found in the UAE (the Emirates Road saw 14 deaths and 30 accidents from January to June in 2018) and in Bahrain (the Shaikh Isa bin Salman Highway was the scene of 55 accidents and five deaths in 2019).

Insurance firm Budget Direct, which commissioned the research, said of the findings: 'News reports covering road accidents around the world reflect the same sad tale: authorities blame motorists, motorists blame authorities, and people keep dying.

'The development of smart road networks and self-driving cars may make the roads safer over the forthcoming years.

'But their distribution will be uneven, and some countries will always have more dangerous roads than others.

'Ultimate responsibility falls to us each in our personal and professional capacities as motorists, politicians, and citizens to do our part in keeping the roads safe for our families and everyone around us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Qatar Airways has been named the world's best airline for 2021 by a leading aviation group.

Australia-based AirlineRatings.com - a website that ranks airlines on safety and in-flight experience - has released its annual round-up of the top 20 global carriers, with the Doha-based airline scoring gold for its cabin innovation, passenger service, and commitment to continue to operate throughout the pandemic.

Air New Zealand is second overall and claims first in the premium economy and economy categories, while Singapore Airlines is third in the best airlines ranking.

Qatar Airways has been named the world's best airline for 2021 by a leading aviation group

Australia-based AirlineRatings.com rated Qatar Airways for its cabin innovation, passenger service, and commitment to continue to operate throughout the pandemic

THE BEST AIRLINES IN THE WORLD 2021 REVEALED 1. Qatar Airways 2. Air New Zealand 3. Singapore Airlines 4. Qantas 5. Emirates 6. Cathay Pacific 7. Virgin Atlantic 8. United Airlines 9. Eva Air 10. British Airways Source: airlineratings.com 11. Lufthansa 12. ANA 13. Finnair 14. Japan Air Lines 15. KLM 16. Hawaiian Airlines 17. Alaska Airlines 18. Virgin Australia 19. Delta Air Lines 20. Etihad Airways Advertisement

Other airlines making the top 20 ranking this year include Qantas, Emirates, Cathay Pacific, Virgin Atlantic, United Airlines and British Airways.

The awards and the ranking is judged by a team of editors and takes into account major safety and government audits. There are 12 key criteria that include fleet age, passenger reviews, profitability, investment rating, product offerings, and staff relations.

In the airline ranking, the Australian flag carrier, Qantas, is fourth. Coming fifth is Emirates followed by Cathay Pacific in sixth and UK-based Virgin Atlantic in seventh.

United Airlines is eighth, Eva Air is ninth and British Airways rounds out the top 10.

Air New Zealand is second overall and claims first in the premium economy and economy (pictured) categories

Virgin Australia wins the prize for best cabin crew, pictured

The rest of the top 20 is made up of Lufthansa (11th), Ana (12th), Finnair (13th), Japan Airlines (14th), KLM (15th), Hawaiian Airlines (16th), Alaska Airlines (17th), Virgin Australia (18th), Delta Air Lines (19th) and Etihad Airways (20th).

The best first-class cabin award goes to Singapore Airlines yet again due to its 'truly spectacular' new 'Skyroom' Suites on the A380s, which look more like hotel rooms.

Qantas is named best for both lounges and domestic flights, while Qatar takes home another gong for best catering.

The carrier with the best inflight entertainment is Emirates and Virgin Australia takes the title for the best cabin crew for the second year running.

The winners in the best low-cost category are easyJet, Jetstar, Frontier, Jetblue, Ryanair, Scoot, Southwest, VietJet Air, Volaris, and Westjet.

The best first-class cabin award goes to Singapore Airlines yet again due to its 'truly spectacular' suites product, pictured

Qantas is named best for lounges. Pictured is the international transit lounge at Perth International Airport

After being named the winner of the over airlineratings.com awards, Qatar Airways CEO, His Excellency Mr Akbar Al Baker, said: 'Over the past 16 months, we have witnessed some of the darkest days ever seen by the aviation industry.

'Yet, when so many other airlines stopped flying, Qatar Airways continued to operate and stand by our passengers.

'Despite the health crisis, we continued to reach new heights and set industry standards that deliver a passenger experience unmatched by any other airline in the world.

'So, it goes without saying that receiving Airline Ratings' Airline of the Year award for 2021 is an honour that all of us at Qatar Airways will treasure as we find ourselves emerging from the global health crisis and progressing forward to new horizons and clearer skies ahead.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A former flight attendant has lifted the lid on some trade secrets, touching on everything from the cleanliness of planes to pilots who use their gold stripes for sex.

Speaking anonymously to MailOnline Travel, the woman says she worked in the industry for six years with her work taking her around the world until Covid-19 struck and she was let go. Read on for insights ranging from the humorous to the shocking and bizarre...

The Champagne goes down the toilet

A former flight attendant says that drinks were dumped down the toilet before touchdown

Before touchdown, all of the drinks were dumped in the toilets, from opened juices to the most expensive bottles of Champagne.

I really hated doing this, it seemed such a waste. When it came to uneaten hot meals, they were left in the ovens for the catering team to dispose of.

People fake being ill to get an upgrade

Some people came on board saying they weren't feeling well, hoping we would upgrade them for better comfort.

In certain cases, we quickly decided to offload them to prevent them from becoming a medical liability during a flight. I warned many of my passengers about this happening if they continued telling me they were ‘too sick’ to fly in economy and needed a business seat. You can imagine how quickly that person went back to their seat and stopped moaning.

I saw one proposal and three deaths

In my personal experience, there were certainly more deaths than engagements. Over six years I encountered three deaths and one engagement. That proposal was wonderful. The business-class passenger approached us and asked us to serve his girlfriend a glass of Champagne and he dropped the ring inside the glass and went down on one knee.

However, the deaths I witnessed were pretty grim. The worst was when a four-year-old girl passed shortly after take-off en route to Germany. Her face and body were so pale while we were performing CPR. We never stopped trying to revive her, even during landing.

The mother remained surprisingly calm but she eventually broke down and gave an agonising scream when her child was carried out the back door wrapped in a blanket. That moment she knew her child was gone.

We reuse the headphones

Instead of being thrown away, the headphones are detangled and reused

Before landing the crew collected all of the headsets and put them into a bag. These were then taken to a facility at the airport where low-paid workers were tasked with detangling them day and night so they could be repackaged and reused. New coverings were put on the ends of the headphones for hygiene. The blankets were also washed and repacked.

Makeup is mandatory

Our company had a uniform department, which we nicknamed the ‘fashion police’ as they would stand around like cops and try and catch us out if anything was out of place, from our hair to our hemlines. Looking back, it makes me feel quite ill and angry about the extent our grooming was scrutinised.

Beauty is a huge topic among cabin crew, and you will find most have their bathrooms stocked like aisles of a Boots pharmacy.

I always had to wear lipstick, foundation, and either mascara or eyeliner. I also always had to wear nail polish.

We were put on diet plans if needed

I was weighed before starting my job as a flight attendant so it could be used as a reference. I was issued with a uniform that was one size larger because I was expected to ‘grow into it’.

Then the company had a weight management plan that flight attendants were forced to follow if they had been reported by management or the ‘fashion police’. This involved seeing a nutritionist who would prescribe an appropriate diet plan.

Evacuation slides aren’t that fun

While many people assume evacuation slides might be quite fun, the flight attendant says the landing can be quite hard

Evacuation slide training was a huge component of our safety and emergency procedures training. We got to jump down a slide only once, though.

The slide is steep and you land on a relatively hard mat at the bottom. I observed red lipstick marks on the mats, indicating some might have had a pretty rough landing.

There are secret staff sleeping pods

In the aft of the Boeing 777, there is a secret door that can be opened with a special pin code. When you open the door, it leads you up a staircase where you will find up to eight very spacious bunks for flight attendants to take a nap on.

Rest was less relaxing on the Airbus A380 as the sleeping cubicle was located between passenger sections and you could hear toilets flush and babies cry. There were nine tiny bunkbeds stacked over each other.

Newer Airbuses had a better layout down below. It felt like climbing into a submarine as a steep ladder led down from the front galley.

Planes are cesspits of bacteria

I think, as a whole, planes are pretty dirty. The seat covers were only exchanged if they’d been soiled or vomited on.

As the planes were constantly on the move, it was only obvious dirt that was tended to. If I ran a towel on the galley floor I guarantee it would have been filthy in a single wipe. Passengers sometimes went to the toilets barefoot. This is not something I would advise.

Covid-19 made passengers kinder

During the pandemic, the flight attendant noticed that passengers were kinder and less demanding

When airports started closing down, you could see how desperate people were to get home. Everyone understood that we were repatriating them, not there to provide the usual ‘world class’ service.

For the first time in years, I did not have to lift a single bag for anybody and put it in an overhead bin. This was a huge change and relief.

For once, we were also not being chased around with call bells and in general, customers were grateful just to be on board.

Pilots use their status to get sex

In pre-Covid days, layovers were basically fun nights out, where anything could and did happen.

It was quite common for pilots to get girls’ numbers from the staff portal and invite them to their room.

I’ve seen promiscuity from both sides, though. The female crew still consider it ‘climbing the ladder’ if they sleep with a pilot, and it’s a sad truth, but many men will take advantage of this.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

JetBlue started transatlantic flights between New York and London on Wednesday, with the first flight pictured landing at Heathrow on Thursday afternoon.

The low-cost airline is planning to grab market share with low fares and drive recovery on what is usually one of the world's busiest and most lucrative international routes.

Transatlantic travel remains partially shut as the United States is still not allowing most travellers from Britain into the country because of the coronavirus pandemic. Anyone who does enter, including U.S citizens, must present a negative Covid-19 test. The UK only opened to fully vaccinated U.S travellers earlier in August.

New transatlantic player: The first JetBlue flight from New York to Heathrow touches down

JetBlue's long-range A321 taxis to the gate at Heathrow after its journey from JFK

JetBlue started transatlantic flights between New York and London on Wednesday. Pictured are passengers on the first service as it waits to depart JFK

Passengers wearing protective masks hold American and British flags on JetBlue's first flight to London

But New York-based JetBlue pressed ahead with the start of its daily John F. Kennedy (JFK) Airport to Heathrow service, counting on its new Airbus A321LR jets, a longer-range variant of the A321neo, to underpin profits.

JetBlue believes that by using the smaller, fuel-efficient Airbus jets it can undercut other airlines on price - and UK travellers get a special introductory rate.

Tickets start from £329 return ($599 on the U.S side) for one of 117 Core (economy main cabin) seats and £999 ($1,979) return for one of 24 individual business-class 'Mint' suites.

The aircraft will also feature two first-class 'Mint Studio' seats - for an extra $299 (£211) each way - that the airline claims have 'the largest lie-flat bed of any U.S carrier'.

One of the two first-class A321 'Mint Studio' seats, pictured, which JetBlue says have the biggest lie-flat bed of any U.S carrier

The business-class seat offered on the JetBlue A321LR transatlantic service. It features tilting 17-inch Thales Avant screens, wireless charging capabilities, an integrated phone ledge 'for multitasking', 'easy-to-reach in-seat power', as well as laptop, shoe and handbag stowage

A flight attendant on the inaugural flight is pictured here helping passengers in the business-class section

The Mint Studio seat, which New York-based JetBlue says is the 'pinnacle of space and privacy', feature 22-inch Thales 'Avant' tilting seatback screens, an extra side table and a guest seat that can accommodate an additional passenger during flight at cruising altitude.

The 'regular' Mint suites, meanwhile, feature tilting 17-inch Thales Avant screens, wireless charging capabilities, an integrated phone ledge 'for multitasking', 'easy-to-reach in-seat power', as well as laptop, shoe and handbag stowage.

The designs for the 'Mint' suites and 'Mint Studio' seats were conceptualised by London-based Acumen Design Associates and developed in partnership with another UK studio, Aim Altitude.

Speaking at JFK before the first departure, JetBlue Chief Executive Robin Hayes said the launch was already driving a price war, with fares between New York and London falling since its flights went on sale.

'JetBlue is responsible for that,' he said.

At the JetBlue launch event at JFK, a section of the terminal was given a British-themed makeover

Passengers at JFK show their passports before boarding the first ever transatlantic JetBlue flight

UK-based airlines British Airways and Virgin Atlantic are struggling in the pandemic because, unlike U.S rivals American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines, they do not have a large, buoyant domestic market to fall back on.

JetBlue, which plans to add flights to London's Gatwick in late September and between Boston and London next year, was more affected than other U.S airlines during the pandemic because its hub airports were heavily affected by lockdowns.

As domestic Covid-19 restrictions ease, it has seen an increase in revenues. It hopes its London service will provide a further boost and that it will fare better than other low-cost carriers that have tried and failed to conquer the transatlantic in the past.

'I want to congratulate JetBlue on its inaugural transatlantic flight to London and wish all the crew and customers a safe and pleasant journey,' said Dame Karen Pierce DCMG, U.K. Ambassador to the U.S. 'As vaccinated Americans can now come to the UK without the need to quarantine, this route will offer more Americans a path to doing business, holidays and family reunions in the U.K. Today's flight quite literally takes our Special Relationship to new heights.'

Speaking at JFK before the first departure, JetBlue Chief Executive Robin Hayes (pictured) said the launch was already driving a price war
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Airport hotels taking the stress out of early-morning flights.

Check-ins have never been fun, and those for early getaways are even worse now that we need extra time to show we’ve filled in the right forms and won’t fall foul of Covid requirements at our destination.

A night in an airport hotel is becoming the summer’s most attractive holiday extra. For less than the price of a family’s pre-departure Covid tests, you can forget about beating the morning commuters while you sleep within sight of the runway. Better still, airport hotels tend to be very conscious of Covid protocols, so while facilities such as restaurants, gyms and pools are open, enhanced room cleaning, contactless payment and table service are likely to be the norm for some time.

Take it easy: The work/relax area at the Moxy, Edinburgh

Heathrow has dozens of hotels along its perimeter roads. The newly refurbished Hilton at Terminal 4 is a short taxi ride from all the other terminals, or you can use the Hotel Hoppa bus that stops nearby. The hotel embraces the holiday mood from the start, with olive trees growing in the atrium and illuminated maps of the world on bedroom walls. Rooms in August from £118 (hilton.com).

At Gatwick, the best of the budget options is the ultra-modern Premier Inn, a five-minute walk from North Terminal, with its free shuttle to the South Terminal. Family rooms sleep up to four and if adults pick a meal deal, two under-16s get breakfast for free. From £45 (premierinn.com).

The Holiday Inn Express at Stansted has bright, modern rooms and is a five-minute shuttle ride from the terminal. Breakfast is served from 4am. From £113 (ihg.com).

Newcastle’s DoubleTree by Hilton - which offers guests views of the runway

At Luton, the Ibis Budget has small, sleek rooms a short walk from the terminal. There are ‘grab & go’ coffee cups and food bags in the breakfast room to save time in the morning. From £47 (accor.com).

Travelodge has a site two miles from Birmingham Airport and local taxi firms promise ‘always there’ transfers to the terminal in time for early flights. Arrange offsite parking when booking your room for cheaper rates and a free shuttle. From £31 (travelodge.co.uk).

Manchester Airport has come alive with the opening of its new Terminal 2. The check-in, security, shopping and dining areas welcome travellers with Virgin Atlantic, Singapore and Etihad airlines as well as package holiday favourites Tui and Jet2. It’s an easy walk to both terminals from the Clayton Hotel, or get the free shuttle bus that runs every 15 minutes. Some rooms have runway views and there’s a gym for pre-holiday workouts. From £100 (claytonhotels.com).

At Luton, the Ibis Budget has small, sleek rooms a short walk from the terminal

Runway-view rooms are also on offer at Newcastle Airport, at DoubleTree by Hilton. It is a two-minute walk from the terminal and there’s a friendly bar and restaurant, a gym with floor-to-ceiling windows and rooms with connecting doors for families. From £84 (Hilton.com).

The cluster of hotels around Glasgow Airport includes the Courtyard by Marriott. Early-morning taxis to the terminal cost about £7, rooms from £60 (marriott.com).

In Edinburgh, holidays can start in style amid the pink neon of Moxy hotel. Check in at the bar, rather than a reception desk, then eat, drink, work or relax in the big ‘lobby meets living room’ area. Walk to the airport in about five minutes or get a taxi for about £5. Rooms from £119 (marriott.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just occasionally you meet someone with such boundless energy that it knocks you back. Unsettling, even; highlights one’s own lethargy.

Joanna Preston is a case in point. She ran a successful catering company in London before moving with her husband to what was a battered farmhouse with outbuildings and is now the chic-est of B&Bs (which also offers dinner and cookery classes) in 40 lush acres on the Berkshire/Wiltshire border.

Joanna is a first-rate chef, gardener, beekeeper, owner of ponies, chickens and pigs . . . oh, and she has just bought her local village shop. She also has two young children.

The Inspector was impressed by the lavender on the grounds of Long Acre Farm, insisting it was more vibrant than that of Provence in South of France

When we arrive on a Sunday evening, she skips across the gravel drive as though we’re long-lost relatives and apologises for the effusive welcome from her three dogs.

It’s a gorgeous spot (linked to the Bloomsbury set via one of the house’s former owners, Noel Carrington) north of Lambourn, the garden lined with perfect box and lavender of such intense colour the like of which I have never seen — not even in deepest Provence.

There are three rooms for guests in the converted pig-sties. Ours has an African theme, influenced in part by Joanna’s years working for Robin Pope Safaris in Zambia. But it’s soft Anglo-African, with little jars of sweet pea, decanters of water (drawn from the property’s own bore hole), rows of books and a beautiful bathroom with bare brickwork, a huge Swedish mirror and roll-top bath.

The 'beautiful' bathroom in The Inspector's room had exposed brickwork walls and was decked out with a huge Swedish mirror and roll-top bath

B&B owner Joanna Preston ran a catering company in London before moving to the rural idyll of Lambourn

TRAVEL FACTS Long Acre Farm, Lambourn, Berkshire. Doubles B&B £120. For more information call 07815 782518. Rating: Advertisement

In the passage leading to the garden, there are bottles of homemade sloe gin, apricot vodka, cherry brandy.

‘Just help yourself,’ says Joanna.

We head off to a pub for a three-star burger before returning for a five-star night, during which an owl hoots his approval.

Breakfast is taken in a pretty annexe where the table is laden with berries, granola, jars of jam, marmalade, honey, compotes and apple juice from the orchard. We whip up our own fried eggs and bacon and decide we would stay a week, given the chance.

We have everything we need — but then Joanna skips across the drive again carrying some newly baked pastries.

‘Almost forgot,’ she says.

The truth is that nothing is forgotten at Long Acre Farm.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Birch does not see itself as a hotel. It’s a ‘community’, an ‘off-grid hideout’, an ‘escape from urban living’, ‘time off for the always on’.

All of which sounds like the creatives, with their skinny lattes and skinny jeans, have been let loose. But to my surprise, Birch (brainchild of Chris Penn, who launched the trendy Ace Hotel in Shoreditch) is all these things and more — although the ‘escape from urban living’ happens to be just off the M25 in Hertfordshire.

I am expecting hipster pretension, when actually it’s a music festival without the music: 55 acres to rock and roam, build dens, snooze in hammocks, swim in a fresh-water lido, learn to make sourdough bread, join a breathing class, sit around a fire pit, watch a movie in the screening room, eat well — all without feeling that you’re being fleeced.

Birch - brainchild of Chris Penn, who launched the trendy Ace Hotel in Shoreditch - is an ‘escape from urban living’

The Inspector says he was 'expecting hipster pretension' but discovered Birch is actually 'a music festival without the music'

The rooms at Birch are simple, with no TV, no phone, no directory, no fluffy bath robe, and no tea or coffee-making apparatus

It helps that central to this is a magnificent Georgian stately home with just enough dilapidation to fit the shabby-chic mould, and so much space that you’re invited to work at one end of the building and play in the other, while children and dogs are positively encouraged. You can become a member of this ‘community’ and get a 15 per cent discount on a room and 10 per cent off food and drink.

And anyone booking a Friday and Saturday night is given Sunday night for free.

‘Hey babe, how are you settling in?’ asks a member of staff when I turn up at the lido. Very well indeed, thank you.

At Birch, explains the Inspector, you can build dens, snooze in hammocks, swim in a fresh-water lido, learn to make sourdough bread, join a breathing class, sit around a fire pit, watch a movie in the screening room and eat well

At Birch everything is pay-as-you-go, ‘to avoid a hassle when you leave’. Pictured is Valeries restaurant

Become a member of the Birch community and you get a 15 per cent discount on a room and 10 per cent off food and drink

My room is on the top floor with views of the parkland. The stairs leading to it are bare concrete, chipped in places. The room itself is simple: no TV, no phone, no directory, no fluffy bath robe, nothing on the walls and absolutely no tea or coffee-making apparatus.

The fancy restaurant in the former stable block is called The Zebra Riding Club, where £48 gets you six courses. No space there, so I eat outside at Valeries. What I had not appreciated is that everything is pay-as-you-go, ‘to avoid a hassle when you leave’, as my new friend puts it.

I pick up a flat white and croissant at the coffee shop in the morning, where a notice tells guests what’s going on during the day. There’s ‘toning’, pottery, candle-making, dance, ‘gentle flow’ and you can always pop into the bakery to practice your kneading.

‘You’re with us for a week, aren’t you?’ asks the young thing at reception. If only.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Try to imagine watching an extended family of 1,000 people get together again after 18 months, combined with the excitement of boarding a new ship — and you have the electric atmosphere of Spirit of Adventure’s inaugural sailing.

To be honest, nobody is much bothered about the band on the Port of Tilbury’s quayside in Essex belting out A Life On The Ocean Wave or the blasts of confetti marking the sail-away.

Most of us are heading to the bar and restaurants to meet friends.

The Daily Mail's Lesley Bellew joined Spirit of Adventure's inaugural sailing. She said the atmosphere was 'electric'

'This sophisticated vessel cost £344 million to build and the quality shows,' writes Lesley

Pictured is Lesley enjoying dinner in Amalfi on Spirit of Adventure

This 15-night anti-clockwise circumnavigation of the British Isles is the longest cruise to depart from the UK since the restart of sailing — and it feels more like a reunion, with 70 per cent of guests being repeat customers and more than half the crew returners.

It’s heartwarming to watch this huge Saga family pick up where they left off before the pandemic, which saw the over-50s company become the first travel firm to insist that customers should be double-jabbed.

Captain Kim Tanner and his crew are at the gangway to greet guests boarding the 999-passenger ship that has classic lines with an interior design swaggering with decadence.

After several date changes to the inaugural cruise and almost a year and a half of seeing the cruise industry linked to a string of Covid outbreaks, Captain Tanner, 39, is visibly thrilled.

‘Seeing everyone exploring the decks, so many with beaming smiles, filling our rooms with chatter and laughter, has finally given the ship soul,’ he says.

This sophisticated vessel cost £344 million to build and the quality shows. Every public space has sumptuous styling, a distinctive colour palette in each area and deep wool carpets, while each suite and cabin has a balcony, including the 109 single cabins.

Walls are lined with newly-commissioned artworks by British-based artists. From botanicals to landscapes, sculpture and ceramics, they capture the beauty of the natural world, which really adds to the pleasure of being on board, particularly the stair landings where Glasgow design studio Timorous Beasties’ giant flora trail is brimming with signature thistles, blooms, birds and butterflies.

Spirit of Adventure has been built for a mainly British market and passengers’ input has been considered, from comfortable sofas that are not too low to a washing line in the shower and a kettle in the cabin with a large carton of milk.

The library is a central hub, with its own coffee bar, although passengers have to bring their own books at the moment owing to Covid rules, and the crafts area is buzzing with activity.

Each suite and cabin has a balcony, including the 109 single cabins. Pictured is one of the luxury cabins

LIFE ON THE HIGH SEAS IS DIFFERENT EMBARKATION: Allotted time slots for boarding and testing. Guests must show proof of travel insurance and NHS Covid-19 vaccinations.

Allotted time slots for boarding and testing. Guests must show proof of travel insurance and NHS Covid-19 vaccinations. DINING: Tables farther apart and improved buffet service where passengers choose their meal and chefs then plate up.

Tables farther apart and improved buffet service where passengers choose their meal and chefs then plate up. THEATRES: Have a reduced capacity. Sit with friends and family but leave an empty seat between other guests.

Have a reduced capacity. Sit with friends and family but leave an empty seat between other guests. MASKS: To be worn in public areas but not when eating and drinking.

To be worn in public areas but not when eating and drinking. SOCIAL DISTANCING: Passengers and crew respect one another’s space.

Passengers and crew respect one another’s space. GOING ASHORE : Only on tours and within a bubble. This rule will relax once it is safe. Coach drivers and guides are Covid-tested.

: Only on tours and within a bubble. This rule will relax once it is safe. Coach drivers and guides are Covid-tested. GYMS AND SPAS : Book a time slot.

: Book a time slot. SWIMMING: Numbers in pools reduced.

Numbers in pools reduced. HOT TUBS: Recommendation to share only with friends and family.

Recommendation to share only with friends and family. BARS : Drinks have to be ordered from a waiter. No bar stools.

: Drinks have to be ordered from a waiter. No bar stools. DANCING : Is allowed in small numbers. Advertisement

For one couple, this cruise is much more of a personal celebration — and it started with a quiz.

Lynne Heathcote, 67, and Roger Wall, 78, met on Saga’s original small ship Spirit of Adventure in 2010 and four years later their romance led to marriage.

They are on the new Spirit of Adventure to mark their seventh wedding anniversary.

‘Lynn joined our quiz team and we started chatting so I invited her to join us for dinner. We enjoyed each other’s company and on sea days we’d have lunch together,’ says Roger.

Every public space has sumptuous styling, a distinctive colour palette in each area and deep wool carpets

Spirit of Adventure has been built for a mainly British market and passengers’ input has been considered

WHAT'S NEW IN THE WORLD OF CRUISING? The Government has given the go-ahead for international cruising from Monday — and after a successful summer of sailing in UK waters, cruise lines are ready to re-introduce overseas itineraries. Fully vaccinated cruise passengers can visit amber-listed countries without having to quarantine on return. It also means people arriving at UK ports, who have been fully vaccinated in the U.S. or the EU, will not have to quarantine. All cruise lines have upgraded their health and safety protocols, with most insisting on all adults being double-jabbed as well as taking a lateral flow test before embarkation. Andy Harmer, Cruise Lines International Association managing director for the UK and Ireland, says: ‘The resumption of international cruising is very good news and follows the successful restart of domestic sailings, so now is an ideal time to book up if you’re looking to start exploring overseas destinations again. ‘Travel agents and cruise lines can advise on the overall onboard experience, as well as conditions for getting back on ships, such as testing requirements.’ Here are some of the new measures: On-board testing includes a daily saliva test on Viking Cruises.

There will be daily temperature tests on TUI’s Marella ships.

SagaCruises and Marella Cruises have received the top-rated Lloyd’s Stay Safe certification.

All pre-embarkation testing is free, so no-fly sailings from a UK port to overseas will now be a particular plus, together with designated boarding times for reduced queues.

With the Foreign Office having advised against cruise ship travel abroad since March last year, it is likely there will now be a huge surge in bookings and deals will soon disappear.

For further convenience and safety, companies such as MSC charter flights to ports including Barbados, Dubai and the Red Sea, while destinations such as Antarctica, Svalbard and the Russian East will be attractive to travellers wanting to avoid busy parts of the world and revel in the wilderness. Advertisement

The couple have sailed more than 150 nights and Lynn says: ‘It is the crew who make all the difference. Everyone has been so welcoming and now we feel our love boat story has gone full circle.’

New-to-Saga guests Jacquie and Martin tell me how they are immediately impressed by the classy decor. While drinking coffee on an emerald-green velvet sofa in the atrium and listening to the classical ensemble, Martin says: ‘We really love our cabin and the public spaces are bright and airy.’

In fact, there’s a surprise around every corner, from The Supper Club cabaret restaurant that is as wide as the ship to speciality restaurants including the high-end Italian dining room, Amalfi.

Saga cruises are all-inclusive so that means a chauffeur to and from the port, drinks, use of the cavernous spa and no tips

GRAB THESE GREAT DEALS BEFORE THEY SAIL AWAY Join Norwegian Jade’s sailing to Crete, Mykonos, Rhodes and Santorini (pictured) HOT IN ICELAND Join Borealis’s first international sailing, from Liverpool on August 14, to see the whales, waterfalls and geysers of Iceland. The nine-night sailing explores the unspoilt Isafjordur and Westfjords as well as the capital Reykjavik. Details: From £1,599 pp (fredolsencruises.com, 0800 787 0733). GREEK ODYSSEY Join Norwegian Jade’s sailing to Crete, Mykonos, Rhodes and Santorini with long days in port to make the most of the sunshine — depart on September 26. You can upgrade for £99 pp to have an open bar, wifi, tours and speciality dining package. Details: From £722 pp (iglucruise.com, 020 3733 5305) BARCELONA BARGAIN There is fun for all the family on MSC Grandiosa’s Mediterranean sailing from Genoa on October 4. Calls include Barcelona, Valencia, Civitavecchia and La Spezia, while on board there are West End-style shows, laser tag games and children’s clubs. Details: From £459 pp (msccruises.co.uk, 0203 426 3010). Dive into one of the swimming pools on board MSC Grandiosa FLOATING BED TO THE MED Keep it simple with Sky Princess’s No-Fly Mediterranean Adventurer sailing to Spain, France, Italy, Sardinia and Gibraltar. The 14-night round trip departs Southampton on October 21. Details: From £1,429 pp (rolcruise.co.uk, 0800 204 4660). CHRISTMAS CHEER Put a Queen Mary 2 festive markets’ cruise at the top of your Christmas list to set sail from Southampton to Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Bruges. The ship will be decorated for the December 10 sailing with a giant Christmas tree and a gingerbread village. Details: From £599 pp (cunard.com, 0344 338 8641). ALASKA AHOY! Look forward to an Alaskan Autumn on Regent Seven Seas Mariner on September 7, 2022 — a seven-night sailing including flights, a three-night pre-cruise land programme in Vancouver and free shore tours. Details: From £5,064 pp (panachecruises.com, 0161 513 8200). DUBAI DREAM Seven-night sailings on the MSC World Europa from Dubai start in December 2022. This ship will be powered by liquefied natural gas, and calls at Abu Dhabi, Sir Bani Yas Island and Doha in Qatar. Details: From £699 pp (msccruises.co.uk, 0203 426 3010). SLOW BOAT HOME Book (very) early for a slow route home from Hong Kong to Southampton on Arcadia’s 35-night sailing on March 9, 2023. Prices include outward flight with calls to Chan May and Phu My in Vietnam, as well Singapore and Port Klang and Penang in Malaysia. After that, you stop at Colombo in Sri Lanka, Dubai, Muscat in Oman, Valletta in Malta and Cadiz in Spain. Details: From £4,479 pp (pocruises.com, 03453 555 111). Advertisement

On an inaugural sailing, dining experiences can be mixed, but a meal in Khukuri House, the first Nepalese restaurant at sea, was beautifully presented and the service impeccable.

Spirit of Adventure creates a sense of occasion and everyone is in cocktail dresses and tuxedos for the first of three formal nights.

In the Playhouse Theatre, West End singer Kerry Ellis tells her sing-along audience she has ‘never seen so many sequins’.

'It's heartwarming to watch this huge Saga family pick up where they left off before the pandemic,' says Lesley

Guests have to be double-jabbed, and also have a lateral flow test before boarding cruises

TRAVEL FACTS Saga offers six UK cruises next month including the six-night ‘Westward to the Isles of Scilly’ on Spirit of Adventure. Depart Tilbury on August 10 with calls to Portsmouth, Falmouth, Isles of Scilly and Portland. Prices from £1,112 pp (saga.co.uk/cruise, 0800 056 9947). Advertisement

She is emotional to be back on stage and passengers return the warmth, thrilled to enjoy live music again. No wonder everyone’s happy. The sea is calm, the pool is open and drinks are served on the deck. Saga cruises are all-inclusive so that means a chauffeur to and from the port, drinks, use of the cavernous spa and no tips.

Chargeable tours are well-priced, including a visit to Hadrian’s Wall from Newcastle costing £49. Calls into Belfast, Holyhead, Liverpool, the Isles of Scilly, Bristol and Falmouth all feature complimentary tours because protocols mean nobody can leave the ship without being on an excursion.

Guests have to be double-jabbed, and also have a lateral flow test before boarding cruises. Embarkation on this sailing took only 30 minutes at Tilbury’s Windrush Terminal.

Nobody was sent away after the testing, says CEO Saga Cruises Nigel Blanks.

‘We have done everything to ensure passenger safety and continue to review all procedures.

‘On this cruise we have nearly 800 on board instead of the full capacity,’ he adds.

‘A ship is cold without people. I stood on the gangway with a sense of pride and a lump in my throat as we were finally welcoming guests on board.

‘I hope we can soon sail farther afield.’

And if rivers float your boat...

River cruising enjoyed brief renaissances between the first and second lockdowns — but now they are fully resuming across Europe.

To join them, you can either fly, take the ferry or travel on Eurostar. Meanwhile, long-haul is taking off with deals including free business flights and balcony upgrades.

River cruises have introduced similar protocols to ocean cruising, even through they deal with smaller numbers of around 150 guests.

One of the joys of river cruising has always been to hop on and off the ship to walk into cities such as Cologne, Avignon and Amsterdam.

So in the short term, the current requirement to join escorted tours — rather than roam cities at will — restricts the freedom to explore.

MEET A MONK

River cruising enjoyed brief renaissances between the first and second lockdowns — but now they are fully resuming across Europe. Pictured is a river cruise in Budapest

Scenic's 15-day Jewels of Europe river cruises start on September 20. Sail from Amsterdam to Budapest along the Rhine, Main and Danube rivers. Highlights include a medieval feast at Marksburg castle and meeting a monk at a Miltenberg monastic brewery. In Vienna, you can listen to a classical concert in Palais Liechtenstein.

Details: From £4,395 pp (scenic.co.uk, 0808 3017599).

MAGNIFICENT MEKONG

Pedal around Phnom Penh on a cycle-rickshaw and see the temple city of Angkor Wat in Cambodia on a 15-day river cruise on Viking Saigon. Its Magnificent Mekong itinerary includes an eight-day cruise and hotel stays in Hanoi, Siem Reap and Ho Chi Minh City. This fly-cruise departs on December 6.

Details: From £6,895 pp (vikingcruises.co.uk, 0800 458 6900).

PORTS AND PORT

Guests on MS Douro Elegance’s Douro, Porto and Salamanca River Cruise enjoy eight free tours including lunch and a flamenco show on the September 17 sailing from Porto, Portugal.

Castelo Rodrigo and Mateus Palace gardens are also on the itinerary. Plenty of chances to sample a drop of local port along the way on the eight-day trip.

Details: From £2,439 pp (rivieratravel.co.uk, 01283 523 431).

CRUISE AND RAIL

Elegant: Pictured is a luxurious suite on the new river ship SS Venezia, with its Venetian-inspired interiors

Combine the glamour of train travel with a cruise on the new river ship SS Venezia. This 12-day holiday through the Swiss Alps from Zurich to Venice starts with four nights on the Golden Eagle Danube Express followed by a seven-night sailing with visits to a gondola-building shipyard, a private after-hours visit to St Mark’s Basilica and an overnight mooring on the island of Burano. Sailings are in 2022.

Details: From £9,999 pp (uniworld.com, 0808 168 9110).

DANUBE DELIGHTS

Save £1,117 pp on Emerald Destiny’s Danube Delights seven-night cruise on August 27, 2022 with calls to Regensburg, Passau, Durnstein, Vienna and Bratislava. The fly-cruise offer also includes an upgrade to a French balcony cabin, free drinks and no tips.

Details: From £2,594 pp (panachecruises.com, 0161 513 8200).

FLOWER POWER

Floriade, the Netherlands’ International Horticultural Expo, is held once every ten years and passengers on MS Serenade’s Dutch Waterways’ sailing can see the garden festival during the cruise starting on April 13, 2022. The sailings last eight days and only require a £49 deposit, with a choice of travel from regional airports, by Eurostar or Channel ferry.

Details: From £1,499 pp (titantravel.co.uk, 0808 239 1194).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@France was placed on the 'amber plus' list because of Beta variant cases on the tiny Reunion Island 6,000 miles from Paris, Dominic Raab said today.

The Foreign Secretary openly admitted that the classification was based on the prevalence of the strain 'in the Reunion bit of France' - which is an island in the Indian Ocean.

'It's not the distance that matters, it's the ease of travel between different component parts of any individual country,' he added.

The comments came as France voiced fury at the 'incomprehensible' decision to leave it out of exemptions from quarantine for EU and US travellers coming to the UK.

Meanwhile, La Reunion will go into a partial lockdown at the weekend due to a surge in Covid-19 infections.

The Foreign Secretary openly admitted that the classification was based on the prevalence of the strain 'in the Reunion bit of France' - which is an island in the Indian Ocean. Pictured, the 6,000-mile difference between Paris and Reunion Island

There is growing concern among officials in Paris over the infection rates in France's overseas territories in the Caribbean, Indian Ocean and the Pacific where vaccination uptake is lower than the nationwide average.

La Reunion will from Saturday for the next two weeks go into partial lockdown, with movement only allowed 10 kilometres from people's home in the daytime and five kilometres on a Sunday, said its top official, prefect Jacques Billant.

In the evenings, there will be a strict curfew from 6.00pm until 5.00am, with no movement allowed expect for essential reasons, he added.

Cafes, restaurants and gyms will also close for the next two weeks as Mr Billant described the situation as 'worrying'.

Dominic Raab's (pictured today) comments came as France voiced fury at the 'incomprehensible' decision to leave it out of exemptions from quarantine for EU and US travellers coming to the UK

He said there was 'unprecedented exponential growth of the epidemic' with 350 out of every 100,000 inhabitants infected.

The situation on La Reunion is being particularly closely watched after Britain said it was the main reason why travellers from France - unlike all other non-red list destinations - still have to quarantine for 10 days on arrival in the country.

Mr Raab told the BBC that this was due to the prevalence of the Beta variant on La Reunion, which is off Madagascar and over 9,000 kilometres (almost 6,000 miles) from Paris.

A spokesman for Brittany Ferries, which runs ferries across the Channel, said the Government's logic was 'like France hammering British holidaymakers due to a Covid outbreak on the (British Atlantic territory of the) Falkland Islands.'

French European Affairs Minister Clement Beaune earlier lambasted the British restrictions as 'discriminatory towards French people' and making 'no sense in terms of health policy'.

Beaune said the Beta strain accounted for fewer than five percent of Covid cases in France, and mostly occurred in overseas territories from where relatively few people travelled to the UK.

La Reunion (pictured) will from Saturday for the next two weeks go into partial lockdown, with movement only allowed 10 kilometres from people's home in the daytime and five kilometres on a Sunday, said its top official, prefect Jacques Billant

But Prime Minister Jean Castex earlier expressed alarm over the 'dramatic' situation in some overseas territories, with only three out of every 10 adults vaccinated on La Reunion compared with over half nationwide.

The Caribbean territory of Martinique, where only 15 percent of people are vaccinated, will also go into a three-week lockdown from Friday with only limited movements allowed in daytime an a curfew from 7.00pm, its prefect Stanislas Cazelles announced.

It comes as health officials are said to be 'getting very jumpy' about Spain's situation with the strain, which emerged in South Africa and is thought to be more resistant to the AstraZeneca vaccine given to millions in the UK.

Any move to put Spain on the 'amber plus' list is likely to provoke a fierce row within Government.

Although there is concern about the Beta variant, many experts believe it is being 'crowded out' by the more virulent Delta variant now spreading rapidly across Spain.

The shock move to place France in its own category earlier this month wrecked thousands of families' holidays as well as the plans of many expats hoping to see loved ones for the first time since the start of the pandemic.

Cases of the Delta variant have fallen sharply in France in recent weeks and ministers are confident it will be restored to the same status as other amber list countries, meaning fully vaccinated travellers will no longer have to quarantine when they return.

Asked about the possibility of Spain going on an 'amber watchlist' - with the possibility of it moving straight to the red category - Mr Raab said: 'I can't rule things that the JBC and the government will decide, but they'll make that decision next week in terms of the traffic light system for all the relevant countries.'

Mr Raab said the 'momentum forward is positive' with the high proportion of Britons who are double-jabbed.

'We've done the job we had to do domestically, and as we see other countries catch up if you like, I think we're increasingly confident that more countries will go on either on amber or onto green,' he said.

Pushed for advice to would-be holidaymakers, Mr Raab said 'you'll know next week'.

He suggested if the need to book immediately they will 'have to base it on the traffic light system we've got in place right now'.

'We can't give cast iron guarantees about what the next review system will decide. If we did it wouldn't be a very meaningful review system,' he added.

Meanwhile, French minister Clement Beaune has slammed the decision to keep quarantine measures for vaccinated travellers coming from France to the UK, while other EU countries and the US are exempted.

'It's excessive, and it's frankly incomprehensible on health grounds ... It's not based on science and discriminatory towards the French,' Mr Beaune told LCI TV.

'I hope it will be reviewed as soon as possible, it's just common sense.'

Mr Beaune said France was not planning tit-for-tat measures 'for now'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The home of tomorrow could be yours today.

A unique Jetsons-style bubble house in the suburb of Karalee in the city of Ipswich, west of Brisbane, featuring 11 giant inter-connected domes containing 20 rooms is up for sale for £800,000 ($1.5millionAUD/$1.1millionUS).

The brains behind the project is architect Graham Birchall, who didn't just rustle up the design for the quirky abode - he built it by hand and then lived in it.

A unique Jetsons-style bubble house in the suburb of Karalee in the city of Ipswich, west of Brisbane , featuring 11 giant inter-connected domes containing 20 rooms is up for sale for £800,000 ($1.5millionAUD/$1.1millionUS).

The brains behind the project is architect Graham Birchall, who didn't just rustle up the design for the quirky abode - he built it by hand and then lived in it

Graham, who's director of architecture firm Birchall and Partners and a registered builder, dreamt up the design during the final year of his architecture degree, back in 1983.

Over the next seven years, he spent weekends building the four-to-eight-metre-wide steel and concrete domes with his father-in-law, Ed Bohl.

Graham told MailOnline Travel that the inspiration for the design came from space-age imagery, including The Jetsons.

Graham, who's director of architecture firm Birchall and Partners and a registered builder, dreamt up the design during the final year of his architecture degree, back in 1983

He said: 'The Jetsons were a favourite show of mine growing up.

'Googie architecture of the fifties and sixties - featuring bold geometric shapes and sweeping curves reminiscent of space-age imagery, from rockets to flying saucers - is very much a theme that interests me.

'Not every child, however, is fortunate enough to grow up and live in their dreams.'

To make sure the look was space-aged down to the finest detail, Graham even contacted Nasa for advice, asking for help with his bespoke round window shutters.

To make sure the look was space-aged down to the finest detail, Graham even contacted Nasa for advice

Inspiration for the design came from 'Googie architecture of the fifties and sixties featuring bold geometric shapes and sweeping curves reminiscent of space-age imagery'

He mused: 'I suppose given the secret nature and the mystery that surrounded the organisation over the years I was heartened firstly that they spoke to me, and secondly that they were so forthcoming and co-operative.

'In the end, the plans they sent did not go on to help the final design of the window shade mechanism, but I was bolstered by their willingness to assist in the endeavour.'

The finished product is a sprawling cluster of cream and lavender-painted globes joined by circular passageways, the walls and ceilings arcing and curving around the decor.

Graham's neighbours gave the property its pet name, 'The Bubble House', which eventually stuck.

'The circular form and its simple purity have always fascinated me,' the architect explained.

Graham's neighbours gave the property its pet name, 'The Bubble House', which eventually stuck

'From when I began my career, I had gravitated to all types of domes and the elegance they lend to a space. The free flow and soft lines remind me of nature and The Golden Mean proportioning of Fibonacci is a heavy influence.'

Graham and his wife, Sharon, used the Bubble House for weekend getaways from 1993 through to 2012, then took up permanent residence in 2013.

However, they put the dwelling up for sale last year as they want to move closer to their grandchildren.

The property is listed by Ipswich-based First National Real Estate, which has registered interest from buyers across the globe, from France to the archipelago of Vanuatu.

Graham and his wife, Sharon, used the Bubble House for weekend getaways from 1993 through to 2012, then took up permanent residence in 2013

The property is listed by Ipswich-based First National Real Estate, which has registered interest from buyers across the globe, from France to the archipelago of Vanuatu

The riverfront property offers 1,050 square metres (11,000 square feet) of floor space and is open for private inspections with prospective buyers.

Built over three levels, the three-bedroom house has two bathrooms, a four-car garage, a wine cellar, and multiple terraces.

The ground floor features a kitchen with contoured counters and a circular island unit, which were specially designed by a boat builder and carpenter.

The fireplace, which runs from floor to ceiling and was crafted by an artisan blacksmith, is one of Graham's favourite features in the residence.

Upstairs, the main bedroom is complete with an ensuite bathroom and a private balcony looking out to the suburbs of Karalee, the name deriving from an Aboriginal word meaning 'pretty hill beside the water'.

The windows are fitted with remote-control-operated iris shutters, while the entryway is a tunnel of glass windows, allowing light to spill into the property.

'It is a home that has its own organic feel that has grown over the years,' Graham said.

'A lot of the spaces blend to form unusual nooks and crannies and light will play through windows and doors to make kaleidoscope effects on the surrounding surfaces.

'Every room is full of surprises even after nearly 40 years. It is a home which craves to be lived in.'

Graham says: 'Every room is full of surprises even after nearly 40 years. It is a home which craves to be lived in'

The riverfront property offers 1,050 square metres (11,000 square feet) of floor space and is open for private inspections with prospective buyers

Built over three levels, the three-bedroom house has two bathrooms, a four-car garage, a wine cellar, and multiple terraces

While this is the only house of its kind Graham has built, he is constantly looking at new ways to integrate circles and spheres into his architecture and has plans to build 'alternative shelter options' in the future.

He added: 'There are always new challenges just around the curve.'

Click here for more information.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The extremely kind head butler, Sean, lifts my seven-year-old daughter above the Lalique frieze counter in the hotel lobby so she can fill out a form on what time she would like cookies and milk that night.

He tries hard not to buckle as she writes carefully (and slowly).

As we are led past floral arrangements and polished wood panelling she beams, as everyone from the concierge through to the restaurant team knows her name. It feels magical, a seemingly choreographed whirl of staff and guests.

Due to the pandemic, the multi-generation, week-long villa holiday of old might this year be a three-day stay at The Savoy with grandparents

The interiors of The Savoy's swanky Beaufort Bar, where the champagne cocktails are the stuff of legend

Treating a child as a VIP here comes as a surprise: The Savoy I know is the epitome of glamorous entertaining and dining, a five-star venue for glittering evening events, where Gordon Ramsay is at the helm in the Savoy Grill and champagne cocktails at the Beaufort Bar are the stuff of legend.

Yet Covid has been the mother of invention for some London hotels after the realisation that a trickle of business guests and overseas visitors would not be enough to keep their doors revolving. But families with long school holidays to fill? They just might.

These gleaming citadels of grown-up sophistication and indulgence are a treat for most adults, never mind their offspring. Still, the emotional impact of missed opportunities during the pandemic has led families to spend more this year on decadent bursts of fun to create lasting memories. The multi-generation, week-long villa holiday of old might this year be a three-day stay at The Savoy with grandparents.

At Solas, a pop-up alfresco dining area that has transformed The Savoy's entrance, two families with teenage boys are chattering over the speciality here – seafood platters – and selfies ensue.

Afternoon tea can be taken from noon to 4pm in The Savoy's Thames Foyer

Solas is a pop-up alfresco dining area that has transformed The Savoy's entrance with seafood platters being one of the most popular picks on the menu

We take the Red Lift, London's first electric elevator. It dates from 1889, is padded out in red leather, including its seat, and is affectionately known as the Ascending Room. There are 267 rooms – check in to 326 and, like us, you'll unpack in the elegantly furnished Winston Churchill suite, where incredible views of the River Thames and Embankment are framed by majestic swags of curtain.

Yet it is soft, too, and comforting, with overstuffed sofa, writing desk and fireplace. But all eyes are on a book stand with carefully chosen titles for a seven-year-old. A chalk slate reads 'Romilly's Library' and has two named balloons tied to it. 'For me? How did they know?' she squeals.

Children with aunts and a couple with three immaculately behaved little ones relish the chance to tuck into chocolate cake as a pianist plays softly

On a comfy windowside bed she finds a bag of goodies – a colouring book and pencils plus a perfect-size robe and Savoy monogrammed slippers. There's also a box of fresh caramel popcorn and Savoy chocolate lollies (surely for the grown-ups?).

The real treasure, on her pillow, is a black fluffy toy cat, Kaspar, the Savoy mascot, who has been her bedfellow ever since. He is the creation of author Michael Morpurgo who wrote Kaspar, Prince Of Cats, after his tenure as writer-in-residence here in 2016. Morpurgo was charming, according to The Savoy's own archivist, Susan Scott.

Later we gallop through a wonderful history with Susan, back to the Duchy of Lancaster owning the site in 1240. It was US theatre entrepreneur Richard D'Oyly Carte who brought the best of US modernity to London's Edwardian theatreland and in 1889 opened The Savoy as the first purpose-built luxury hotel and the first public building in the world completely lit by electricity. Afternoon tea, booked in advance, can be taken from noon to 4pm in the Thames Foyer – a far more elegant space than it sounds.

TRAVEL FACTS Sarah Hartley was a guest of Fairmont Hotels. The Savoy has Superior rooms from £580 per night and Deluxe King with an additional rollaway bed from £705 per night. Afternoon tea is £65 per adult and £37.50 for children (thesavoylondon.com). Advertisement

Tables are wonderfully placed, allowing guests to feel truly special as cake-stands laden with dainty patisserie confections, finely cut sandwiches and scones are laid out with a flourish. Champagne precedes Savoy-blend tea.

Children with aunts and a couple with three immaculately behaved little ones relish the chance to tuck into chocolate cake as a pianist plays softly. At the next table a man – not in his youth – proposes to his tea companion and she tries the ring on for size and is smitten. It is all very low-key and such fun.

That night we can't bear to dine out – what could be more delicious for our daughter than spaghetti bolognese in a bathrobe, watching the sun set over the London Eye, then cuddling up with Kaspar to read Charlotte's Web from her very own library? The boat-sized bath has its own Savoy Ahoy toy boat, while the monochrome bathroom comes with pleasing Art Deco touches and walk-in shower.

At breakfast, our daughter copies other children and orders chocolate pancakes – berries are a side order delivered with a wink by our waitress to throw in some vitamins.

After an Arnold Bennett omelette, fresh orange juice and strong coffee refills, I fear we may sink in the swimming pool. At the time, sessions had to be booked ahead and were only for your bubble. But to have 30 minutes splashing in private with my daughter is heaven.

We could have booked a week somewhere coastal with fresh air and walks, but I know we've hit the memory bank when she later asks a family friend: 'Do you know The Savoy? It's wonderful. They give you a cat to take home too.'

Fancy feasts and their own concierge!

Little ones at The Dorchester can get their own bathrobes, teddy bears and pint-sized beds

The Peter Rabbit afternoon tea at The Dilly on Piccadilly will have your little ones nibbling on themed sweet treats

It's fantasy time for families checking in to luxury London hotels as itineraries have been cranked up to full-force fun.

Little ones at The Dorchester can get booked in for a car ride to Buckingham Palace in a classic Rolls-Royce, or they can whip up a treat or two during a cooking class in the hotel's kitchens.

Children's tea is a 'fanciful feast' with milkshakes, sandwiches, cakes and sprinkles aplenty.

A Superior King Room plus adjoining room, B&B for two adults and two children costs from £815 a night, or suites from £2,770 (dorchestercollection.com).

Over at The Dilly on Piccadilly, with a £60 family travel card for each night of your stay, watch your child become a Dilly Explorer with maps to guide them (with your help) to attractions such as the Natural History Museum and Hamleys.

Your children can meet Teddy the Shetland pony at The Goring

Big treats: An exhibition of lifesize wooden elephants in the Royal Parks near some of London's most exclusive luxury hotels

There are connecting family rooms at the Athenaeum

Peter Rabbit afternoon tea will have your little ones nibbling on themed sweet treats.

Under-12s eat free in the restaurant and it's a pet-friendly hotel. B&B for two adults and two children in a Dilly Family Room is from £499 a night (thedillylondon.com).

Kids will adore Teddy the Shetland pony, who is checking in for a 'stablecation' at The Goring in August. They will find him roaming free in the walled garden and can enjoy a pony-themed afternoon tea before cuddles with Teddy.

The Teddy overnight package is from £585, Teddy Afternoon Tea is £50pp or Teddy Afternoon Tea With Bollinger is from £62pp (thegoring.com/teddy).

Talking of roaming free, make time for your children to experience the majestic lifesize elephant sculptures that are touring London's Royal Parks as part of a campaign to highlight our coexistence with wildlife (coexistence.org).

Families come first at the Athenaeum in Mayfair with a Children's Concierge to keep your little ones happy – whether it is delving into the hotel Toy Store or taking bikes into Green Park. Family rooms with connecting rooms cost from £600 per night (athenaeumhotel.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Travellers returning to UK from green or amber countries must take a PCR swab

Ministers could ban companies which mislead customers by promising cheap Covid PCR tests, it was claimed today.

Holidaymakers buying travel tests from the cheapest firms on No10's official website face paying up to five times the amount advertised. Research shows the real cost of single-test kits advertised for just £20 on the list can be as much as £99.

Health Secretary Sajid Javid has already asked financial watchdogs to investigate if travellers are being ripped off or misled.

Whitehall sources they expect health chiefs to begin 'culling' firms that quote 'wildly different prices to the ones they are offering on the government website'.

A source told The Times: 'The Competition and Markets Authority will be looking at that and that's expected to be part of their findings and recommendations.'

The Government is facing increasing pressure to end the 'Wild West' of test costs for travellers.

MailOnline yesterday revealed the most expensive PCR test listed on the catalogue of approved providers costs £400. On average, British travellers have to fork out £92 per test.

But customers are paying far more than what is 'fair', according to Professor Stephen Bustin, a world-renowned expert on PCR tests at Anglia Ruskin University. He said a price in the region of £20 would be reasonable.

Most of the cut-price offers are either out of stock or only offered in actual centres — meaning many customers would have to travel hundreds of miles.

Tourists travelling to green list countries and fully vaccinated holidaymakers going to amber list destinations are required to book one PCR test in Britain for when they re-enter the country.

Non-vaccinated travellers need two after returning from amber list countries and red list destinations require two regardless of inoculation status.

Ministers insist travellers take PCR tests — which can take three days to give results — because they are more accurate than cheaper lateral flows, which offer answers in as little as 20 minutes.

Ministers could ban companies offering PCR tests for travel at five times their advertised price of £20. Pictured: Ed Cockroft receives a test in Cabot Circus car park, Bristol

Health Secretary Sajid Javid (left) has asked the Competition and Markets Authority to investigate whether travellers are being ripped off or misled. A price in the region of £20 would be reasonable for the swabs according to Professor Stephen Bustin (right), a world-renowned expert on PCR at Anglia Ruskin University

WHAT COMPANIES ARE ADVERTISING £20 TESTS? Test For Now claims to offer a self-swab Covid test for £21 on the Government website but the cheapest available on its website is for travelers to take on their second day back in the UK and costs £89 for a self-swab version, while it costs £97 for the same test at its clinic. Meanwhile, Everything Genetic's £20 offer is only available to NHS staff, with others charged £60. Pillhub-Feltham Pharmacy and 0-100 Travel 19's £20 tests are currently sold-out and their other PCR tests cost £80. ArrivingUK advertising 'self swab at home' day two kits for £20 on the Government portal. But on the firm's website this was only available to people who could collect them from Wembley in north London. The real cost was £89 plus £10 postage. Abicare Health was listed at the same low price but its website says this is only available if you can travel to Manchester — and not until November. The real cost for a posted kit is £75. Advertisement

Of the 12 cheapest firms listed yesterday which offered £20 single-test 'self swab at home' kits, none were willing to post them out at that price.

The research, by the Daily Mail, found testing firm ArrivingUK advertising 'self swab at home' day two kits for £20 on the Government portal.

But on the firm's website this was only available to people who could collect them from Wembley in north London. The real cost was £89 plus £10 postage.

Abicare Health was listed at the same low price but its website says this is only available if you can travel to Manchester — and not until November. The real cost for a posted kit is £75.

Everything Genetic Ltd also offered single-test packages for £20 but its website says this price is only available for NHS workers. Otherwise it's £60.

Rory Boland, editor of Which? Travel, said: 'The Government list is not really fit for purpose. Many of the cheapest advertised don't exist or the advertised prices are impossible or unrealistic to obtain.

'Many also fail to provide tests and results on time. It's unacceptable and ridiculous.'

Avi Lasarow, boss of testing firm Project Screen by Prenetics, said a 'small minority of rogue traders' were bamboozling travellers. He added: 'Ministers must really act to end this Wild West of prices.'

The £399 PCR test listed on the UK Government's approved list of providers is offered by the Mayfair GP, a small private practice based in London.

The Department of Health says the tests — which can be performed in a matter of minutes — are carried out by people in their own home. But they are supervised by medical staff, meaning the firm may factor in some travel and labour costs.

The Mayfair GP uses Oncologica's laboratory to carry out the testing, suggesting the provider likely has to pay to get samples analysed.

Labs use a machine and array of chemicals to decipher whether a sample contains Covid.

Research by the Mail shows the real cost of single-test kits advertised for just £20 on the list can be as much as £99. Graphic shows: The step-by-step process of a PCR test

Research by airline consultancy Skytrax shows airport PCR tests were available for as little as $8 (£5.70) in Mumbai, India, in April. The cost in Britain was nearly £100

The average price among all the 425 Government-approved provider for a single swab is just over £90 — a cost which pricing many families out of going abroad this summer.

Virginia Messina, of the World Travel & Tourism Council, called on ministers to subsidise PCR tests if they keep insisting on them, or let travellers take cheaper rapid tests.

Everything Genetic agreed 'many companies are manipulating their price' but denied it was one of them, saying it had 'provided quality services to the NHS, private sector and public for nearly five years now'.

A Government spokesman said: 'The Health and Social Care Secretary has requested advice from the CMA to stamp out any exploitative behaviour.

'We are also working with the travel industry and private testing providers to further reduce testing costs.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amazon's highly anticipated $1billion Lord of the Rings series will relocate filming to the UK in the latest loss for New Zealand after Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced strict border controls were here to stay.

New Zealand's premier yesterday warned that border restrictions will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out.

Ardern said she hoped to cautiously reopen to the rest of the world next year while maintaining the country's virus-free status.

But Amazon, who are due to start shooting for the second season of the hotly-anticipated Lord of the Rings television series, decided to move their filming base from New Zealand to the UK as a result.

The $1billion production, which had already received rebates from the government, will start filming in the United Kingdom from next year - marking the first time the production won't be created using New Zealand's stunning landscapes.

Albert Cheng, co-head of TV for Amazon Studios, confirmed the relocation and said the company would not 'actively pursue' the five per cent financial uplift with New Zealand's government.

Amazon's hotly-anticipated $1bn Lord of the Rings television series will relocate filming to the UK from 2022 after Jacinda Arden's announcement

New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said that strict border controls will continue until 2022 as she warned Kiwis they will face full lockdowns if the Government fails to keep the Delta variant out

While the first set of television episodes followed in the footsteps of Peter Jackson's epic trilogy by shooting in New Zealand, season two will be made in the United Kingdom.

Vernon Sanders, vice president of Amazon Studios, paid tribute to New Zealanders ahead of the studio's departure.

'We want to thank the people and the government of New Zealand for their hospitality and dedication and for providing the series with an incredible place to begin this epic journey,' he said.

'We are grateful to the New Zealand Film Commission, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Tourism New Zealand, Auckland Unlimited, and others for their tremendous collaboration that supported the New Zealand film sector and the local economy during the production of Season One.'

Announcing the news that New Zealand faces the prospect of tough border measures until at least 2022, Arden said changes would be 'careful and deliberate' to avoid allowing variants such as the highly contagious Delta strain into the country.

'Rushing could see us in the situation many other countries are finding themselves in,' Ardern said, citing an outbreak of the Delta variant in neighbouring Australia that has forced its two largest cities into renewed lockdown.

The government is also warning its citizens to be prepared for a strict lockdown at the first sign of an outbreak of the Delta variant.

Ardern said the government planned to follow the advice of experts and maintain their elimination strategy.

'While the pandemic continues to rage overseas, and the virus continues to change and mutate, the best thing we can do is lock in the gains achieved to date while keeping our options open,' she said.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. Despite pledges that the country would be 'at the front of the queue' for the vaccine, the rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with less than 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated.

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows.

COVID-19 Response Minister Chris Hipkins said the government's response to an outbreak of the Delta variant is likely to be 'swift and severe.' New Zealand has stamped out the spread of the virus and had previously planned to rely primarily on contact tracing for any small outbreaks.

But Hipkins said the problems that Sydney currently faces in trying to contact trace a growing outbreak showed the delta variant was extremely hard to manage and that New Zealand's tolerance for risk was now very low.

Its vulnerability was exposed after unvaccinated port workers in Tauranga berthed a ship where 11 of the 21 crew had tested positive for the virus. More than 90 port workers have been tested but so far no one has returned a positive test.

Ardern said the borders would not reopen until after New Zealand's vaccine rollout was completed at the end of the year. The rollout has been much slower than in most developed nations, with under 20 per cent of the population fully inoculated

Officials also said they would delay second shots of the Pfizer vaccine in order to speed up first shots to protect more people as the threat of the delta variant grows

The announcement comes as Ardern faced calls to ease border measures from sectors such as healthcare, hospitality and agriculture, which are facing acute labour shortages due to the absence of foreign workers.

The country's tourism industry - one of its main economic drivers - is on its knees with the borders shut to non-residents and non-citizens.

New Zealand's success in erasing the coronavirus has allowed life to return almost to normal. The South Pacific nation of 5 million people has reported just 26 deaths since the pandemic began.

That's been achieved in part by closing borders to those who aren't residents or citizens.

But many question whether its feasible for New Zealand to maintain a zero-tolerance approach to the virus once international travel resumes.

Ardern said vaccinations would ramp up with the goal of offering jabs to all the eligible population by year's end, allowing a relaxation of border policies.

She said that from the first quarter of next year, the country would begin allowing travelers to arrive on a carefully managed basis.

Under the proposed changes, international arrivals would be assessed on vaccination status and whether they have travelled from a country deemed high, medium or low risk.

Fully vaccinated travelers from low-risk countries would not be required to quarantine, she said. Those arriving from medium-risk countries would need to complete some form of quarantine. And those arriving from high-risk countries, or who were unvaccinated, would need to stay 14 days in a quarantine hotel run by the military, Ardern said.

The government did not provide a ranking of countries by risk, saying it could change quickly.

'Our ultimate goal is to get to quarantine-free travel for all vaccinated travellers,' Ardern said, without providing a timetable.

She said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic.

'Vaccines, border testing and maybe a bit of monitoring of symptoms when you travel will eventually become our baseline. And we will get used to it,' she said.

Ardern said international travel would never be the same as it was before the pandemic

Ardern said a new trial would begin in October that would allow some business travelers to quarantine at home rather than in military-run hotels as a test of the new system it planned to introduce for medium-risk countries next year.

Ardern also announced it was increasing the standard time scheduled between Pfizer vaccine doses from three weeks to six weeks. She said the initial groups targeted for the vaccine - border workers and older people - had already been fully vaccinated.

'From a population basis, it makes sense to get as many New Zealanders at least partially vaccinated quickly,' Ardern said.

The changes were generally welcomed by business owners, including those in the struggling tourism industry. Before the pandemic, more than 3 million overseas travelers visited New Zealand each year and tourism was among the country's largest industries.

'It's important to have a roadmap so all businesses, including tourism operators, can plan ahead and make informed decisions,' said Chris Roberts, the chief executive of Tourism Industry Aotearoa.

Opposition Leader Judith Collins said Ardern's announcements were a step in the right direction but the government needed to speed up its vaccination program.

About 29 per cent of New Zealanders have received one dose of the vaccine and 17 per cent are fully vaccinated.

New Zealand's tentative attempts to relax border controls have so far met with mixed success.

A travel bubble with Australia faced numerous disruptions and was finally suspended in June as multiple outbreaks spread across the Tasman Sea.

Quarantine-free travel is allowed with the tiny Cook Islands, and New Zealand this month launched a scheme to bring in seasonal workers from Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu without having to self-isolate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What makes a British summer so… British? Apparently, it’s everyone moaning about the weather.

That’s according to a recent survey that asked those polled what makes for a quintessentially British summer. ‘Everyone complaining about the weather’ came top of the 30-strong list with 52 per cent of the vote.

Having a 99 with a chocolate flake from the ice cream van was voted second (40 per cent), while in 10th place, a quarter of Britons polled insisted summer hasn’t officially arrived until someone makes a massive fuss over a wasp during a day out.

Buying a 99 with a chocolate flake from the ice cream van was voted into second place

Harking back to childhood, the tinkling music of the ice cream van coming down a street was voted the third best thing about a British summer, earning 34 per cent of the vote.

Next, at number four, was the smell of sunscreen (32 per cent), while three in ten voters put eating strawberries and cream (fifth) - a Wimbledon staple - as the key summer element.

Speaking of Wimbledon, 27 per cent of voters agreed that the annual tennis championship (joint eighth) was a summer essential, while watching the cricket on the sofa ranked in 15th place (17 per cent).

The 'soothing sound of your neighbours mowing the lawn’ is essential to a British summer, according to a survey

Twenty-seven per cent of those polled agreed they are annually cheered by the excitement of Wimbledon

Sixth most popular, at 29 per cent, was burning your bangers on the grill at a fair-weather BBQ, and the sight of a crowd of men gathered around the grill left 26 per cent of voters (ninth) feeling nostalgic.

The 'soothing sound of your neighbours mowing the lawn’ is also a crucial ingredient for a summer spent at home for Britons (28 per cent, joint seventh) .

Also tied in seventh place were getting sunburnt on the first day of hot weather (28 per cent) and an ice-cold pint and a packet of crisps in a pub garden (also 28 per cent).

For many, no British summer is complete without inconvenient tan lines

Britons can't beat an ice-cold pint and a packet of crisps in a pub garden

30 THINGS THAT MAKE FOR A QUINTESSENTIALLY BRITISH SUMMER 1. Moaning it's either too hot or too wet - 52 per cent 2. A 99 with a flake from the ice cream van - 40 per cent 3. Hearing the ice cream van come down your street - 34 per cent 4. The smell of sunscreen - 32 per cent 5. Strawberries and cream - 30 per cent 6. Burning your bangers on the BBQ - 29 per cent 7= Getting shorts on at the first sight of sun - 28 per cent 7= The soothing sound of your neighbours mowing the lawn - 28 per cent 7= Getting sunburnt on the first day of hot weather - 28 per cent 7= An ice-cold pint and a packet of crisps/peanuts in a pub garden - 28 per cent 8= Summer festival season - 27 per cent 8= Wimbledon - 27 per cent 9. Groups of men standing around the BBQ - 26 per cent 10. Making a massive fuss about a wasp - 25 per cent 11. Drinks in the park - 24 per cent 12= A Sunday roast, whatever the weather - 23 per cent 12= Seagulls trying to steal your ice cream - 23 per cent 13. Checkered picnic blankets - 22 per cent 14= People wearing socks and sandals - 19 per cent 14= Complaining to anyone who will listen about your hay fever - 19 per cent 15= Inconvenient tan lines - 17 per cent 15= The cricket - 17 per cent 16= The sound of rain hitting the outside of your tent - 16 per cent 16= Chasing your kids around the garden with a hose - 16 per cent 17. The sound of your partner doing chores in the garden - 11 per cent 18= Getting the bunting out for your garden party - 10 per cent 18= Having to use a mini fan on the bus - 10 per cent 19. The comeuppance of the unlikeable man on Love Island - 9 per cent 20. Impromptu games of rounders - 8 per cent 21. Lashings of ginger beer - 6 per cent Source: Noveltea Advertisement

The British love to swap their trousers for shorts at the first sight of sunshine, 28 per cent of voters agreed - another contender for seventh place - and the ensuing inconvenient tan lines landed 17 per cent of the vote (joint 15th).

Spreading out a checkered picnic blanket for a day in the park claimed the 13th spot with 22 per cent of the vote, and one in ten cheered for getting the bunting out for your garden party (18th).

Even the seemingly lousy aspects of summer in England got a vote, with seagulls trying to steal your ice cream (23 per cent, joint 12th), the sound of rain hitting your tent (16 per cent, joint 16th) and complaining to anyone who will listen about your hay fever (19 per cent, joint 14th) all making it into the top 30.

Getting the bunting out for your garden party was tied in 18th place with having to use a mini fan on the bus

Britons admitted they enjoy the 'sound of rain hitting the outside of your tent'

The survey of 1,500 people by Perspectus Global for alcoholic tea brand Noveltea found that 94 per cent of Britons agree that the UK summer is a totally unique experience - despite the dodgy weather.

Reflecting on the findings, Graeme Nash, Director of Marketing at Noveltea, said: ‘The research reveals we love to have a good moan about the weather during the summer, as well as enjoying those other classic experiences from eating 99p flakes to hearing our neighbours mow the lawn.

‘At Noveltea we’re all about those quintessentially British moments of joy and humour, be it a wasp-free picnic or the first rewarding drink after a hard day’s work, so we’re delighted to learn more about the moments that make Britain smile.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Statues of former Soviet leaders that once sat proudly in city centres have been discarded in private parks, isolated forests, empty fields and behind old buildings.

And their plight has been documented in a project by American photographer Matthew Moore.

His stark series includes an image of the heads of Lenin and Stalin on a palette in a basement, a giant Lenin head lying on grass at the back of the Estonian History Museum in Tallinn and a statue of Stalin hidden in a Czech garden, facing a hedge.

US photographer Matthew Moore travels around former Soviet states capturing discarded Soviet statues. Here a statue of Lenin stands in an empty overgrown field in Kosice, Slovakia

Busts of Engels, Marx, Lenin, and Stalin sit in front of fir trees in Grutas Park, near Druskininkai in Lithuania. The sculpture garden features dozens of Soviet-era statues

An isolated statue of Stalin stands eerily in the Grutas Park forest. The verdant setting is similar to the places where he sent thousands of people to their deaths while he was in power

Forty-five-year-old Matthew, based in Maryland, has travelled around former Soviet states not only tracking down where the statues have ended up – but what happened to the sites where they used to stand.

Matthew moved to the Czech Republic in the year 2000 and while he was there, and during regular visits since moving back to the U.S, he discovered that a statue of Lenin that once stood in the centre of the Lithuanian capital opposite the KGB building where people were tortured, is now displayed in Grutas Park.

Grutas Park, unofficially known as Stalin World, is also home to a statue of Stalin standing to attention in a forest similar to where he used to send people to die.

Meanwhile, boulders now sit in the former Leninplatz, Berlin, where a statue of Lenin stood. The monument was removed in 1992 and buried in 192 pieces in a wooded area outside Berlin.

Lenin in a relaxed, cross-legged pose on the edge of Grutas Park

This statue of Lenin once stood across the street from a former KGB building in Vilnius, Lithuania, where thousands were tortured. It was later taken down and relocated out of the city to Grutas Park

The spot where a statue of Lenin once stood in Vilnius before it was relocated to Grutas Park

The toppling of Edward Colston's statue in Bristol last year and the current court case on removing the statue of Confederate general Robert E Lee have highlighted the issue of political statues in the UK and U.S.

Matthew was happy that his photos could be part of the conversation.

He believes that the countries could learn from the ways former Soviet states have dealt with upheaval and trauma.

A discarded monument of Stalin stands facing away, half-buried at the centre of a labyrinth of a chateau that had been repossessed by the communist government in the Czech Republic. It had been commissioned just before the regime change and therefore never erected

The head from a statue of Lenin lies abandoned at the back of the Estonian History Museum in Tallinn. The museum has been gathering discarded Soviet monuments for decades

'What these societies have learned from the upheaval is that these statues are important. They have meaning and can be offensive,' he said.

'People in the United States don't seem to feel that way. Well, not all of them. Many of them think if you tear down a statue, you're erasing history.

'That is complete nonsense. These statues are put there for a particular political reason.

'I think that cultures there have an edge on us in terms of understanding the meaning of these works of art and these monuments.'

Moore believes that other countries could learn from the ways former Soviet states have dealt with upheaval and trauma. Pictured, a solitary Lenin in a statue graveyard in Tallinn, Estonia

Busts of Stalin and Lenin are propped up on pallets hidden away in a basement room in Memento Park. The open-air museum in Budapest, Hungary, is dedicated to statues and sculptures from the country's communist period

In places such as Budapest, the Soviet-era statues have been made available for people to see but have not been placed in the centre of town. Pictured, a piece of a Lenin statue sits beside a stone relief in the Hungarian capital's Memento Park

The Republic of Councils Monument, which was created in 1969 and depicts a charging sailor, once stood on Dozsa Gyorgy street in Budapest but now it resides in the city's Memento Park

He was inspired to start the project after hearing about a man who set himself on fire in front of a Lenin statue in a Lithuanian town in 1989.

Fascinated by the story, he decided to look at the spot where it happened to take some photos.

Matthew - who's Associate Professor of Photography at Anne Arundel Community College in Arnold, Maryland - categorised the project into two parts. The first, titled Scars, focuses on the exact locations where the statues once stood and the second, Idols, captures where the statues are today.

The photos show seemingly innocuous public parks and town squares, but they are still very charged places to some people.

Sometimes the absence of the statue is obvious, while the local government has tried to transform the space in some cases.

'Different societies approach these problems in different ways and that's what the project is really about. Then the same thing occurs with the unwanted statue that's now been removed,' Matthew said.

This bronze statue of Lenin used to stand at the workers’ entrance of the ironworks in Budapest but it was relocated to Memento Park

A metronome monument takes centre stage in Prague's hilltop Letna Park. It stands in the same place where the largest Stalin statue in the world once stood. The Czech people blew up that monument during the period of de-Stalinization

A square in Tallin, Estonia, where a statue of Lenin once stood has since been filled in with a small garden. Matthew's project is categorised into two parts. The first, titled Scars, focuses on the exact locations where the statues once stood and the second, Idols, captures where the statues are today

A decorative arch now stands in place of a large statue of Lenin that was torn down in 1991. The arch is located in the centre of the Latvian capital, Riga

Some statues are sold off, others are off the beaten path and some are even on display in well-known locations, such as Memento Park, Hungary.

In places such as Budapest, the statues have been made available for people to see but have not been placed in the centre of town.

'It's a compromise and a recognition of the power that they have. They are this haunting object that can upset people,' Matthew said.

'I think it depends on the amount of trauma that they suffered. Some societies really want to deal with that trauma in a healthy way and others want to just try to get through it and not look back.'

Some of the spots have changed since Matthew originally visited them.

In some cases, when the statues were first taken down nothing but an empty field was left, but years later a memorial or monument to anti-communism has been installed.

It is a matter of securing funds or having younger politicians who do not remember the trauma to debate the issue.

Boulders now sit in the former Leninplatz, Berlin, where a statue of Lenin stood. The monument was removed in 1992 and buried in 192 pieces in a wooded area outside the city

The Stalin statue that once stood on Karl-Marx-Allee (formerly Stalinallee) in Berlin, was pushed off its pedestal with a bulldozer and smashed into pieces. A fountain was installed in its place but has been out of operation for years

Matthew said: 'If you ask an older person on the street where the statue was, they'll tell you immediately, they always remember. There is never any hesitation.

'I don't really ask younger people because they don't necessarily know. I think a lot of younger people walk over these spaces all the time and they really don't understand the significance of this space.

'That fascinates me. It's actually one of the things that drives me to do the photographs. To help with remembrance.

'It's not necessarily just about that particular space, but just the idea that we are walking on hallowed ground at all times.'

The process of every photo begins with research. Matthew starts by looking for locations online. He looks at archival photos or searches for the locations on Google Earth, prints them out and plans a journey to cover three locations in two days.

An exhibition of the project - Post-Socialist Landscapes - will be on display at Blue Sky Gallery in Portland, Oregon, in 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Disembarking on a private Caribbean island in the same week as its billionaire owner is jetting off into space feels faintly surreal. Is he avoiding me? Have I done something to upset him?

Necker without Richard Branson, who bought the island in 1978, is like Ant without Dec, Morecambe without Wise. It is more than his home, his secret hideaway — it is where he has stamped his entire personality. Brilliant and bonkers and often both at once.

This little slice of luxury in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) has had a torrid time of late. In 2011, the main house was destroyed by fire and then in 2017, Necker was battered by Hurricane Irma, the most ferocious in memory. Then along came coronavirus.

Creature comforts: Richard Branson has his own home on Necker, which is located in the British Virgin Islands

With so many setbacks, so much damaged infrastructure to repair, Branson has had to invest tens of millions in his beloved Necker. It remains his headquarters on Planet Earth and he has his own home on the island.

But he is also keen to attract more paying guests — which is why I’ve been invited to sample its pleasures before its relaunch as a private island resort. Not a taxing assignment.

The 74-acre island can accommodate up to 40 guests in a handful of high-end properties, done in Balinese style, with plunge pools, 360-degree views, complimentary champagne et al.

Only those with cash to splash need apply. To book the island for the exclusive use of you and your family will set you back £75,000 a night. But in selected weeks of the year, targeted at families celebrating special occasions with their friends, the island functions as a hotel, with room rates starting at just over £3,500 a night.

Not peanuts, but a lot cheaper than flying into space. Oh, and the BVI will be on the Government’s amber list of countries from Monday.

A flight to Antigua, a transfer by private jet, then a short boat trip, and you can be on the beach with a rum punch in your hand before you can say Virgin Galactic.

Transformation: The Crocodile Pavilion was rebuilt following the devastation wreaked by Hurricane Irma in 2017

Hurricane Irma was the most ferocious in memory and it battered the island, as can be seen above

It is certainly an extraordinarily beautiful place. Apart from three large wind turbines and hundreds of solar panels, as a nod to environmental sustainability, this is the Caribbean in perfect miniature.

Soft sand underfoot. Swaying palm trees above. The sun warm but not too warm. Lapping waves. Lush vegetation. Thrillingly blue seas. Box after box ticked all with effortless ease.

So far, so familiar. But it is the exuberant, eccentric extras, not to be found anywhere else in the Caribbean, that make Necker unique.

Having had my breakfast disrupted by a stray iguana, I am strolling down to the beach when a Cockney voice hails me from behind a palm tree. ‘ ’Allo! ’Allo!’

Necker is being relaunched as a private island resort for up to 40 guests. Pictured are the Balinese-style interiors

It turns out to be a white cockatoo answering to the name of Marley. Charming chap, if conversationally limited. I have just said goodbye to Marley when I nearly trip over a giant tortoise plodding across the lawn. Crikey! I thought these magnificent creatures were only found in the Galapagos Islands. Not so, apparently.

Umpire, as this one is called, has been imported from the Seychelles, a member of staff explains. He is more than 70 years old, weighs 700 lb and is part of a successful breeding programme.

And so it goes on. Umpire’s achievements as a super-stud are eclipsed by a randy ring-tailed lemur called Mr 007. An endangered species in their native Madagascar, from where they have been imported, the lemurs have bred like rabbits on Necker.

But, then, it’s a sexy place. There are at least seven different sub-species and, when they are not making a hullabaloo mating, they are stopping play on the tennis court by walking behind the server’s arm. Bonkers.

All systems go: Necker is an 'extraordinarily beautiful place', writes the Daily Mail's Max Davidson. Pictured is an inviting pool

A sumptuous bath tub in one of the high-end properties

How do you cap that? Flamingos! A hundred years ago, they had disappeared from the Virgin Islands. Branson, undaunted, flew some in from Cuba.

There are now hundreds on Necker and to see them take flight at sunset, in perfect formation, like the Pink Arrows, with scarlet ibises for an escort, is too thrilling for words.

I had hoped for a sighting of the Greater Spotted Celebrity, another common species on Necker. Signed thank you letters from the likes of Princess Diana and Barack Obama adorn the walls. A book by the Duchess of York sits next to the Branson oeuvre in the gift shop.

In 2011, Kate Winslet made headlines around the world when she carried Branson’s elderly mother out of a burning house. But my luck is out. Could the craggy-looking man knocking up on the tennis court be Jack Nicholson? Nope. Too tall. German accent.

How about that well-spoken English lady in a silk dress asking for directions to the lavatory? Nope. Posh writer from London.

The resort staff, who outnumber guests by two to one, are a friendly, cosmopolitan lot. Geordies, Scots, Swedes, Canadians, Portuguese, Indians, as well as BVI locals. Their discretion, naturally, is assured. If you want to do anything more adventurous in the rooftop hot tub than gaze at the night sky, it will go no further.

The Necker food, superintended by the charming French chef, Guillaume, is predictably superb, with everything from fish curry to fresh Caribbean fruit and veg to chargrilled lobsters on the beach.

Zany touch follows zany touch. When I’m summoned to a ‘surprise’ lunch by the pool, after a morning sailing round the neighbouring islands by catamaran, I expect some mad publicity stunt, like cocktails served by Brad Pitt in a white tuxedo.

Instead, I get something even better: delectable sushi borne across the pool on a kayak decorated with palm leaves. As lunchers take to the water, chopsticks in one hand, glass of champagne in the other, Britain suddenly seems a long way away.

Giant tortoise, imported from the Seychelles, roam the island. The billionaire owner has also flown flamingos in from Cuba

Next up is a gloriously chaotic tennis tournament, with more duffed volleys in an hour than you would expect in the whole of Wimbledon fortnight. The tennis coach, gallantly, says that I display promise.

My last night is party time in the great Necker tradition. Hair is let down with happy abandon.

Where else would this normally sedate grandfather from Oxford find himself up on the table at 3am, belting out Sweet Caroline to whoops of approval?

As beautiful women, clad head-to-toe in white, jump fully dressed into the pool, there is a shrill cackling sound in the darkness. Marley the cockatoo? Lemurs mating on the tennis court? Or Richard Branson up in space chortling at our antics?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Japanese photographer Ryosuke Kosuge, better known as RK, started out in 2013 by taking photos on his iPhone.

Eight years later, he's moved on to more complex kit, and he's taking Instagram by storm, with more than 607,00 followers and counting.

His portfolio of striking images showcase how the man-made and natural worlds coexist.

In addition to taking photographs in his home city of Tokyo, he travels around the world snapping subjects and scenery as far and wide as Italy, America and the UK.

'Awe inspiring', 'insane' and 'spectacular' are just a few of the comments RK's followers regularly leave on his Instagram posts.

Here is MailOnline Travel's pick of some of his most mesmerising shots.

This rare heart-shaped body of water is Lake Toyoni in Hokkaido, Japan. Explaining how he felt when he took this picture, 38-year-old RK said: 'The sky was a clear blue over our hearts. Everyone felt a sensation of natural happiness'

This mesmerising picture is of King Alfred's Tower, a folly in Wiltshire, England. RK said: 'The wall of this chapel is reaching to the sky. It might be connect[ed] to heaven'

RK described this elevated road junction in Guangxi in southern China as 'one of the most beautiful viaducts in the world'. Describing the circumstances in which he took this photograph, he said: 'The rim of the sun was blazing up over a sharp horizon'

This image, praised by RK's followers for its symmetry, was taken in Vietnam. The objects balancing on the bike are hand-crafted bamboo fish traps. On Instagram, RK revealed that the art of making these traps is dying out in many villages

This stunning image of Mount Fuji was taken out of a plane window using a Sony Alpha camera. RK wrote on Instagram when he posted this shot: 'Never stop exploring this great world'

RK uses the hashtags #depthobsessed and #moodygrams to describe this photograph of Los Angeles on Instagram. One follower commented: 'Love the tones there'

LEFT: This ethereal image was taken at the Tianwen Platform in Jishou, central China. RK told MailOnline Travel: 'Chinese architecture is cool.' RIGHT: This spellbinding image is of RK's home city of Tokyo - 'one of the most glamorous cities in the world'. The illuminated Eiffel Tower lookalike is the 332.9m- (1,092ft) high Tokyo Tower, an observation and communications tower built in 1958

This dizzying picture showcases the Tao Zhu Yin Yuan apartment building in Taipei in all its glory. RK said: 'Architecture is a visual art, and the buildings speak for themselves'

'Go into the woods, go into a fairy tale,' RK said about this image, which was taken at the sustainable Treeful Treehouse resort in Okinawa, a prefecture off the southwest coast of Japan made up of more than 150 islands

LEFT: Taken in Taipei, Taiwan, this photograph showcases RK's signature style 'The Dense'. In these images, every inch of the shot is filled with action and colour. RIGHT: This amazing image was taken on one of the Dakeng Trails in Taichung, Taiwan. When RK posted this image on Instagram he wrote: 'Rough road that leads to the heights of greatness. Life is not always perfect. Like a road, it has many bends, ups and downs, but that’s its beauty'

In this striking image, a woman skateboards down a road on Hokkaido, in front of active volcano Mount Yotei, which has a lenticular 'UFO' cloud draped over its summit. One of RK's followers commented: 'OMG, this miraculous picture is perfect!'

LEFT: This photograph was taken at an undisclosed location in China. RK's Instagram caption for it reads: 'I’m getting some great vibes from China.' A follower, meanwhile, commented: 'This is just magical.' RIGHT: At China's 4,980ft-tall Tianmen Mountain in the Tianmen Mountain National Forest Park, near Zhangjiajie city, is this eye-opening opening - 'Heaven's Gate'. Visitors can reach this lens-baiting portal via a cable car or by taking a bus up a narrow road with 99 bends. After disembarking, they then go on a half-hour odyssey up the 'Stairway to Heaven' - 999 steps (it's a lucky number in Chinese culture) that lead to the 431ft- (131m) high, 98ft- (30m) wide portal, formed by soil and water erosion over hundreds of years

RK took this moody market shot in Nanning, China. One of his followers commented: 'This is such an amazing shot. Incredible how they build the residences so close together. You can tell people are very hardworking and diligent and appreciate what they have'

LEFT: A lone woman in white crosses an almost-empty street with Japan's mighty 12,389ft- (3,776m) tall volcano, Mount Fuji, looming in the distance. RIGHT: While most photographers train their camera on the tourist-mecca leaning tower when they visit Pisa, RK picked a spot that was far less crowded

RK took this brilliant image in Tokyo. He explained: 'The yellow train provides local shuttle service every day... [It] brings warmth to this winding local street'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For food and wine-lovers, the Rhone region is one of Europe’s ultimate destinations, with its rich burgundies, zesty Provence rosés and fine cheeses. And on this all-inclusive five-star river cruise along the Rhone, you’ll be joined by Frenchman Raymond Blanc, one of the fathers of modern British cuisine. His Le Manoir aux Quat’Saisons restaurant has spawned some of the country’s most talented chefs, including Marco Pierre White, Sat Bains, Heston Blumenthal and Michael Caines, but his passion for food has its roots in France.

‘Most French life revolves around mealtimes and my family was no exception,’ says Raymond. ‘For my mother, cooking was an act of love. At an early age, I was taught to love and respect food, for its beauty, its freshness and also its price. This simple philosophy has been a strong influence on my career as a chef.’

You’ll see that passion on display as you take part in an interactive cookery demonstration with Raymond. You will have the opportunity to taste his creations, enjoy a dinner of local delicacies from a menu that he will choose, and ask him your cookery questions during a question-and-answer session and book signing, where you’ll also get a free copy of his latest cookbook (one per booking).

Time span: The famous ancient bridge over the Rhone at Avignon

OUR SPECIAL GUEST You will be joined by Raymond Blanc Chef Patron of the two-Michelin-starred Le Manoir aux Quat’Saisons restaurant in Oxfordshire, Raymond Blanc worked his way up from a cleaner in France to become one of the best-known chefs in the world. From a young age, he helped his father grow vegetables, and Raymond fell in love with food standing at the frying pan with Maman Blanc. He opened his first restaurant in Oxford in 1977 before buying Le Manoir in 1983. A regular guest on TV favourite Saturday Kitchen, Raymond has presented numerous series including his recent ITV show Simply Raymond. Advertisement

Your sailing begins in Lyons and you will travel along the Rhone river, stopping at Macon, Vienne, Viviers, Avignon and Tarascon to explore these charming destinations and feast on the region’s best bites.

You’ll tour Roman monuments, visit vineyards, and enjoy all-inclusive food and wine in the ship’s fantastic restaurants.

REASONS TO BOOK

MEET RAYMOND BLANC

You will meet the much-loved chef and take part in a series of exclusive events with him. Join Raymond for a book signing and Q&A session while you enjoy a cocktail before seeing him in action on board the following day during an interactive cooking demonstration. That evening, you’ll feast on a special regional menu chosen by Raymond.

ULTIMATE FOODIE ADVENTURE

The Rhone Valley is the jewel in France’s culinary crown, and you’ll have plenty of chances to sample its produce. A highlight is sure to be a meeting with a local farmer who has a specially trained truffle-snuffling dog, and tasting what it finds – exclusively for this itinerary.

CRUISE IN STYLE

Scenic Sapphire is an all-suite Space-Ship, with food and drink included in the price you pay. Your award-winning ship boasts a fine restaurant, elegant bar, salt therapy lounge and fitness facilities, and a sundeck with pool. You’ll can also learn delicious local recipes from our expert chefs, at the on-board cooking school, Scenic Culinaire.

EXCURSIONS GALORE

Choose from a huge range of trips on your eight-day itinerary, from shopping with a chef and cooking your purchases, to visiting vineyards and an olive farm and exploring the architectural wonders of Arles and Avignon.

In addition, after the doors close to the public at Avignon’s prestigious Palais des Papes, you’ll be invited for an exclusive Scenic Enrich concert inside this elegant 14th Century palace.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Can there be anything more uplifting than strolling through an endless sea of lavender on a hot summer’s day, when purple fields meet blue sky?

Better still, is there anything more relaxing than to smell the gorgeous scent that drifts from the stems as you brush against them?

The sights and smells of lavender will surround you on Hvar, the colourful Croatian island where dry, chalky soils and long sunny days provide some of the world’s most perfect growing conditions.

Purple reign: The sights and smells of lavender will surround you on Hvar Island in Croatia

Better still, Croatia and its islands are now firmly on the UK’s green list, so you can visit without having to quarantine on your return.

Just outside the charming town of Stari Grad you’ll find Old Road, a stunning route across the island which is flanked by lavender and rosemary and dotted with vineyards and rugged olive groves. Explore beyond the narrow winding paths and you’ll find yourself in remote hilly villages and fortified towns displaying the most heavenly crops from June all the way through to the end of August.

One place that lures lavender aficionados and novices year after year is Velo Grablje, a 15-minute drive from Hvar.

Croatia and its islands are now firmly on the UK’s green list, so you can visit without having to quarantine on your return. Pictured is Hvar's pretty harbour

Lavender has been flourishing here for more than 100 years, and back in the 1960s this tiny village alone accounted for one per cent of the world’s entire lavender production.

Velo Grablje dates from the 15th Century, and with just 14 residents living in its old honey-stoned houses, it feels as if the modern world has been kept at bay.

It is now protected as an ‘Ethno-Eco Village’ – a project launched by local authorities in 2005 to care for the remnants of ancient Dalmatia and restrict development.

Devised to retain and promote Velo Grablje’s cherished heritage, the annual two-day Lavender Festival is now in its 13th year and attracts visitors from all over the globe to celebrate all things lavender. It usually takes place to mark the start of harvest time – but here lavender is celebrated all year round.

The cultural immersion in traditional lavender production begins at the crack of dawn with what villagers call The Picking, on a hillside carpeted in swathes of violet.

Strong whiffs of lavender permeate the air and bees buzz around as tourists put their hand to the plough and mimic cheerful villagers such as 88-year-old Nikola Zaninovic Malabonkin. He demonstrates the old harvesting technique of grabbing a bunch of lavender stalks with one hand and using a sickle in the another to swipe and cut them off.

The cut stalks are stuffed into a giant sack, then transported to the village’s distillery, which was built in 1905.

Sniffing out a bargain: A stall at Velo Grablje’s famous Lavender Festival, which attracts visitors from all over the globe

Here visitors can watch the traditional distillation of lavender and rosemary oil being processed in old cauldrons, which were the first of their kind in Croatia and are still in use today. Locals revere the distillery as a rare monument to be preserved, as it’s one of the last places where you can truly smell the scent of ancient Hvar.

Unlike the wide-open herb fields of Provence, for example, the rocky landscapes of Velo Grablje has been cultivated in a network of dry-stone walled terraces. This makes it incompatible with modern machinery but is ideally suited to the traditional handpicking method of collecting lavender.

While it means the harvest these days is comparatively modest, the villagers are incredibly generous with their crop, and once The Picking is over, each visitor is gifted with a fresh posy of lavender.

For a wonderful historical perspective, head to the centre of town and spot a terracotta-coloured house where a plaque commemorates Barba Borto, the first man to plant lavender in Hvar, in the 1920s. His grandson Bartul Tomicic now lives in the house and welcomes visitors to view his archive of manuscripts that chronicle Velo Grablje’s unique role in Hvar’s lavender history.

Another local hero to look out for at the festival is Lavenderman, the village mascot, a purple-robed comic superhero who is armed with a sickle, a stalk of lavender and with superpowers that include fighting… moths.

Aromatic fix: Expect to find menus featuring lavender cheesecake, lavender honey and lavender marmalade in Stari Grad

To really get your fill of lavender, make for the bazaar where you’ll find wonderful hand-made oils, soaps, perfumes, creams and pretty lavender-scented pillowcases.

You can also taste Hvar wines, olive oils and local treats such as honey-flavoured biscuits. And don’t miss the Crobucha Kombucha stall selling a delicious Croatian version of the popular fermented tea drink concocted from local lavender. A portion of the profits goes to Velo Grablje.

There are also workshops led by medicinal herb experts, informing visitors on the future of lavender cultivation, new technology, analysis and research. As the day closes, the real fun begins as local performers take to the stage for a concert.

This little island with a big welcoming heart remains open for visitors to explore even without the sparkle of the Lavender Festival, and the cobblestoned streets of Stari Grad are your next best bet for an aromatic fix.

Generations of Hvarians have been blessed with a comfortable livelihood thanks to lavender, and Stari Grad has pushed the brand to the limit so every stall and souvenir shop is laden with purple goods. Even menus are created around the fragrant herb so you can pick up lavender cheesecake, lavender honey and lavender marmalade.

In this gastronomic corner of Hvar, both bistros and authentic konoba-style restaurants (rustic, taverna-style eateries) offer treats and drinks infused with it. At Bistro Kod Damira, you can indulge in traditional lavender cakes which can be nicely paired with a glass of lavender champagne – along with lavender ice cream, it’s something you have to try, but you’ll either love it or hate it.

Pictured is is Maslinica, home to the five-star Maslina Resort, where the focus is on 'mindful luxury'

TRAVEL FACTS British Airways, easyJet, Tui and Jet2 have flights to Split from £110 return. Ferries and catamarans from Split to Hvar take about an hour and cost roughly £10 each way. Get timetables and more information at ferrycroatia.com. Advertisement

Whatever your verdict, do savour the taste as it will remind you of a holiday on one of the most beautiful islands in the Adriatic.

Beyond sun, sea and shopping, Hvar has been recognised as a destination for recovery and wellbeing since 1868. Herbal treatments are popular and can be enjoyed in many of the area’s wellness hubs. The most well-known is the five-star Maslina Resort on the bay of Maslinica. Book into its Pharomatiq spa and you’ll find a treatment menu with a garden-to-skin inspired concept. Expect only hand-picked herbs from the resort garden, such as lavender, sweet wormwood and rosemary, infused in local oils and used in tailor-made treatments.

The Adriatic Rejuvenation treatment and the Intuitive massage are energising and will take your senses on a relaxing journey through the world of the region’s aromas. Try the Sound Healing techniques, which help contribute to a deeper state of relaxation, and you may, like me, find you’re asleep in no time. Or kick-start your day at 9am with a zen-filled outdoor yoga session.

Maslina is all about ‘mindful luxury’ – travel buzzwords that translate as expensive but low-key sophistication. The architecture incorporates Brac Island stone and Iroko wood which melt into the natural surroundings. This makes for a sublime hideaway for both solo travellers like myself, and families. Guests are cocooned in two acres of land naturally decorated with olive and pine trees, with a backdrop of the Adriatic Sea, pearly white rocks and a dense green forest.

The property is secluded, with only 53 rooms and three villas with amazing sea views. The restaurant is headed up by French Michelin-starred chef Serge Gouloumes, who has created a farm- to-plate menu with traditional Croatian fare such as gregada fish stew, a tribute to Croatia’s coast, fresh seafood such as langoustine with a cauliflower crumble, and classic Mediterranean favourites.

Beyond the beach bar, the two pools and the library, the Experience team can curate a bespoke itinerary for you, whether you fancy a cultural tour of villages, a cycling day out or wine-tasting at the best vineyards in the region.

And of course they can always tell you where to find the best lavender, so no matter where you go, you’ll never be far from this heavenly scent of purple reign.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Greece has now overtaken Spain as the most popular summer 2021 destination for Britons, according to booking statistics from a leading travel company.

Top-rated independent firm Travel Counsellors revealed that it has received the most bookings for Greece from UK travellers, with Spain a close second.

This means that for the firm, two amber list countries are now the top-rated holiday destinations for sun-starved tourists this summer.

Greece has now overtaken Spain as the most popular summer 2021 destination, according to an independent travel firm. Above is the picturesque town of Oia on the island of Santorini

Travel Counsellors discovered that 16 per cent of new bookings made in the last week of July were for Greece, known for its ancient ruins and scenic islands.

Spain, which attracted around 18 million UK visitors each year before the pandemic, ranked in second place, earning 15 per cent of new bookings.

The government lifted the 10-day home quarantine requirement for fully vaccinated Britons returning from amber list countries on July 19.

Spain has long been a favourite for UK holidaymakers, and its status on the amber list hasn't deterred tourists. Pictured is the popular port city of Valencia

However, tourists making their way to both Spain and Greece still need to adhere to strict travel regulations.

According to the FCDO, those arriving in Spain need to show proof of double vaccination or a negative PCR test upon entry, and must fill out a Health Control Form within 48 hours before they travel.

Similarly, for Greece, UK visitors need to show evidence of a negative PCR, a negative rapid antigen test or proof of a double jab, and must complete a Passenger Locator Form in advance of their arrival.

Another 15 per cent of bookings came from Britons looking to stay at home, searching for a staycation to see the summer out.

Croatia is another popular European holiday hotspot for summer 2021.

After it was moved to the green list on Wednesday, July 14, Skyscanner recorded an immediate daily surge in bookings of up to 50 per cent for 2021 holidays there.

The travel site also charted a 199 per cent increase in searches week on week for Croatia in the wake of the announcement.

Once Croatia was added to the green list, UK holidaymakers planned their summers around trips to destinations like the island of Hvar, pictured

Travel Counsellors, meanwhile, also experienced a 39 per cent upsurge of new bookings for summer 2022 – with the top destinations being Greece, the USA and Spain – as well as a 20 per cent increase in new bookings for winter 21/22 – led by the USA, the Maldives and Barbados.

Kirsten Hughes, UK Managing Director at Travel Counsellors, explained: 'With Spain and Greece remaining on the "amber list", we are experiencing considerable demand for both countries, in particular Greece, which has become our most popular summer sun destination.

'We also expect an upsurge in bookings to France now it's moved from "amber plus" to "amber", as well as the UAE, which has moved from red to amber, meaning that Britons will no longer need to quarantine on return.

'On the whole, we feel the latest news is certainly a positive step forward, as the green list increases and there are more countries turning to amber from red.

'However, people still need to ensure they are aware of the FCDO advice on entry requirements, as we await the UAE to align with the latest traffic light news, for example.'

The news comes as Britons holidaying in Mexico were left facing travel nightmares following the government's declaration that the country would move from amber status to red on Sunday, August 8.

Rebecca Dean and her family are scrambling to get home from Mexico

Rebecca Dean and her family are among the thousands of British holidaymakers now scrambling to get home before 4am on Sunday to avoid a ten-day stay in a UK quarantine hotel costing £1,750 per person, rising to £2,285 from next Thursday.

Dean, who was en route to Cancun when the announcement was made, learned she would need to travel home immediately as soon as the plane landed in Mexico.

The nurse told Good Morning Britain: 'There was nothing to suggest that Mexico would be going on the red list and we found out after a really long flight from other passengers. It was complete devastation'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Holiday Guru is always on hand to answer your questions.

This week issues tackled include entry requirements for mainland Spain and the Canary Islands.

Q. My husband and I are going to Spain for ten days. We are both fully vaccinated and will fill in the Spanish Health Control Form two days before departure. What tests must we take before, during and after our holiday?

Denise Bushell, via email.

Modernist marvel: Park Guell in Barcelona, designed by Antoni Gaudi

A. You don’t need to take a test before going — although you will need proof of being double-jabbed. You can either show this via the main NHS app (on your phone or having downloaded and printed it), or by requesting an NHS Covid Pass letter by calling 119. See ‘NHS Covid Pass’ at gov.uk.

You will also need to take a lateral flow/antigen test and get a negative result in the 72 hours before your flight back, and a further PCR test in the UK by day two of your return. Details of tests can be found at ‘Red, amber and green list rules for entering England’ at gov.uk. There is also information there on the differing rules for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Q. There is a lot of information about Spain and the Balearics but I can’t find much about the Canaries. I am booked to go to Tenerife. What are the rules there?

Anne Furlong, via email.

The Holiday Guru helps a reader who is booked to go to Tenerife

A. The rules are the same as for mainland Spain. More details at travelsafe.spain.info/en.

Q. If we go on a cruise that stays in UK waters, will we be entitled to full NHS benefits? Travel insurance is not financially viable.

Gordon Murr, via email.

A. It is advisable to take out insurance. If you fell ill at sea and the ship had to be diverted, you would not be covered by the NHS.

WE’RE HERE TO HELP

The Holiday Guru is here to answer your questions. Email holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Antigua's now on the green list – and this new five-star hotel on the island?

The gold list, for sure.

Hammock Cove is a shining new gem of a place to stay and from the minute our personal butler (included with every room – along with a mobile phone to call them anytime) swept open the door to our suite, it was clear leaving would be tough. And the longer we lingered, the more challenging escaping became.

Hammock Cove, pictured, is the fifth Elite Island Resorts property on Antigua, joining St. James’ Club and Villas, Galley Bay Resort and Spa, The Verandah Resort and Spa, and Pineapple Beach Club

Accommodation at Hammock Cove is in the form of 42 'light and spacious' villas with 'embarrassingly large private wooden decks'

Each villa comes with a mobile phone, which guests can use to summon their private butler

Each of the 42 villas at the property is light and spacious and boasts a frankly embarrassingly large private wooden deck.

Open the sliding French doors in front of your bed each morning and you can choose to relax on your own sunloungers or suspended armchair, or in an infinity plunge pool.

All this is enjoyed overlooking a calm and empty azure sea – the benefits of the hotel being situated in a cove and being on the less busy Atlantic side of the island.

'Open the sliding French doors in front of your bed each morning and you can choose to relax on your own sunloungers or suspended armchair,' writes Katy

Sizing it up: There is plenty of room for manoeuvre throughout every villa

Water great position: Every villa has a sea view, so you won't feel short-changed

Hungry? No need to move - you can order food from both the hotel's incredible restaurants to your room free of charge, delivered with panache by your butler.

However, despite the room's temptations, leave you must.

As well as the sugar-sand beach, postcard-worthy sea and some seriously plush cushioned beach loungers, there is a fully equipped and deliciously cool gym, luxurious spa, and a range of water sports on offer just yards from your room.

Guests can order food and drink via their butler to the sunbeds on the Hammock Cove beach

A boat trip was one of Katy's favourite ways to see the island (left). Pictured right is her partner cooling off in gin-clear waters during one of the stops

You can also use your butler mobile to call for drinks and food to be delivered to your sunbed - anytime.

Be warned - if you are someone who likes to let loose on the dancefloor on holiday, this isn't the hotel for you.

The mood of this adults-only resort is laid-back, with attentive high-end service.

Evening music is kept to a minimum, usually just a jazz singer or steel band at Hammock Cove's signature restaurant, Lighthouse.

However, guests made an effort to dress up for the elegant restaurant setting, a daily-changing menu worthy of any Mayfair establishment and the charming sommelier, Silvia.

Don't be scared to ask to speak to Italian Executive Chef Marco Festini. Despite his Michelin-starred experience, he cheerfully came and sat with me one morning over coffee to plan a menu just for my partner and me for a special evening.

Most nights will see him doing a round of the dining tables, personally checking guests are happy with their meal.

Food comes courtesy of Michelin-trained Italian Executive Chef Marco Festini. Pictured here is the signature restaurant, Lighthouse

This image show's the resort's tempting spa centre, which features five treatment rooms equipped for a variety of face and body therapies

Katy writes: 'This is the only hotel I have visited with a team I'm still in contact with - they really did help to make it the ultimate escape'

This is the stunning view from the Shirley Heights lookout, a top day-trip spot

Should you wish to venture beyond the hotel's boundaries, you have a range of day trips available - walking to the nearby Devil's Bridge National Park, jeep tours of the island's high points and seeing the sunset at the famous Shirley Heights lookout.

Our favourite was exploring Antigua's coastline from the sea on a boat trip that leaves from the hotel's jetty.

As with any resort worth its salt, the staff are what make it.

And Hammock Coves' are in a class of their own.

Nearly every team member will know your drink or meal preference, if not your name.

They don't bow or scrape, they just genuinely love Hammock Cove and care about their guests' comfort and enjoyment.

This is the only hotel I have visited with a team I'm still in contact with - they really did help to make it the ultimate escape, inside and out.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Fancy a fabulous golfing holiday but can't decide where to go? Then allow some of the world's greatest golfers to help with the decision.

Here we present golf courses around the world, from California to Melbourne via Scotland, that have been given the stamp of approval by stars including Tiger Woods, Jack Nicklaus and Colin Montgomerie.

Californian dream course

Jack Nicklaus once said: ‘If I only had one round of golf left to play, I would want to play it at Pebble Beach', pictured

Jack Nicklaus once said: ‘If I only had one round of golf left to play, I would want to play it at Pebble Beach.’ Quite an endorsement for this dramatic, Pacific Ocean-side course in California, coming from the player many believe to be the greatest ever thanks to 18 major championships wins – three more than Tiger Woods, who is in second place.

Indeed Nicklaus, nicknamed the Golden Bear for his broad physique and mop of blond hair, is such a fan that he helped redesign its tricky fifth hole.

The appeal of Pebble Beach Golf Links is its stunning location on the rugged coastline of the Monterey Peninsula. And it makes a perfect stop on a California road trip from San Francisco south along Route 1.

The course has hosted seven majors (the eighth will be the US Open in 2027) and it has a dash of celebrity about it. Clint Eastwood, who lives in nearby Carmel, is among the investors and an annual ‘pro-am’ tournament is held in which the comedian Bill Murray and actor Kevin Costner have played. But while it may be one of America’s best-loved courses, beware: rounds are eye-wateringly expensive.

Rounds £410; B&B at The Inn at Spanish Bay from £612 per night (pebblebeach.com).

THE GREAT WHITE’S GREAT CHALLENGE

A panoramic drone shot of the Royal Melbourne Golf Club in Melbourne. Nick Faldo loves its West Course

Designed in 1926 by Dr Alister Mackenzie, the legendary Scottish golf course architect, the Royal Melbourne Golf Club’s West Course is often rated the best in the world.

The club, tucked away in a suburb close to the ocean, has two courses that are much-loved by Greg Norman, one of Australia’s all-time greatest players.

Norman, known as the Great White Shark for his aggressive shot selection and world number one for almost seven years, has described it as ‘probably the most natural, beautiful, challenging golf course in the world.’

It is the quality of Mackenzie’s design of the West Course, where holes slink between heathery slopes and the greens are as smooth as billiard tables, that sets it apart. The Scot was also responsible for Augusta National in Georgia, the gorgeous home of the Masters Tournament.

Parts of the West Course are so tricky that it ‘messes with a good player’s mind,’ says Norman.

England’s champion golfer Nick Faldo is another fan, saying: ‘The West Course might just be the best in the world.’

Rounds £310 (royalmelbourne.com.au); B&B at Grand Hyatt Melbourne from £143 a night (hyatt.com).

Drop in by helicopter

The Ile aux Cerfs Golf Club course, pictured, was designed by the German two-time Masters champion Bernhard Langer

Set amid a rolling landscape thick with tropical vegetation beside the Indian Ocean, Ile aux Cerfs Golf Club is ranked number one in Mauritius by Top100golfcourses.com.

The course was designed by the German two-time Masters champion Bernhard Langer, who said he aimed to utilise the ‘amazing natural setting’ to ‘arouse all the senses’. The Scottish golfer Colin Montgomerie, who won a record eight European Tour Order of Merit titles, describes it as ‘must play’ for all golfers.

You reach the first tee by taking a helicopter or ‘special golf’ boat shuttle from a private jetty. Fairways curl between mangrove forest, gullies, lakes and volcanic rock outcrops. The fifth hole skirts a beautiful tidal pool, while the 16th, across a mangrove, is named ‘Reach Me If You Can’.

After a round, relax with a drink or meal at Langer’s Bar & Grill. Stay at the nearby Shangri-La’s Le Touessrok for a luxurious break by white-sand beaches and soothe tired muscles in its top-class spa.

Rounds from £124 (ileauxcerfsgolfclub.com); B&B from £275 a night (shangri-la.com).

From a mountain top to deep bunkers

The Kawana Hotel in Japan has two courses and one of the most jaw-dropping backdrops in the world - Mount Fuji

With Mount Fuji as a backdrop and the Pacific Ocean sweeping beyond plunging cliffs along the fairways, the pair of courses at Kawana Hotel in Japan’s Shizuoka Prefecture are breathtaking.

Of the two, the Fuji Course is the classic, designed in 1936 by yet another legendary golf course designer, Charles H. Alison, a Lancastrian who described the setting as a paradise. He added: ‘It lies among the hills beyond the hot springs of Ito on a pine-covered plateau bordered by red cliffs which descend down to the blue sea. From a wooded bay, miles distant, a fishing village sends out boats with brown sails to complete the last detail of a perfect scene.’

The old-fashioned fishing vessels may have vanished but the glorious scenery ought to inspire your best golf, although watch out for the difficult 15th as well as for deep bunkers throughout.

The course hosts the Fujisankei Ladies Classic, currently held by former world number one, Jiyai Shin, of South Korea.

The plush five-star hotel has a hot springs spa, an outdoor pool, a snooker room and a mah jong room, of course.

Rounds from £166; B&B from £154 a night (princehotels.com).

Swing your way through to the bar

Perfect shot: The view of South Africa’s Table Mountain from the Royal Cape Golf Club

AND WHAT DOES TIGER THINK? Tiger Woods who is still recovering from his horrific car crash in California in February, says the Old Course at St Andrews (above) – the home of golf – is his favourite anywhere: ‘I think the history behind St Andrews is amazing. There is no other golf course in the world that can say that every great player that has ever played the game has played that golf course. When you first play it, you think, “All right, this course really isn’t that hard.” Then the wind comes up and it just becomes brutal.’ Rounds from £98 (standrews.com); B&B doubles at the Old Course Hotel from £408 a night (oldcoursehotel.co.uk). Advertisement

Royal Cape Golf Club is home to the oldest golfing society in South Africa, dating from 1885.

With views of Table Mountain from a southern suburb of Cape Town, the setting is awe-inspiring and the course is perfectly kept.

The South African Open has been played here ten times, with the South African Ernie Els, nicknamed The Big Easy due to his languid playing style, one of the most popular winners in 1999.

Although Table Mountain looms in the background, the course is mainly flat, winding through pretty parkland with rare flora native to the Cape.

Expect narrow fairways, plenty of bunkers, streams and ponds, as well as a lovely old clubhouse with a wood-panelled bar and a veranda – a great spot to unwind after a tough round.

The lively V&A Waterfront with its restaurants, bars, boutique shops and hotels is close by.

Rounds from £42 (royalcapegolf.co.za); five nights B&B at Table Bay Hotel in the V&A Waterfront from £879pp, flights excluded (golfbreaks.com).

A masterpiece by a landscape artist

Jose-Maria Olazabal, the Spanish winner of two major championships, lauds Real Club Valderrama as a ‘masterpiece’ and ‘a very special place’.

He’s not wrong – the rolling Andalusian landscape dotted with ancient cork and olive trees is magnificent, and the weather is golf-friendly year-round.

Real Valderrama is a few miles north of Gibraltar and was designed by the renowned American golf course architect Robert Trent Jones in 1974.

An indication of its quality is that when a venue was being sought for the first Ryder Cup to be held on continental Europe in 1997, Valderrama got the nod. Prior to then, the Ryder Cup in Europe had been hosted exclusively in the UK.

Valderrama is challenging, especially the 17th hole, which was redesigned by the late Spanish golfer Seve Ballesteros, the country’s best player and former world number one. But club players can enjoy rounds without feeling intimidated.

Rounds from £345 (valderrama.com); seven nights with one round at Valderrama and three at nearby courses plus B&B at the elegant Hotel Encinar de Sotogrande from £1,369pp (yourgolftravel.com).

Designed by a champ, it’s not for chumps

No prizes for guessing who designed the Faldo Course at Amendoeira Golf Resort.

Britain’s Nick Faldo was called upon to create this tough set of 18 holes in the Algarve, of which he has said: ‘You have incredible views, undulating land, and any time you get natural terrain like this, it is great fun to work with.’

You also have water hazards, rocky hillsides, scrubland-style bunkers and plenty of cacti, oaks and olive trees to negotiate – so bring your best game.

Amendoeira has a second course designed by the late Irish golfer Christy O’Connor Junior, next to the Faldo Course. There is also a floodlit nine-hole course for anyone who cannot get enough of playing in daylight hours.

The resort has kids’ clubs, pools, waterslides and football academies. There’s horse-riding, tennis and a fitness centre. Tennis and golf lessons are offered, with a Junior Golf School for youngsters.

It’s also just a 15-minute drive to the beach.

Rounds from £110 (amendoeiraresort.com); three nights at Amendoeira Golf Resort with one round on the Faldo Course and a round at a nearby course from £259pp based on four sharing, flights excluded (yourgolftravel.com).

FASHIONABLY FRENCH – AND FIT FOR A KING

About 20 miles south of Boulogne on the coast in north-east France, Golf du Touquet’s La Mer course has splendid sea views on a sandy, rolling landscape similar to the ‘links’ courses created between dunes on Scotland’s east coast.

During the 1920s and 1930s, the fashionable golf club and hotel enjoyed its heyday; the Prince of Wales, soon to be King Edward VIII, even played at La Mer a few days before its official opening in 1931.

The course was designed by Charles H. Alison (also behind the Kawana Hotel course in Japan) and Harry S. Colt (another early golf course genius) and you can expect clever, winding fairways between dunes with precision required for good scores. The course has hosted the French Open six times, with Seve Ballesteros among the winners.

The connected Le Manoir Hotel, with a pool, a gourmet restaurant, chic bar and billiards room, is generally considered the most stylish golf hotel in France.

Rounds from £33; doubles at Le Manoir Hotel from £190 a night (letouquetgolfresort.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Curled up in a ball chair, engrossed in a book on a dull day in Dover, I’ve found my special spot on this cruise ship. In other pods tucked around the Hideaway, a handful of other cocooners are also in worlds of their own as we take time out on board the ‘revolutionised’ Celebrity Silhouette, which is fresh from a £55 million revamp.

Other passengers don jackets for excursions, such as a steam train ride, but as soon as the sun comes out I head up to Deck 15 and stretch out on a sofa in one of the newly created open-air lounges to gaze at the White Cliffs in one direction and the outline of France in the other.

The ship’s week-long UK-only itinerary included visits to Belfast and Liverpool, which may have lacked exoticism but gave me the perfect opportunity to explore the wealth of things to do on board and try out its new bars, restaurants and lounges.

All decked out: The exclusive and stylish Retreat Sundeck has taken over a space previously occupied by a basketball court

One of the refurbished suites designed by Kelly Hoppen, who has struck out from her usual palette of muted tones

To make life aboard simple, Celebrity (celebritycruises.co.uk) has introduced an ‘Always Included’ policy across its fleet, meaning tips, drinks and wi-fi are covered by the fare, with an option to upgrade to premium drinks and more wi-fi at extra cost.

Silhouette, launched in 2011, is a cruise ship made for sunshine, with a wide and luxuriant real grass lawn to picnic and play games on, and hundreds of sunbeds around the two outdoor pools.

One of the best places to catch the rays is at the top of the ship on the Retreat Sundeck, which has taken over a space previously occupied by a basketball court.

The new Craft Social bar has a long list of interesting wines available by the glass as well as a vast selection of beers

Holidaymakers can picnic and play games on the luxuriant real-grass lawn, which is a distinguishing feature

Celebrity Silhouette's open-air lounges invite guests to take in the sea view. Pictured is the Lawn Club

Caroline discovers The Sky Observation Lounge, pictured, ‘has clusters of leather and chrome armchairs and the feel of a boutique hotel'

One of the ship's numerous lounges, The Hideaway, is fitted with pod armchairs

FIRST-TIMER? HERE'S HOW TO CHOOSE A TRIP How do you choose your maiden cruise? First-timers face a big decision. Here’s how to get it right. One tip is to start with a short, taster cruise. Top options include three- or four-night breaks on P&O’s family-friendly Britannia. Try all the on-board facilities, including fine-dining, a pizzeria and grill, ice-cream parlour, sunset and crow’s-nest bars, West End-style theatre, gym, spa and more, to see if cruising is the holiday for you. Seasonal: Go to a Christmas fair On short cruises, every day is spent at sea. P&O’s Southampton departures aim to sail close enough to the Dorset and Cornish coasts to offer wonderful views. From £199pp (pocruises.com). Another idea is to include a cruise as part of a bigger holiday. Enjoy a week in a villa with a pool in Florida, then step aboard Freedom of the Seas in Miami for a four-night Royal Caribbean cruise. You’ll stroll along sandy beaches in the Bahamas as well as enjoy a floating water park and a surf simulator on board. From £245pp (royalcaribbean.com). Cruise-lovers also suggest themed or seasonal voyages for first-time trips. These include Cunard’s five-night Dutch Christmas Markets cruise in December. It starts and ends in Southampton and offers shopping stops in Rotterdam, Bruges and Le Havre. From £599pp (cunard.com). Size also matters. ‘Small ships’ with fewer than 1,000 guests will be less overwhelming for newbies. Take advantage of the ‘every cabin has a balcony’ guarantee with Saga Cruises for privacy. In October the Flavours Of Western France And Spain cruise on its brand-new Spirit of Adventure takes in seven ports on a 14-night return trip from Southampton. From £3,349pp (saga.co.uk). Neil Simpson Advertisement

It is part of a gated enclave spread over two decks, exclusively for the occupants of suites, and it feels like stepping into an Ibiza beach club with chill-out music, a bar, and waiters bringing snacks and drinks to your sunbed or sofa.

The look is smart black, white and red stripes, designed by Kelly Hoppen, who has boldly struck out from her trademark palette of muted tones.

She has also worked her magic on swishing up the suites, exclusive lounge The Retreat and private restaurant Luminae.

And there are plenty of fabulous places to dine that are open to all passengers.

The Porch is the place for seafood with sea views, where you can tackle a tower of fruits de mer, nibble blackened cod tacos and sup on a light lobster bisque.

In Le Petit Chef, you sit down to four astonishing courses where animated characters somehow take over the tabletop and appear to create each dish on your plate – it’s full of surprises and tasty, too.

Sushi On Five specialises in made-to-order sushi rolls, while fresh wasabi prepared at your table gives your meal an extra kick.

Go to Tuscan Grille for the groaning anti-pasti board, rib-sticking pastas and juicy steaks.

Or for a really special night out, you must book a table in French-fusion restaurant Murano and splash out on the sumptuous Five Senses wine-pairing menu.

All these menus come at an extra cost, but there are also plenty of places to eat on Silhouette that are included in the fare, such as the grand Main Dining Room (with an impressive wine tower filled with 1,643 bottles), casual self-service Ocean Cafe and the outdoor Mast Grill.

And the bars!

Eager staff are always ready and waiting to mix a cocktail or pop open a bottle of fizz.

There’s a late-night buzz around the Martini Bar in the spectacular 13-deck-high atrium, while the quieter Passport Bar, with mesmerising views of the dashing sea, is tucked to one side of the Grand Foyer on Deck 3.

The outdoor Sunset Bar looks over the ship’s wake to the horizon.

There’s also a new bar in the casino, while in the Sky Observation Lounge, which has clusters of leather and chrome armchairs and the feel of a boutique hotel, you can order sharpeners to help you tackle the afternoon quiz.

The cosy Cellar Masters wine bar, with its long list of interesting wines available by the glass, has gone, replaced during the makeover by Craft Social, with screens showing sports in every alcove and – heaven for hopheads – a vast choice of bottled beers and opportunities for afternoon tasting sessions.

Between eating and drinking, you can take in a theatre show or a lecture, get active playing croquet and bowls on the lawn, join an energetic Peloton cycle class, limber up for a workout in the Fitness Centre or aim for a bull’s-eye on the archery range in the Entertainment Court.

Make a day of it in the spa by mixing head-to-toe treatments such as a wrinkle-ironing facial or a tip-top pedicure with flopping in the Persian Garden thermal suite.

Book an Aqua Class cabin, situated near the spa, for unlimited access to the aromatic steam rooms, tropical showers and heated daybeds, or pay for a day or weekly pass.

The main dining room, pictured, boasts an impressive wine tower filled with 1,643 bottles

The balcony of the Sunset Suite. Occupants of the suites are also granted exclusive access to the Retreat Sundeck

’The ‘revolutionised’ Celebrity Silhouette cruise ship is fresh from a £55 million refurbishment

Launched in 2011, Caroline describes the Celebrity Silhouette as a 'destination itself'

With Aqua Class accommodation you’ll also have your own table for breakfast and dinner, in the chic and intimate restaurant Blu that specialises in light and healthy cuisine.

When the ship is at sea, it is time to hit the gallery of shops. Be warned: go early and with a clear head, as browsing after an indulgent dinner will make it hard to ignore the tempting Prada sunglasses, Kate Spade handbags, Breitling watches and Bulgari jewellery.

Sometimes a ship can turn out to be the destination itself, as I found on my voyage of discovery aboard Celebrity Silhouette.

There’s more on board than on shore: From Swarovski crystal staircases to festivals at sea, cruise ships have unique selling points keep guests on-deck

If it offers more restaurants than a seaside resort and even more things to do, it can be hard to tear yourself away for a jaunt ashore when your cruise ship docks. And different ships have their own unique selling points to keep guests on board.

Galleria Virtuosa, the 370ft-long, two-deck-high indoor promenade on dazzling new mega-ship MSC Virtuosa (msccruises.co.uk), with a glamorous Italian feel, is the place to see and be seen.

Here you can sip a cappuccino, browse alluring boutiques, enjoy an aperitivo or dance under the domed ceiling that twinkles like a night sky.

The cruise ship MSC Virtuosa is home to Galleria Virtuosa, pictured, a 370ft-long, two-deck-high indoor promenade

Sashay down glass staircases embedded with 61,000 Swarovski crystals and go for a cocktail in the futuristic Starship Club, where Rob, a funny-faced robot who speaks eight languages, will mix you a cocktail at the touch of a screen. Want an adrenaline rush? Head to the waterpark with heart-stopping water slides, go Formula 1 racing on a simulator or battle zombies in a 4D theatre.

The biggest ship built for British holidaymakers is Iona, the new flagship of P&O Cruises (pocruises.com).

A firm focus on home-grown food and drinks and entertainments means the first distillery at sea not only supplies the ship with gin, it is the place for tasting masterclasses. There are 30 places to eat, and selected voyages have cookery demonstrations by celebrity chefs such as Marco Pierre White.

The Cunard line Queen Mary 2, pictured, is renowned for booking excellent speakers during her one-week transatlantic crossings

Take That’s Gary Barlow is musical director of the 710 Club, its live music venue. Daring aerial acrobatic shows take place in the enormous Sky Dome and there is a four-screen cinema. Special deals for spa treatments on port days are another reason to stay on board.

For more than 180 years Cunard (cunard.com) has learnt the art of keeping passengers occupied and entertained on long sea voyages, so it is no surprise that Queen Mary 2 is renowned for top-notch speakers on her one-week transatlantic crossings.

In addition, occasional themed cruises such as a Literature At Sea, Theatre Festival At Sea or Fashion Week At Sea give unsurpassed opportunities to hear and learn from, and be entertained by the ultimate experts in their fields, at lectures, performances and workshops that are so engaging and absorbing you might even miss docking in New York.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Booking a dream getaway that ticks all the boxes is more important than ever now.

And while Greece’s islands offer an escape unlike anywhere else in the world, its marvellous mainland offers pristine shores, lush greenery and astounding architecture in abundance too.

Preveza, Parga and Syvota, in the coastal Epirus region of northwestern Greece, is where you’ll find wild valleys, alpine lakes, luscious landscapes and turquoise waters - not to mention first-class cuisines and beautiful beaches.

Here’s why these three fabulous destinations should top your holiday wishlist.

Escape to Preveza

Whether you want to relax on a breathtaking beach and indulge in incredible local cuisine, or explore ancient monuments and scenic hiking trails, Preveza is a dream destination.

As the sun goes down, why not enjoy a tsipouro at one of the waterfront bars in Preveza?

This seaside town is perched on the edge of the Ambracian Gulf in the northwest, and is filled with traditional taverns, awesome architecture and stretches of idyllic white sand.

The city of Preveza is also accessible from Epirus by Greece's first undersea tunnel.

Explore the history and culture of its chilled-out harbour town, which was built close to the site of Vereniki town in 290BC.

Stroll its pretty streets, taking in the magnificent Byzantine and Venetian architecture, then visit the remains of one of the most important cities in the Roman Empire, Nikopolis, as well as the ancient site of Kassiopi.

Head to the 19th-century Pantokratoras Castle, found at the mouth of Amvrakikos Gulf, at dusk, for spellbinding views.

For a day trip, you will enjoy the beautiful Venetian castles, Preveza’s ‘big Ben’ the Roloi, and historic fortresses and museums.

The Roman aqueduct of ancient Nikopolis was built to supply the town with water in 1BC

Preveza is also the perfect place for nature lovers. Choose from 12 hiking routes through lush mountains and sparkling rivers - also ideal for kayaking and swimming. Hop in a boat for a scenic tour - you might just spot dolphins!

The village of Anogeion is where you’ll find hot springs, ideal for a chilled-out afternoon.

Then, at dusk, dine on Preveza’s famous pita bread and savoury pies or sip on local tsipouro, accompanied by a traditional mezze platter, along the picturesque waterfront boulevard Venizelou.

With beaches stretching for 40 miles, Preveza is perfect for whiling away days next to the ocean.

With fine sand and turquoise water, 15-mile-long Monolithi, the largest sandy beach in Europe, and the one named safest post-Covid beach in Europe, is a must-visit. You'll find secluded spots, watersports, and tavernas selling fresh fish dishes.

Isolated Ai Sostis is where to escape, and splash around in its crystal-clear water then soak up the rays on its white sand; Alonaki is perfect for snorkelling; while Kanali is one of the longest beaches in Greece.

Paradise in Parga

The stunning coastal town of Parga, on Greece’s northwest coast, is brimming with pine-forest mountains, Venetian monuments, and pretty olive groves.

With its winding cobbled hills and lanes, the main town is where to find breathtaking architecture, quaint shops selling handmade souvenirs, as well as cosy cafes and tavernas.

The coastal town of Parga has it all, from beaches and mountains to architecture and bars

Stroll the scenic trail up the dramatic cliffs to the 11th-century fortress that, overlooking the bay, is the perfect place for photos of the twinkling harbour.

Then head down the tiny staircases to the colourful, picture-perfect harbour town to refuel at one of its busy waterside bars.

Explore the traditional costumes and learn about the area’s fascinating history at the Ecclesiastical Museum of Parga.

Parga boasts plenty of options for day trips. From its busy harbour, book a boat excursion to the Ionian Islands to discover former palaces, superb architecture and incredible beaches.

Further south is where to find the important archaeological site Necromanteion of Acheron, the historical site of the Temple of Hades. This should top your list, and you can stroll in the river to spot medieval castles, hilltop villages and secluded beaches.

Fancy a spot of diving? Parga's paradisiacal shores are waiting to be explored, teeming with underwater life.

Head to sandy Krioneri beach, where you'll find sunbeds and cafes, to swim across to the small island of Panagia.

Valtos beach, a beautiful stretch of sand and pebbles backed by a picturesque pine forest, has a cosmopolitan vibe, while you can explore sea caves at idyllic forest-lined Lichnos beach.

Sensational Syvota

Narrow inlets, secret coves and lush islands, the picturesque bay of Syvota is only 15 miles from Parga and is lined with traditional tavernas, luxurious yachts and cute fishing boats.

With its pristine shores, it’s easy to see why the excotic region has been nicknamed the Caribbean of Greece, with plenty of wonderful beaches to explore.

The pristine sand and turquoise waters of the Epirus region are a major draw for visitors

The jewel of the region, tree-lined Mega Ammos is the area’s most famous stretch, with golden sand, turquoise water, sunbeds and watersports.

Boasting soft sand and white pebbles, postcard-pretty Bella Vraka is just a 15-minute walk from the harbour - and it’s here you’ll see how the area got its nickname!

You can also discover secret coves at sun-drenched Diapori, Alati or Pisina Beach, aka the Blue Lagoon - you’ll want to spend a day at each one.

Then head to Syvota town for shopping, sightseeing, and dining on world-class cuisine.

Climb the winding steep alleyways to the historic castle - once at the top, you’ll be rewarded with stunning views of the Ionian and Valtos beach.

En route, grab some local souvenirs from the quaint shops, and have your camera ready to snap the pretty courtyards blooming with colourful flowers.

With spectacular scenery, quiet coves and sun-drenched climes, you won't want to come home

For an easier stroll, the promenade is a must. From here, you can hop into a boat for a trip to a remote bay, dine on freshly grilled seafood in an ouzeri, or simply relax and take in the scenery.

From Syvota, you can hop in a sea taxi, or hire a boat, to the tiny island of Paxos to witness the breathtaking Blue Caves, and the imposing rock of Ortholithos.

Or hire a car to explore Syvota’s mountainous landscapes.

The city of Ioannina with the beautiful Lake Pamvotida is a short drive away, as is Vikos - the deepest gorge in the world at 6,000ft deep. The walk takes a day but there are easier options too.

You really won’t want to come home!

Discover Greece's beautiful coastal region of Epirus for yourself - click here for more info.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

All those shiny new pools, sparkling stadiums and miles of delightful countryside — with Mount Fuji popping up every now and again — have served as a reminder of what a fascinating country Japan is.

And for me, these Olympics have brought back vivid memories of a trip I took to the island of Shikoku shortly before the pandemic hit.

It is the second smallest and least visited of Japan’s islands and, because of its historic isolation, has retained many of the country’s traditional characteristics. What I hoped to gain from my road trip was a glimpse of tea ceremonies, misty mountains and thatched-roofed houses. I was not disappointed.

Rise and shine: The beautiful Ritsurin Garden in Takamatsu was laid out by a feudal lord in the 17th century

First stop was Takamatsu, in the north of the island — a bustling concrete metropolis. Here, the street signs are the only indication of where I am. But when I left its honking traffic for the Ritsurin Garden, I stepped into a watercolour. The ‘strolling gardens’ — as they are called — were laid out by a feudal lord in the 17th century, and the ancient black pines, humpback bridges and bonsai-strewn lawns remain pretty much as he left them.

Perhaps inevitably, the highlight was the tea ceremony, launched here in the 1640s. In the ancient teahouse, I kneeled to watch our ‘hostess’ whip the matcha (powdered tea) to a pea-green froth, then, like honoured guests over the centuries, I wandered out with my brew to gaze at the hypnotic clusters of carp in the lake.

In Takamatsu, I stayed in a modern hotel, but my next night was spent at a ryokan, a traditional inn with tatami matting and communal baths. On arrival, I was shown to an empty room, which later acquired a futon, and was handed a yukata — a lightweight kimono-like dressing gown. It proved remarkably forgiving of the multi-course feast served up before I was directed to the women’s bath, where the old hands were moisturising and flossing naked in front of a wall of mirrors.

The matcha tea ceremony has been an integral part of the traditional Japanese culture for centuries

Shikoku is the second smallest and least visited of Japan’s islands

I skipped this step, but happily slipped into the large, warm pool for a long soak, which proved to be considerably more soothing than my usual speedy shower.

The next day, I moved on to explore the Iya Valley, one of the country’s ‘three hidden regions’. Inaccessible and remote with steep mountains still blanketed with forest, the area became a citadel for political refugees from the 12th century onwards, and remained virtually an independent country until the first public road was built in the 1920s.

Here, I mustered my inner Tom Daley and wobbled nervously across one of the few remaining vine bridges poised above a steep river gorge.

Afterwards I felt grateful to return to the safety of my car, from where I enjoyed the misty landscapes on the journey to Ochiai. This turned out to be a hamlet of thatched-roofed houses restored by American Japanologist Alex Kerr.

The softly spoken academic first arrived in Iya in the 1970s, when the old world was still intact. ‘Cooking was done over an open hearth sunk into the floor and people working in the fields wore the woven straw raincoats you see in Samurai movies,’ he said.

Kerr has made it his long-term mission to renovate old houses to rent out to visitors. ‘The Japanese themselves love to go to old towns; they just don’t want to suffer.’

Ochiai is a hamlet of thatched-roofed houses restored by American Japanologist Alex Kerr

Certainly, my stay was suffering-free. I loved the elegant bare rooms divided by fusuma sliding paper doors and lounging in the former hearth, now repurposed as a sofa, warmed by double glazing and under-floor heating.

Though rural communities remain under threat as the younger generation migrates into towns, they do still operate, and a journey along don’t-look-down mountain roads brought me to a form of Japanese Airbnb at a one-woman small holding.

The farmer — an energetic 70-year-old widow — spoke no English, but welcomed me with a huge smile and the international gesture of ‘Come in, come in’. After a generous home-cooked meal — accompanied by rugby on the telly — she pointed to a pile of futons, indicating I should find my own spot anywhere in one of the multi-functional rooms.

The Daily Mail's Lisa Freedman recalls wobbling nervously across one of the few remaining vine bridges in Iya Valley

My final stop was in Wakimachi, a town that grew rich in the 18th century producing the famous ‘Japanese blue’ indigo dye used in the Olympic flag.

Today, its grand merchant houses have been carefully restored, and wandering through the airy splendours of the Yoshida Family Home, with its carved wooden panelling and peaceful courtyard garden, I had no problem imagining its kimono-clad ghosts.

Later, as I whizzed down the main street on a Brompton bike, past rooftops decorated with family crests and protective demons, I felt I’d managed to see the best of Japan, old and new.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Far from the madding crowd, cocooned amid the verdant hills of Hardy country, La Fosse is a peaceful bed-and-breakfast with a renowned restaurant attached.

Run by chef-patron Mark Hartstone and his French wife Emmanuelle, their background of working in hotels around the world (they met at the five-star Chewton Glen in Hampshire) is evident in the standard of food and service, which they make appear effortless.

Cranborne is a village on the edge of Dorset’s expansive chalk downland, Cranborne Chase. It dates from Saxon times and became a Royal hunting ground for King John in the 13th Century, then Henry VIII and James I.

Chef-patron Mark Hartstone serves gourmet dishes from a locally sourced menu. Pictured is the dining room and its Provencal printed mural

La Fosse is run by Mark and his French wife, Emmanuelle. They met while working together at five-star Chewton Glen in Hampshire

In 1891, Thomas Hardy based his fictional Wessex town of Chaseborough on the then-thriving Cranborne, where Tess of the d’Urbervilles would visit its Saturday market. While the population has since dwindled, Cranborne’s main attractions are its 12th Century church, an ancient technology centre with its clutch of reproduction Iron Age buildings, and an abundance of charming cottages.

Poole, Bournemouth, Christchurch and the New Forest are all within easy reach, making Cranborne both a perfect getaway and a base for exploring further afield.

On one side of the village square is La Fosse, a handsome Victorian red-brick building. Its interior is a mix of period furniture and fittings and contemporary comfort, along with beautiful stained-glass windows made by Mark’s sister-in-law.

Our room, called Old Sarum, has a huge cushion-festooned bed, blonde wood and leather chairs, and a very pretty antique writing desk looking out across the garden towards the orchard and allotments which provide much of the fruit and veg on the menu.

'La Fosse may be small and tucked away,' says Lizzi, 'but its combination of cosy country comfort and foodie menu make it stand out'

There are six individually decorated rooms named after local cheeses. They all come with underfloor heating

'The interior is a mix of period furniture and fittings and contemporary comfort,' writes Lizzie

TRAVEL FACTS La Fosse, Cranborne, Dorset. B&B doubles cost from £89 a night. For more information visit la-fosse.com. Advertisement

At dinner, seated at a wooden table with Ercol chairs, the view was of Emmanuelle’s native France – an entire wall of the dining area is covered by a vast Provencal printed mural. But the food was closer to home: Cranborne Chase asparagus with hollandaise and a tiny cup of gazpacho, followed by a Wiltshire pork trio with glazed carrots and rhubarb, apple oat and hazelnut crumble.

La Fosse may be small and tucked away but its combination of cosy country comfort and a foodie menu to write home about make it stand out.

The USP: Contemporary comfort in ancient surroundings and make-you-feel-at-home hosts. I was greeted on arrival, given a jug of fresh milk for the room, and Mark and Emmanuelle appeared, as if by magic, with whatever was needed.

The rooms: All six are individually decorated and named after local cheeses, and come with underfloor heating. You’ll get wi-fi and a DVD library and can relax with fresh Dorset tea and coffee. A walk-in shower is stocked with a profusion of Cowshed toiletries.

The food: Award-winning gourmet dishes from a locally sourced menu. Breakfast was fresh Dorset yogurt with berries and eggs royale with smoked trout.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The world's largest yacht has been unveiled and she's so big a new category has been coined for her – 'yacht liner'.

'Somnio' will launch in 2024 and, with a length of 222m (728ft), will be easy to spot from the outside. Only a privileged few, though, will get to view the 500million-euro (£430million/$600million) boat from the inside. That's because she'll serve as a jaw-dropping floating condo for the super-rich, offering 39 ultra-luxury apartments starting at 9.5million euros (£8.1million/$11.2million).

The identity of the owners will remain a tightly guarded secret, with the chance to buy one of the apartments coming by invitation or referral only.

The world's largest yacht - Somnio - has been unveiled and she's so big a new category has been coined for her – 'yacht liner'

'Somnio' will launch in 2024 and, with a length of 222m (728ft), will be easy to spot from the outside

The chosen 39 will experience a life on the ocean waves like no other, on a boat conceived by two of the world's foremost architectural and design studios, London-based Winch Design and Tillberg Design of Sweden.

The apartments will be spread over six decks, each one fully customisable. A personal kitchen, gym, a library, inside/outside dining spaces and distinct dressing areas are all potential features.

Shared amenities will also be stellar.

Owners will have access to a 'spectacular' 10,000-bottle capacity wine cellar and tasting room, a choice of restaurants and bars, and an onboard beach club featuring water-sports facilities.

A lounge in the ship's bow, meanwhile, will provide for 'spectacular views' when sailing in scenic areas or when entering port.

Somnio will serve as a floating condo for the super-rich, offering 39 ultra-luxury apartments starting at 9.5million euros (£8.1million/$11.2million)

The apartments will be spread over six decks, each one fully customisable

A personal kitchen, gym, a library, inside/outside dining spaces and distinct dressing areas are all potential features owners can order

Owners will have access to a 'spectacular' 10,000-bottle capacity wine cellar and tasting room

And full concierge services will be available for both onboard and land-based needs.

A statement for the unveiling of Somnio says: 'Somnio is the world's first "yacht liner", conceived to provide all the benefits of superyacht ownership and finished to the highest possible standards, with onboard amenities reflecting the service and offering only found in the world's finest hotels.'

The onboard safety standards will be premium, too.

The statement continues: 'World-class medical care will also be available onboard, providing apartment owners with the highest level of safety away from pandemics and other global risks.'

A statement for the unveiling of Somnio says: 'Somnio is the world's first "yacht liner", conceived to provide all the benefits of superyacht ownership and finished to the highest possible standards, with onboard amenities reflecting the service and offering only found in the world's finest hotels'

World-class medical care will also be available onboard, providing apartment owners with the highest level of safety away from pandemics and other global risks. This rendering shows how Somnio will be a sight to behold even at night

Once everyone is ensconced onboard, Somnio, with a focus on 'slow-paced travel', will set sail for the four corners of the globe, undertaking eco-missions as she goes.

Advanced onboard equipment will help scientists and marine experts conduct research into ocean environments and internationally recognised experts will join Somnio's itinerary to update owners on the latest global challenges and solutions on key environmental and philanthropic issues.

The pioneering project is being overseen by Somnio co-founder Captain Erik Bredhe, previously Master of M/V The World, to date the only residential vessel at sea.

Somnio has been conceived by two of the world's foremost architectural and design studios, London-based Winch Design and Tillberg Design of Sweden

Somnio will be the largest yacht in the world, by both length and volume, and powered by the latest clean engine technology

'The World has been a phenomenal success, though it is time for true superyacht co-ownership,' said Captain Bredhe. 'Somnio will be the only residential superyacht in the world and has been designed to exacting standards that are commensurate with a life of opportunity. Owners will share a truly unique lifestyle at sea, with a hand-picked crew and a never-ending global itinerary of carefully selected destinations and experiences befitting a yacht of this nature.'

Somnio will be the largest yacht in the world, by both length and volume, and powered by the latest clean engine technology. She is currently being built by Vard in Norway, which is part of Italian shipbuilding firm Fincantieri.

More details about Somnio can be found by visiting www.somniosuperyachts.com.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With series two of The Durrells now available on Netflix, you can revisit the charming story of Gerald Durrell's family and their four years in Corfu.

And one of the biggest stars of the show is the sun-drenched Greek island itself – with its sparkling cobalt-blue sea and beautiful mountainous interior, it is easy to see why the famous naturalist and author instantly fell in love with it when his family moved there in 1935.

Now you can put yourself in the family's shoes on our exclusive Corfu trip with the naturalist, author and broadcaster Lee Durrell.

Idyllic: Vlacherna monastery, with Mouse Island in the distance

OUR SPECIAL GUEST You will be joined by Lee Durrell Naturalist, writer and broadcaster Lee Durrell is the honorary director of the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust, which aims to save endangered species from extinction. She is the author of several books, including The Amateur Naturalist: A Practical Guide To The Natural World, and co-presented several TV series with Gerald. She also advised production on the ITV comedy-drama The Durrells – an adaptation of her late husband's books about his childhood years in Corfu. Advertisement

During this magical holiday, you will visit filming locations from the TV series and many of the places that Lee's late husband Gerald immortalised in his wonderful childhood memoir My Family And Other Animals.

Enjoy expertly guided excursions to some of the young Gerald's haunts – including Mouse Island and the Lake of Lilies – and visit the charming home of his literary elder brother, Lawrence.

Plus you will take a boat trip to Corfu's intriguing neighbour, Albania, and enjoy a lunch at the renowned Taverna Foros, which has been featured by TV chef Rick Stein.

Your special guest will be Lee Durrell, who will share family stories as she introduces you to their favourite spots.

Lee says: 'The magic of Gerald Durrell's childhood can still be experienced, and it will be a privilege for me to watch as the sun, sea and flower-filled olive groves that so beguiled the young Gerry once again weave their spell.'

REASONS TO BOOK

Meet Lee Durrell: Naturalist Lee Durrell will give her personal insights into the life of her late husband and their work together. As well as retracing Gerald's footsteps, Lee will give two exclusive talks reflecting on his legacy and his lifelong love of Corfu.

Visit the Durrells' favourite places: Anyone who enjoyed reading My Family And Other Animals as a child will have dreamt of spending an afternoon on Pontikonisi, or Mouse Island. Gerald and his sister Margo – played by Milo Parker and Daisy Waterstone in the ITV drama – spent many happy hours on this tiny islet, just a short scenic boat ride from Corfu Town.

Another highlight will be a trip to Kalami Bay accompanied by Lee. Poet and author Lawrence Durrell lived here with his wife Nancy in the White House, an elegant villa on a tranquil beach where the couple loved to swim.

You will also see the location of the original Strawberry-Pink Villa and the Durrells' picnicking spot, Lake Antiniotissa. Gerald christened it Lake of Lilies after the dainty sand lilies that flower there every spring.

Your four-star hotel: You will be staying at the stylish Divani Corfu Palace, a four-star hotel with superb sea views, situated on a peninsula overlooking the lagoon.

Your guided tour of Corfu Town's cobbled streets will take in elegant Spianada Square and the 16th Century St Spyridon Church. Another must-see is the Achilleion Palace and museum, a 100-year-old villa filled with statues and other mementoes from its history of former royal owners.

A taste of Albania: Only a sliver of sea separates Corfu from Albania, where you will enjoy a private guided tour of its most impressive archaeological site, Butrint – the atmospheric ruins of an ancient Greek and Roman city.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Covering five counties, the idyllic rolling hills of the Cotswolds are home to some of Britain’s most wonderful gardens.

And you’ll have the chance to explore some of the best, set among honey-coloured stone villages and buzzing market towns, on this fantastic five-day tour.

As well as enjoying some unforgettable experiences, the highlight will be meeting celebrity farmer Adam Henson, who regularly presents his Adam’s Farm segment of the BBC’s Countryfile from his Cotswold Farm Park. Adam will join you for a private lunch at his farm as well as giving you an exclusive talk on his career and the history and conservation work that takes place there.

Explore the finest gardens: A Cotswolds must-see, the colourful Arts and Crafts garden at Hidcote (pictured) features wonderful secret gardens connected by a maze of narrow paved pathways

The grand and intricate Exedra feature in Painswick Rococo Garden

OUR SPECIAL GUEST You will meet TV's Adam Henson Adam Henson is possibly the UK’s best-known farmer, often presenting the BBC’s Countryfile programme from his Cotswold Farm Park. Adam took over the 1,600-acre site from his father in 1999 and it now welcomes more than 100,000 visitors a year. He also grows wheat, spring barley and oilseed rape, and manages more than 50 herds and flocks of British rare-breed farm animals. Advertisement

You will stay on the edge of the Cotswolds in the festival town of Cheltenham, from where you will visit the colourful Painswick Rococo Garden and Bourton House’s award-winning three-acre garden.

You’ll enjoy a traditional cream tea at the Lygon Arms hotel in the village of Broadway and take trips to the gardens at Hidcote, Whichford Pottery in Shipston- on-Stour and Batsford Arboretum, home to more than 2,850 plants from around the world, including 1,300 different trees, shrubs and bamboos.

Reasons to book

Guided tour of Bourton House: Set in the Saxon village of Bourton-on-the-Hill, the house was rebuilt at the beginning of the 18th Century by Alexander Popham, grandson of one of Oliver Cromwell’s generals. You’ll visit the beautiful garden that took more than 25 years to transform to its current splendour.

Join Adam for lunch: While you’re at the farm, you will enjoy a delicious private lunch with Adam in the wonderful setting before you get to explore it for yourself.

Explore the finest gardens: A Cotswolds must-see, the colourful Arts and Crafts garden at Hidcote features wonderful secret gardens connected by a maze of narrow paved pathways. Painswick Rococo Garden is the only surviving rococo-style garden of its kind in the UK, and during a private tour you’ll be transported back to the ornamental style’s heyday in the 1700s.

See potters in action: During your visit to Whichford Pottery, which is world-famous for its award-winning flowerpots, you’ll have a chance to see the hand-throwing and hand-pressing methods loved by gardeners all over the globe.

Visit Batsford Arboretum: Autumn is the ideal time to visit Batsford Arboretum, with its riot of leaf colour from deep butter-yellow through to crimsons. Explore the Chinese and Japanese-influenced gardens created by Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford in the early 1890s, which feature Japanese maples and one of the UK’s first bamboo collections.

Financial protection: These are uncertain times for travel, but you can enjoy peace of mind knowing this unique trip with TS Tours and Travel Editions is financially protected.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Covid travel tests can cost more than five times the price of a return flight to Europe, it emerged last night.

It leaves families paying hundreds of pounds extra to go abroad this summer with MPs branding the expense ‘a rip-off’.

Ministers face increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks.

A study by MPs looked at the cost of trips to popular European destinations later this month and compared them with the average fee for a single PCR swab after getting back to Britain.

It found Ryanair was offering return flights from East Midlands airport to Barcelona and Exeter to Alicante for just £18 between August 24 and 27.

But the typical charge for a post-return PCR test among Government-approved providers is £93 – some five times as expensive. The swab is also almost four times as costly as a return flight from London Stansted to Madrid.

A study by MPs found Ryanair was offering return flights from East Midlands airport to Barcelona and Exeter to Alicante for just £18 between August 24 and 27. Pictured: a sign to a Covid-19 test centre at London's Heathrow Airport on July 31

Ministers face increasing pressure to cap how much travellers pay for PCR tests and scrap VAT on them to stop would-be holidaymakers from being priced out of foreign breaks (pictured: terminal 5 departures at Heathrow Airport this month)

And for destinations such as Berlin, Budapest and Faro in the Algarve, the test is more than double the price of plane tickets.

The research only includes the cost of a single post-return PCR swab, which double-jabbed travellers must take by day two after returning from a green or amber country.

It does not include the pre-return swab all passengers must take before boarding UK-bound planes, meaning testing bills as a proportion of flight costs can be even greater. Non-fully vaccinated holidaymakers also face much larger bills as they are required to take two post-return PCR swabs on days two and eight.

The Daily Mail has championed calls for the Government to drive down costs.

Tory MP Henry Smith, chairman of the all-party Future of Aviation Group, which conducted the study, said: ‘These figures demonstrate that testing for international travel has become little more than a tax on travel, adding a huge disincentive to travel.

‘When the cost of testing can be more than the price of a ticket, it is clear that the current system is not fit for purpose and needs urgent reform to stop the rip-off fees we are currently seeing.’

French police officers control customers' health passes at a bar in Paris on August 9. The UK Government has repeatedly said it is working with the travel industry and testing providers to see how to ‘further reduce the cost of travel for the public’

A worker who came to empty an overflowing Randox drop off box in Warwick. Randox is a company doing PRC tests for people wishing to travel but many of these drop off points have been rammed with people's test kits

He said travellers should be allowed to take much cheaper rapid lateral flow tests on return followed by a ‘gold standard’ PCR only if this is positive.

He added: ‘Alongside this, ministers must urgently consider a cap on the total cost of testing. It is high time that the Government got to grips with this issue.’ Sir Graham Brady MP, chairman of the Tory backbench 1922 Committee, said: ‘The number of tests required and their exorbitant prices in the UK risk making foreign holidays the preserve of the well off.

‘This is plainly unfair to families on average incomes and risks destroying our very successful travel industry. This problem should be tackled as a matter of urgency.’

The study found a post-return PCR test can also cost more than return flights to Nice in southern France, Malta, Gibraltar and the Balearic island of Menorca, doubling the cost of a trip even for fully vaccinated individuals.

Carrier easyJet is offering return flights to Mahon in Menorca for £61 later this month, making the average cost of a test nearly 50 per cent more than the flights. British Airways is offering return flights from Heathrow to Paris for £100, making the typical post-return testing bill almost as expensive as the flights.

Ministers insist arrivals must take pricier PCR tests as they are considered more accurate and can be ‘sequenced’ for mutant Covid strains. But NHS Test and Trace figures show just 5 per cent of swabs are being sequenced. Greece and Italy have capped the price of PCR tests, while in France they are free for citizens. Some European countries have also axed VAT on testing kits.

The Government has repeatedly said it is working with the travel industry and testing providers to see how to ‘further reduce the cost of travel for the public’. Health secretary Sajid Javid has asked the Competition and Markets Authority watchdog to investigate whether travellers are being ripped off by testing firms.

But Labour MP Ben Bradshaw, who sits on the Commons transport committee, said: ‘While the rest of Europe is enjoying a relatively normal summer on the beach, for many British families the cost of the tests and the confusing and chaotic traffic light system is putting the dream of a foreign holiday out of reach.’

A Government spokesman said: ‘We are clear that all private providers must meet a set of required standards and each provider is held to account by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service, with companies that fail to meet high standards being removed from the list of approved suppliers.’

The great travel test farce! Swab boxes left overflowing

By David Churchill and Josh White for the Daily Mail

Britain's travel testing system was branded an ‘absolute mess’ yesterday after uncollected swabs were left piled high outside pharmacies.

Pictures posted online showed three drop-off boxes run by Randox, the UK’s largest PCR testing provider, overflowing with swabs.

It meant outraged customers were forced to choose between adding to the pile – risking their personal details being stolen by thieves – or shell out for a private courier.

Yesterday’s images have fuelled fears that the testing system will be unable to cope if too many Britons go abroad during the school holidays.

Piled high: A Randox drop-off bin in London filled with uncollected PCR tests, showing the demand in the currently privately-run holiday testing system

Ditch traffic light system, says former vaccine boss The current traffic light system for international travel is too complicated and should be ditched, the former head of the Government’s vaccine taskforce has said. Clive Dix said the current four categories – green, green watchlist, amber and red – should be replaced with just red and green. He said that high levels of vaccination in the UK and other countries meant only those destinations with low jab uptake and without widespread testing should be on the red list, with quarantining required. All other countries should be green, needing only a test on return. ‘We don’t really know what the viral variants are [in those countries],’ he told the Daily Telegraph. ‘The rest, we’re pretty sure what’s there. I think there’s no difference between moving around there and us moving around within the UK.’ Advertisement

All travellers returning from green and amber list countries must take a test by day two after arriving back in the UK. Those who have not been fully-vaccinated must also take a test on day eight. Some countries also require a pre-holiday test to show on arrival.

It means that, were any of these types of tests left uncollected, potential burglars could work out when people were away and their homes empty.

Gavin Williams, 51, from Southfields in south-west London, said he travelled 30 minutes to the nearest Randox drop-off bin to deliver his daughter’s day two PCR test. But when he arrived, it was filled to the brim and overflowing.

Posting a picture to Twitter, the teaching assistant, who paid £43 for the tests, said he felt ‘ripped off’.

Replying with a picture of another drop-off bin with uncollected tests piled 20 boxes high, Tilly Slight posted: ‘You think that one’s bad?’

The pictures have sparked fury among travel experts, with Paul Charles, CEO of consultancy The PC Agency, saying they were ‘a symbol of the absolute mess that PCR testing has become’.

And Rory Boland, editor of Which? Travel, said the watchdog had repeatedly warned the testing system would be unable to cope with too many people travelling abroad.

‘It’s particularly frustrating as Which? raised this with the Government a few months ago,’ he said. ‘The system isn’t set up for large numbers of people travelling. Now many people are travelling, the system is not working properly.’

Randox is among more than 400 private testing firms on the Government-approved list of providers.

According to the Government’s website, the firm charges £43 for a ‘self swab at home’ day two test. The cost for a days two and eight package is £86.

The latest controversy comes a year after Randox sent out hundreds of thousands of unsterile tests to care homes.

As a result, it was forced to recall 750,000 unused kits.

Despite this, the company was awarded a new £347million Government contract and is capable of processing around 500,000 swabs a day.

A spokesman for Randox said the firm was increasing the number of drop boxes across the UK as well as the frequency of test collections.

‘All of the sample kits pictured will be processed,’ the spokesman added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Gorgeous images of night skies around the world have been captured by photographer Morteza Safataj - and some of the sensational snaps took a year to plan.

Safataj has shot photos across Iran and scouted the perfect Milky Way locations to make the night sky pop across national parks in Texas, Oregon, Arizona, New Mexico and California.

Originally from Iran but now a US citizen, Safataj creates and balances shadows in the foregrounds of his photos, which make the backdrop of the starry skies seem all the more theatrical.

Moment of reflection: Gorgeous views of night skies around the world have been captured by photographer Morteza Safataj. The skilled photographer can be seen in the foreground of this shot, taken in Arizona

LEFT: The Milky Way over a field of Texas wildflowers. RIGHT: A stunning capture of Joshua Trees in California taken while Safataj was on a road trip

A long-exposure shot of the night sky above a valley close to the city of The Dalles in Oregon. Safataj's friend drove his truck on the highway four times in order to get the perfect shot of the car-light trace

The perfect shot can be captured in 30 minutes, but pre-production can take weeks.

Safataj said: 'Finding the spot, aligning the Milky Way with the perfect foreground is a matter of days and weeks.

'I first searched on the internet to find unique spots in nature and then calculated to see when the Milky Way aligned with the scenery a year in advance.

'Then I plan the trip for the next year and go to the spot during the day and scout the area to find the perfect composition using a night sky application that shows where, and at what time, the Milky Way will be visible.

Strike a pose: One of Safataj's friends does a spot of late-night yoga amid a unique rock formation in the Bisti Badlands in New Mexico with the Milky Way shimmering above

A stunning composition of the night sky, in which the Milky Way and the moon can be seen, taken at Big Bend National Park in Texas

Golden shot: The Milky Way puts on an incredible show over a salt lake between the provinces of East and West Azerbaijan in Iran

This shot was taken at Badab-e Surt, Iran's terraced hot springs. Safataj says of his night sky photography: 'With today's technology we are able to capture night sceneries that we would never see with the naked eye'

'After a day of scouting I will get back to the spot during the night and start taking the perfect photo.

'Imagine with all these plans and scouting the weather turns out to be cloudy, and then I have to come back to the location another night or even another year.'

Safataj revealed that despite the potential frustrations, he finds night sky photography exciting.

He said: 'One thing that inspired me was the challenge of capturing the landscape in low light under the night sky.

'With today's technology we are able to capture night sceneries that we would never see with the naked eye.

'Combining the technology with my artistic vision enabled me to show some part of the beauty of our planet earth under the Milky Way galaxy that most people won't get a chance to see.'

A local photographer drove this dirt road in the Valley of the Gods, Utah, to allow Safataj to shoot the vehicle's bright lights and add another magical element to the scene

Safataj ventured out to snap a starry night sky in Crater Lake National Park, Oregon, after a fresh blanket of snow

LEFT: Safataj often shoots at Big Bend National Park in Texas, which he has called one of the 'largest, darkest, most remote parks'. Here the Milky Way really comes alive. RIGHT: The Milky Way over Mount Sabalan, an inactive stratovolcano in Iran

A windmill silhouetted against a glittering night sky at Big Bend National Park in Texas. Safataj says of his work: 'Combining technology with my artistic vision enabled me to show the beauty of our planet earth under the Milky Way galaxy that most people won't get a chance to see'

Along with night skies, weddings are another one of Safataj's specialities - he runs a wedding photography business. Pictured, a long-exposure photo taken at Big Bend National Park in Texas

Houston-based Safataj puts his stunning photos on his Instagram account - @safatajphoto - where he has 36.5k followers.

His favourite photo is one he took of the Milky Way over Rowena Crest Viewpoint in Oregon.

Safataj, who is the co-founder of a wedding photography studio and is the Director of Photography at a marketing agency, said: 'I spent a few days exploring Oregon's night sky. I'm glad that for the majority of the nights, the sky was clear.

'I had a great experience that night. Scouting different locations the whole day helped me shoot the best possible compositions.

'That night, my friend drove his truck on this highway four times in order to get the best car-light trace.'

To see more of Safataj's work visit his Instagram and Facebook pages.

It's not always stars and galaxies. Safataj snapped this electrifying thunderstorm over Lake Urmia in Iran

The ultimate selfie: Safataj shot this mesmerising self-portrait while exploring Vedauwoo, an area of unique rock formations located in southeastern Wyoming

The night sky glitters above the Rio Grande River at Big Bend National Park in Texas, while Safataj can be seen setting up his photography gear

These cross-shaped silhouettes make for a haunting photo at Terlingua Cemetery in West Texas

Houston-based Safataj puts his stunning photos on his Instagram account - @safatajphoto - where he has 36.5k followers. Above, Safataj shot the Perseids, which Nasa describes as 'the best meteor shower of the year', while in Meshgin Shahr in northwest Iran
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Staying in student digs on your summer holiday may not sound exactly enticing. But with hotels jam-packed as so many of us take staycations instead of heading to the Mediterranean, drastic times may require drastic measures.

Thankfully, help is at hand. In 17 cities around the UK, a new start-up called Zeni has secured the keys to student halls, where, until students return in September, anyone can stay for astonishingly tempting prices — from as low as £25 a night.

But I’m sceptical. Recalling my own halls of residence as an undergraduate in Middlesbrough, North Yorkshire, in the 1990s makes me shiver: bars on the window, lino on the floor and a design that seemed to have been taken from the building manual of an open prison.

Zeni's prices are 'astonishingly tempting'. In the above table we compare its deals with three budget hotel providers

So it is with no small degree of apprehension that I check into the Hope Street Apartments in Liverpool, a modern complex used by both Liverpool and Liverpool John Moores students, in the city’s Georgian Quarter.

First impressions are not great. The lobby looks somewhat like a dingy backpackers’ hostel in Rotterdam, with old sofas, concrete floors and pinboards festooned with adverts for Zumba classes.

So far, so regrettable.

Taking the industrial factory-esque lift to the third floor sinks my spirits further. I gingerly turn the key in the lock. Inside, however, I am in for a surprise.

Hope Street Apartments in Liverpool is a modern complex used by both Liverpool and Liverpool John Moores students

No half-empty tobacco pouches, Blu Tacked posters of Edvard Munch’s The Scream or scuffed paperback copies of Aldous Huxley’s The Doors Of Perception or Jack Kerouac’s On The Road. Instead, the room looks as if it has never been occupied. It has clearly been scrubbed to Japanese ryokan standards.

All is gleaming white, and inside the space is a small double bed, a neat kitchenette, a tidy shower room, oodles of storage space and — best of all — a view of the modernist Catholic cathedral (known to Liverpudlians as ‘Paddy’s Wigwam’ due to its odd shape). What a revelation.

Zeni is the brainchild of businessman Raj Patel, who says: ‘There is prime real estate all over the country that is sitting empty for months during the summer when students aren’t there.

Pictured is one of the rooms at Hope Street Apartments, with its 'gleaming white' interiors and neat kitchenette

‘It seemed like an obvious thing to see if we could open it up to everyone rather than have it deserted for months.’

Of course, rooms are only available for a few summer months each year. But even now, in peak summer, booking at short notice is possible.

There is no breakfast on offer and if there are two of you, the bed may be a bit of a squeeze — but can I remind you that a night here costs less than a round of drinks in most pubs.

Revelation: Liverpool’s Victoria Gallery & Museum is within walking distance of the accommodation

TRAVEL FACTS Ensuite rooms at Hope Street Apartments from £35 a night (stay-zeni.com). Avanti West Coast runs direct trains from London Euston to Liverpool Lime Street from £59.60 return (avantiwestcoast.co.uk). Advertisement

Over the road from my Zeni is The Philharmonic Dining Rooms, a Victorian palace of a pub famed for having Grade I listed marble urinals.

Within walking distance are the Three Graces buildings, the Tate Liverpool at the Royal Albert Dock, the Victoria Gallery & Museum, and the cluster of wonderful vintage shops, second-hand bookshops and organic pizza joints on Bold Street.

‘Where are you staying?’ a friend texts, expecting me to respond with my usual Liverpool haunts of the Titanic Hotel or the Malmaison — both usually more than double the Zeni price. Before arriving, I could not help but smirk a little at the hubris of the name of my accommodation.

But now I respond confidently: ‘I’m staying in an apartment.’ Because that, compared with the student digs of my era, is what this place on Hope Street most resembles. There are much larger apartments in the same complex that sleep up to 14 people, and there is even a gym and a roof terrace to enjoy.

As Airbnb prices spiral and guest houses stick up ‘no vacancies’ signs across the UK in this strange staycation summer, a new way of visiting Britain’s cities has quietly opened up.

Expect great value, unbeatable locations and, until Freshers’ Week at least, no ashtrays, joss sticks, pizza crusts or piles of old washing lumped on sofas. Relive your student days . . . in style!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daniel Defoe described Ripon’s market square as ‘the finest and most beautiful . . . of its kind in England’. Which sounds ambiguous. It’s the ‘of its kind’ that bothers me.

Certainly it’s one of the oldest and smallest English cities. Its 7th-century cathedral might lack the soaring towers of neighbouring York Minster, but it contains the oldest cathedral crypt in the country, which is all that remains of the church built on the site by St Wilfred in 672.

Ripon is tucked between the Yorkshire Dales and the North Yorkshire Moors and exudes an air of rural tranquillity. But when Alfred the Great granted Ripon its charter in 886 this was bandit country, prey to Viking raids.

God’s own country: Yorkshire’s Ripon Cathedral is one of the oldest in Britain

Ripon exudes an air of rural tranquillity, writes the Daily Mail's Tim Atkinson

So the King gave the inhabitants a ram’s horn to sound the alarm if attacked. And to this day the city’s Wakemen still blow a curved horn in the market square at 9pm to mark the setting of the night watch, a 1,100-year-old tradition broken only recently by Covid restrictions.

Turning left down Kirkgate, with the 80 ft, Grade 1 listed obelisk (topped with Wakeman’s Horn weathervane) behind you, you’re soon facing the West front of the cathedral.

The poet Wilfred Owen came here while stationed at the Northern Command Depot in 1918. After treatment for shell-shock at Craiglockhart and convalescence at Scarborough, Owen was sent to Ripon to regain his fighting fitness. But that wasn’t all he was doing.

In rented rooms on Borrage Lane, Owen wrote and polished some of his greatest verse including ‘The Send-Off’, about men he saw leaving for the front:

Secretly, like wrongs hushed-up, they went.

They were not ours:

We never heard to which front these were sent . . .

It’s poignant to think of Owen sitting alone, spending his last birthday among the cathedral’s ancient stones. Weeks later, he was posted back to the Western Front for what was to be the final, fatal time. Poignant, too, is the remarkable sight of 10,000 origami angels suspended high in the nave’s vaulted ceiling. Made by volunteers and local school children, each one is dedicated to Covid key workers and to loved ones. You can add your own origami angel for a small donation and the display is intended to grow throughout 2021.

Before leaving, take a look at the carved misericords or ‘choir seats’ in the chancel. One in particular — of a rabbit being chased down a hole — is said to have inspired Lewis Carroll (whose father was a priest here in the 1850s) when writing Alice in Wonderland.

Four miles west of the city lies Studley Royal, a World Heritage Site surrounded by a 300-acre deer park. The spectacular water gardens are sculptured from the wooded valley of the River Skell that first inspired Cistercian monks to build neighbouring Fountains Abbey.

Studley Royal has spectacular water gardens. Pictured is the Moon Pond

Now owned by the National Trust, the estate was once the seat of the 1st Marquess of Ripon, whose sweeping carriage drive leads up the hill from the village of Studley Roger to a Gothic Revival church built as a memorial to the marquess’s brother-in-law Frederick Vyner. Kidnapped by Greek bandits in 1870, Vyner was killed in a bungled rescue mission known as the Dilessi massacre.

Money to pay the ransom was diverted to build this fine church in its commanding position overlooking the deer park. Turn around and you get a magnificent view back to Ripon Cathedral and the Hambleton Hills beyond.

In the late afternoon sun, the peaceful scene seems a million miles away from Viking raids, violent kidnappings, a world war and a worldwide pandemic. But, in its packed 1,100-year history, Ripon has borne witness to it all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Tiny Channel Island Herm has been home to monks, pirates, smugglers, famous writers, and even Prussian royalty. One resident, Prince Blucher, even introduced wallabies to the island in the 19th century.

Now it's home to Craig Senior, originally from Rotherham and who moved to the island with his family to become its CEO.

Yes, this speck of land that measures just 1.3 miles long and less than 0.5 miles wide, has a CEO, charged with ensuring that it 'becomes commercially viable and self-sustaining financially'.

Herm measures just 1.3 miles long and less than 0.5 miles wide. This stunning picture of it was taken by Flickr user Claire Turner from an aeroplane window

Herm island CEO Craig Senior, originally from Rotherham, pictured here with his wife, Emma, their daughters Megan and Grace, and Harvey the Sproodle

Herm has holiday cottages 'to suit every size of family, many of which are dog friendly and have views overlooking Guernsey, Jethou and Alderney'

Senior describes the island - which has no cars (staff walk or use quad bikes), two pubs, one hotel, a school with seven children and an 11th-century chapel - as 'paradise'. And getting the job as like winning the lottery.

But it's a very serious business for him.

He told MailOnline Travel: 'I applied for the role of CEO of Herm Island nearly four years ago. Of the 280 applicants, I was shortlisted to the final six and offered an interview in London.

'Following this, three candidates were invited to visit the island for a three-day interview process, including meeting all the residents and some of the tourists. Simply put, after three very intense days - I won the lottery and moved to Herm with my family in November 2019.

'We were welcomed very positively. I came at a time when Herm had just begun the process of necessary infrastructure improvements across the island, and in the words of the CEO, they were looking for a positive leader who was sympathetic to the island's history and culture whilst accepting it had to move into the 21st century.'

Before landing the role of Herm CEO, Senior was based in southwest London in a high-pressure job looking after 30 golf, leisure, and health centres across the UK.

The south coast of Herm has high cliffs, home to Europe's most southerly puffin colony. This stunning drone panorama image was taken by Flickr user Ningaloo

A view of Belvoir Bay on Herm, complete with white sands and azure waters

The island has 20 equipped tents for holidaymakers and a camping village that specifically caters for Guernsey residents, who pitch their tents seasonally

Quite happily, he ditched long daily commutes for a job that involves concentrating on the soil he stands on.

His main role is helping to boost Herm's income through tourism so that it becomes economically self-sufficient. This, he says, is 'something that hasn't been achieved for many years'.

As a result, the island is currently heavily reliant on additional support from John Singer and his wife Julia, who took on Herm's lease 12 years ago as part of a £15million deal with the States of Guernsey, which act as the landlord.

The couple has a deep love of the island, as it's where they had their first date, and Senior says that they have done a great job in bringing Herm into the modern era – installing the internet being one of the major achievements – while being mindful that the island 'doesn't lose its unique natural charm, tranquillity and beauty'.

My two young daughters have never been so happy, enjoying the freedom, safety and space that Herm offers

The Yorkshireman - who oversees a head of finance, head of services, head of marketing and PR, and a head of hospitality - adds: 'The good news is that Herm is on track to break even this year, so we are finally heading in the right direction.'

Along with the Singers, Senior manages the relationship with the island's board of directors and the landlords.

But the most rewarding part of his job is working with the island community, ensuring they are happy and that the island has 'sufficient investment and care' so that visitors can fully benefit from its beauty.

'This is a duty which I feel incredibly fortunate to have been charged with,' says the father of two.

Visitors to Herm can check into the 40-bedroom White House Hotel, which is next door to The Ship Inn

Senior, 52, has adapted to island life like a duck to water, and his family – including Harvey the Sproodle - are also enjoying the change of pace.

His wife Emma, 51, helps with HR and payroll support for the island's administration office, while his daughters, Megan, eight, and Grace, seven, are pupils at the island's school.

There are currently seven pupils at the one-room primary school and one teacher. Once a week they nip over to Guernsey to mix with another school, and sailing and trips to the beach for swimming are part of the curriculum.

'They have an unbelievable lifestyle,' Senior says. 'My two young daughters have never been so happy, enjoying the freedom, safety and space that Herm offers.

'And I enjoy the walks and walking with Harvey.'

There are no houses for sale on Herm - the Seniors moved into one of the properties reserved for those working on the island.

Avid walkers can circumnavigate the island in half a day, stopping off at some of the 'most unspoilt beaches in Britain'

To explore the island's coast from the water, visitors can hire kayaks from Shell Beach or take a private tour

There are around 70 residents all year round, the number swelling to 150 during the busy summer season. Roles advertised on the island include plumbers, electricians, builders, estate management and hospitality staff.

Asked what the most difficult thing about living on Herm is, Senior says the isolation, a double-edged sword proving especially tough during the pandemic.

The island - which remains Covid-free - went into lockdown twice, first from March to June in 2020 and again from January to March of this year.

During this time, all the necessary supplies, from medicines to groceries to fuel, were shipped to Herm from Guernsey, which is three miles away.

All the goods were sanitised before being dropped off and the boat crew weren't allowed to step onshore.

In a bid to support local fishermen, Senior stocked up on fresh catch and found living on a Robinson Crusoe diet on Herm wasn't too bad, with lobster dinners almost every night of the week.

'I was saying at one point "no more lobster!"' he chuckles.

After exhausting all the activities on the minuscule island, from hiking to puffin-watching, Senior says the residents turned their efforts to sprucing the place up during the lockdowns.

In the centre of Herm is a vast grassy common where Neolithic settlements have been found

The kiosk on Herm's Shell Beach is a popular place for visitors to stop off for an ice cream and cooling beverage

Before landing the role of Herm CEO, Senior was based in southwest London in a high-pressure job looking after 30 golf, leisure, and health centres. Now his job involves concentrating on the soil he stands on

They went about refurbishing the lounge of the island's sole hotel – The White House – for the first time in almost 20 years, refurbishing six holiday cottages, creating new woodland walks, upgrading the drainage system, and doing 'lots and lots of decorating'.

Following the various home improvements, Herm reopened to visitors on March 22, with the public ferry from Guernsey running again.

So, for those planning to visit, what are the highlights of Senior's 'office'?

Avid walkers can circumnavigate the island in half a day, stopping off at some of the 'most unspoilt beaches in Britain with soft white sand and clear blue water where you can swim and kayak', and where the kids can explore rock pools.

In the centre of the island is a vast grassy common where Neolithic settlements have been found and the south coast has high cliffs, home to Europe's most southerly puffin colony.

After working up a thirst, the island has two pubs to choose from. The Mermaid Tavern has a lively atmosphere, Senior says, with 'sell-out beer festivals', Sunday roasts with bingo and 'the best fish and chips outside of Yorkshire by far!'

Meanwhile, The Ship Inn offers 'more of a bistro dining experience', with a large indoor dining area, a cosy bar and an outside courtyard for al-fresco dining.

Credit cards can also be put to use in the island's large gift shop, which is full of knick-knacks and items from summer dresses to crockery. Senior says it's so popular that special shopping boats bring people over to it from Guernsey during the festive period.

Along with the 40-bedroom White House Hotel, Senior says the island has holiday cottages 'to suit every size of family, many of which are dog friendly and have views overlooking Guernsey, Jethou and Alderney and some of the best sunsets you'll see anywhere in the world'.

My settee is my second favourite place. That is when we as a family can get some quality time and I can catch up on missed box sets from the summer – those days are priceless

The island also has 20 equipped tents for holidaymakers and a camping village that specifically caters for Guernsey residents, who pitch their tents seasonally.

For guests with mobility issues, there is a four-seater Gator vehicle if required.

Quizzed about his favourite part of the island, Senior plumps for the southeast corner, explaining that from the clifftops there 'you can see France, Jersey, Guernsey, and the other smaller Channel Islands, and of course parts of Herm'.

His second favourite place, he admits, is his settee. In non-Covid times there can be up to 100,000 visitors during the summer season and he relishes putting his feet up later in the year.

The Rotherham United fan concludes: 'That is when we as a family can get some quality time and I can catch up on missed box sets from the summer – those days are priceless.'

To learn more about Herm visit Herm.com. Thank you to Flickr users ClaireTurner28 and Ningaloo for permission to publish their stunning aerial images of Herm.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Behind the scenes tours for theatre-lovers.

While theatres and concert halls are slowly opening their doors again, many have already reintroduced backstage tours and special events.

London’s 150-year-old Royal Albert Hall is leading the charge. Its team of guides are back on duty and taking groups on hour-long tours of a building that has hosted everything from the famous Proms and operas to boxers, tennis stars and even ice-skaters.

Curtain-raiser: The Proms at London’s 150-year-old Royal Albert Hall

Before lockdown, Hollywood actor Tom Hanks joined one of the tours to see the Hall’s vast stage, its 9,999-pipe organ and the gilded grand tier. Tours cost £16.25 (royalalberthall.com).

In Blackpool, monthly tours of the Winter Gardens restart on Tuesday. The two-hour visit includes the Opera House and huge Empress Ballroom (with space for 3,000 guests) and you’ll get to hear tales featuring legends such as Frank Sinatra and Judy Garland, learn what happened when The Rolling Stones performed, and hear about the show-must-go-on effort for 2020’s Royal Variety Performance.

Upgrade a tour and end with afternoon tea and champagne in the Art Deco Mazzei Cafe. From £12.50, or £30 with afternoon tea (wintergardensblackpool.co.uk).

In Newcastle, step beneath the chandelier of the glittering Tyne Theatre and Opera House, built in 1867 by local industrialist and politician Joseph Cowen (who donated the bricks as well as the money). An hour-long tour will take you under the stage to see the original Victorian machinery that moved scenery around, and you can also expect ghost stories and theatrical gossip. From £6.50 (tynetheatreandoperahouse.uk).

Two-and-a-half centuries of theatrical history are told at the Bristol Old Vic. Take its new Historic Spaces Tour to see the ornate auditorium, the orchestra pit and, if you have a head for heights, a chance to climb into the area above the stage. That’s home to a rare, original 18th Century ‘Thunder Run’, where iron balls are rolled down a wooden trough to recreate the noise of a full-scale thunder clap.

Bristol Old Vic is running a new Historic Spaces Tour where you can climb into the area above the stage

Sinatra’s appearance in Blackpool

Private tours can be arranged for up to six people for £50 (bristololdvic.org.uk).

Belfast also offers something new with the first guided tours of the freshly restored Grand Opera House. Book a ticket (they’re selling fast) and follow in the footsteps of everyone from Charlie Chaplin and Luciano Pavarotti to Van Morrison and Darcey Bussell.

Enjoy an hour-long tour or, with children in tow, a shorter, family-friendly alternative. Tickets cost from £9.50 (goh.co.uk).

Finally, theatre-lovers in Scarborough and Leicester can get the inside track on the journey of a play from concept to stage – and maybe even get to see a real-life drama unfold.

At the Stephen Joseph Theatre in Scarborough, a £5 ticket will get you in to Play Readings, when playwrights and cast sit on stage together to read scripts aloud for the very first time (sjt.uk.com).

The other end of the theatrical journey unfolds at the Curve Theatre in Leicester, where directors aim to allow audiences to come in to watch their final dress rehearsals. Shows that are set to open soon include the comedy Magic Goes Wrong, the musical Grease, and drama Dial M For Murder.

Rehearsal tickets, which cost just £1, are sold on a first-come, first-served basis on the day of the show. Find out how to register for them at curveonline.co.uk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The gentle pace of Norfolk and a coast dotted with delightful beaches have made the county the perfect antidote to the rush of daily life.

From its renowned Broads to historic market towns, Norfolk offers a slice of quintessential English countryside – and we’re giving you a chance to take in the very best of the county while enjoying a special culinary experience in the company of one its most famous daughters: Delia Smith.

On this exclusive five-day tour, you’ll be hosted by Delia for a full day at her Food And Wine Workshop, where you’ll also be joined by chef Alex Mackay, cocktail expert Simon Atkinson and wine expert Jason Banner.

History tour: Blickling Hall contains some of the most historically significant manuscripts and books in England

A steam train on the Bure Valley Railway, which runs through the countryside from the market town of Aylsham to busy Wroxham

YOUR SPECIAL GUEST You will be joined by Delia Smith Delia Smith has been teaching the country to cook for half a century and has sold more than 21 million books. She was awarded the Order of the Companions of Honour in 2017, receiving the award from the Queen for her contribution to cooking and cookery education. Delia, right, is joint majority shareholder at Norwich City Football Club. Advertisement

Your fun-packed food and drink experiences will include a three-course lunch, a wine-tasting, a cooking demonstration with Alex, a cocktail masterclass and a Q&A session with Delia and the team. You’ll also dine at Delia’s Restaurant And Bar in Norwich.

But this is just the start of your Norfolk adventure.

You’ll enjoy a ride on the Bure Valley Railway, take a trip on a paddle steamer on the Broads and go on a tour of historic Blickling Hall.

You’ll also visit the coastal towns and villages of North Norfolk, including Burnham Market, as well as touring Norwich itself.

REASONS TO BOOK

Eat at Delia’s restaurant: Enjoy a special dinner at the acclaimed Delia’s Restaurant And Bar at Norwich City Football Club’s stadium (lifelong fan Delia is joint majority shareholder in the club). The restaurant offers meals to Delia’s exacting standards and has a seasonal menu with an emphasis on local produce. You will have canapes on arrival and a three-course dinner, followed by coffee and something sweet.

Interactive cooking day: Your Food And Wine Workshop includes morning coffee with biscuits, an opportunity to browse the gift shop, a three-course lunch with wine, a cooking demonstration with Alex, a wine-tasting with Jason, a cocktail masterclass with Simon, a Q&A session with the team, tea with cake, a book signing with Delia and Alex, and a goodie bag to take away.

Classic Norfolk experiences: Ride the Bure Valley steam railway, which runs through the countryside from the market town of Aylsham to busy Wroxham. You’ll also enjoy a cruise on the Broads on the Mississippi paddle boat Southern Comfort, taking in the views as you follow the River Bure past cottages and windmills.

Best of the Norfolk coast: Highlights include Burnham Market, with its arts and crafts shops, and historic Walsingham. You’ll stop for lunch in a traditional Norfolk tavern.

See magical Blickling Hall: This majestic Jacobean house between Norwich and Cromer contains some of the most historically significant manuscripts and books in England.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The first roller coaster at sea is open for business - and amazing point-of-view video footage of the ride in action shows that it's a spectacular experience.

The ride is called Bolt and it winds its way around the top of the £1billion Carnival ship the Mardis Gras.

Described as the ‘Ultimate Sea Coaster’, the clip sees the ride shooting around the ship’s 'Ultimate Playground' water slides and its funnel, with the azure blue water of the ocean to one side.

Amazing point-of-view video footage of Bolt on the Mardi Gras shows that it's an exhilarating experience

After years of anticipation, Bolt debuted on a trip to Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas on July 31, on a sailing from Port Canaveral, Florida.

Built by Munich-based Maurer Rides, the roller coaster track - which reportedly cost £5.7million ($8 million) to construct - is 187 feet (57m) above sea level and reaches speeds of nearly 40 miles per hour.

The all-electric roller coaster, which costs £10.80 ($15) for two laps, allows two riders to strap in to a motorcycle-like vehicle and race each other, experiencing nearly 800 feet (243 metres) of thrilling twists and plunges as it flies around the track.

The roller coaster allows two riders to strap in to a motorcycle-like vehicle and race one another

The roller coaster track is 187 feet above sea level and reaches speeds of nearly 40 miles per hour

It finishes with a high-powered hairpin turn around the Mardi Gras funnel

As their stomachs drop, guests can take in 360-degree views of the sky and sea around them, before the ride finishes with a high-powered hairpin turn around the ship's funnel.

Riders' speeds are posted after the race, and just like land-based roller coasters, guests have their photo taken during the ride for a memorable keepsake.

Guests can even choose their own speed using an in-car throttle, making it a tailor-made experience.

Bolt: The Ultimate Sea Coaster flies around the ship’s 'Ultimate Playground' water slides

Riders can enjoy 360-degree views from the top of the cruise ship as they experience the ride

Bolt debuted on a trip to Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas on July 31

Christine Duffy, president of Carnival Cruise Line, said: ‘Bolt will continue the tradition of Carnival providing exciting new ways for our guests to “choose fun”.

‘We are so thrilled to introduce this one-of-a-kind, game-changing, exhilarating attraction – our guests are going to love it!’

Mardi Gras, an XL-class ship, weighs 180,000 tonnes, is 1,130 ft (340m) long and features six onboard zones, including a French quarter.

The cruise line took delivery of Mardis Gras from the Meyer Turku Shipyard in Turku, Finland, where she was constructed.

The ship was set to launch in 2020 but the occasion was pushed back into 2021 because of the pandemic.

After the race, guests have their photos taken for a memorable keepsake
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Holiday Guru is always on hand to answer your questions.

This week's issues tackled include the reopening of U.S borders to UK residents - and the travel rules for Spain, Germany and France.

Q. Can you tell me whether there is any update on negotiations between the UK and U.S. to allow UK holidaymakers to visit?

Paul White, via email.

Vibrant: New York’s famous Times Square, which is currently off-limits to UK tourists

A. The current ban on UK citizens entering the U.S. is unlikely to be lifted before the end of the summer. This is mainly owing to American concerns about the Delta variant of Covid in the UK. Some industry figures, including Robin Hayes, the chief executive of the U.S. budget airline JetBlue, believe the ban could be in place for at least another two or three months.

Q. My wife and I, aged 70, are travelling to Spain by ferry at the end of August. How and when do we need to obtain the necessary form to get there? We are both double vaccinated.

Joe and Jean Byrne, via email.

A. You will need to complete a Spanish government form within 48 hours of your departure. The internet link is: spthm.puertos.es. After completing the form you will be sent a ‘QR’ (Quick Response) code, like a barcode, which you can either print out or keep on your smartphone to use at the border.

As you are fully vaccinated, you will not need to provide proof of a negative Covid test, but you will need evidence of your jabs through the NHS app.

Q. We wish to travel to Freiburg, in Germany, for an 80th birthday party in September. We fly via Basel airport, which is officially called EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg. While Basel is in Switzerland, Mulhouse in France and Freiburg in Germany, the airport is technically in French territory.

We usually exit via the French gate of the airport, as this is the most convenient route to the autobahn leading to Freiburg.

So should we follow French Covid rules?

M. Briggs, via email.

A. This is complicated. Follow the French rules to start with, and then the German rules for entering Germany. Regulations for both can be found at gov.uk under the each country’s entry requirements page. There is more information at euroairport.com.

The Guru answers a question from a reader who plans to travel to Freiburg in Germany

Q. We are due to fly to Germany on August 20 for a week to visit relatives. Germany is currently on the green list, but we still need to take a Covid test in Germany up to 72 hours before our return and a PCR test in the UK by day two, which would be Sunday, August 29.

However, we are due to fly to Spain on August 29 for three weeks to visit our new apartment. Is there any point in taking a PCR test, given that we are flying out of the country that day?

Kevin Cheal, via email.

A. You still need to follow the official procedure to enter the UK from Germany, as daft as that may sound. There are no special rules in this case.

Q. My wife and I are going to the South of France next week for a fortnight. I understand that, as we are fully vaccinated, we do not need to take any tests before entering France. But what tests are required for our return? Our local pharmacist says we don’t need any. Is this correct?

James King, via email.

The Guru clears up confusion over the rules for travelling to and from the South of France

A. Your pharmacist is incorrect. You will need to take a lateral flow test (or ‘antigen’ test) 72 hours before returning and have proof of this to show your airline or ferry company. You will also need to complete a Passenger Locator Form to show at the UK border.

Within two days of your return, you must take a PCR Covid test. Your PCR test booking number will be required on your Passenger Locator Form. For more details, visit gov.uk/provide-journey- contact-details-before-travel-uk.

WE’RE HERE TO HELP

If you need advice, the Holiday Guru is here to answer your questions. Email us at holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

It was like a kind of magic. A hotel on Mallorca that left me spellbound.

I knew the biggest island of the Balearic archipelago could throw a party, but I didn't realise it could enchant. Not, that is, until we rolled into the grand courtyard of Zoetry Mallorca, a stunning step-back-in-time country estate hotel that mesmerises with tranquil courtyards, charming service, a pool or two and luxurious, serene bedrooms.

Lads on tour, move along to Magaluf, which lies about 50km (31 miles) to the west, the other side of the capital, Palma.

Zoetry Mallorca, pictured, is a stunning step-back-in-time country estate hotel

The hotel 'mesmerises with tranquil courtyards, charming service, a pool or two and luxurious, serene bedrooms', says Ted. It occupies buildings once owned by the landed gentry dating back to the 14th century

Zoetry Mallorca used to be a Hilton but has recently been refurbished and become a jewel in the portfolio of U.S group Amresorts Collection

Zoetry Mallorca occupies buildings once owned by the landed gentry dating back to the 14th century, has a 15th-century windmill (the origins of which, intriguingly, are unknown) and a mesmerising neo-Gothic 19th-century chapel, built by a previous owner.

It used to be a Hilton but has recently been refurbished and become a jewel in the portfolio of U.S group Amresorts Collection.

We found it on a quiet road 20km (12 miles) or so to the southeast of the island's capital, surrounded by not much at all.

Ted writes: 'I knew the biggest island of the Balearic archipelago could throw a party, but I didn't realise it could enchant'

There are two adult pools, one with a kids pool - 'and this was where we did much of our flopping', reveals Ted

Ted praises the hotel's service around the pools - there was always a lifeguard on duty and staff ready to dispense refreshments

There's a quality vineyard next door – Bodegas Bordoy – but other than that it's a neighbourhood of raw rustic countryside and the occasional wheeling bird of prey.

Perfect.

Our bedroom was a junior suite with a luxurious bathroom in the renovated stable block, where the interior designer had embraced the pathway to clutter-free tranquillity and left the walls relaxingly bare and the room embellished with just a few carefully chosen items of wooden furniture.

We parents had a gargantuan bed to sink into and our four-year-old daughter a comfy sofa bed in the living room.

It was a most relaxing environment and mere steps from the aristocratic hotel's facilities, which are connected by flower-and-tree-lined pathways, ancient corridors and the aforementioned tranquil courtyards.

Ted's favourite area in the hotel grounds was the cobbled courtyard (pictured), where breakfast and evening dinner was served by the hotel's 'smashing staff'

Some of the bedrooms in Zoetry Mallorca have an aristocratic air about them

Ted's bedroom was similar to this one pictured, with a tranquil, clutter-free aesthetic

The hotel's facilities are impressive - and include an expansive spa with bubbling pools

The hotel is surrounded only by rustic countryside

There are two adult pools, one with a kids pool - and this was where we did much of our flopping, and where the little one generally became most excited. Getting her out of the water was a task.

There was a lifeguard on constant duty, a most efficient waitress on call to dispense tasty bar food (fresh salads with enormous tomatoes, pasta and Mallorcan wine were our go-to menu items) and plenty of trees offering shade.

But perhaps my favourite area in the hotel grounds was the cobbled courtyard, where breakfast and evening dinner was served by the hotel's smashing staff to guests sitting under beautiful trees.

In the starlit evenings, we'd dine on tasty tapas and sip rose cava as musicians wafted music into the night air.

This image shows the hotel's incredible 19th century neo-Gothic chapel

It's a far cry from Magaluf, which lies about 50km (31 miles) to the west, the other side of Palma

The hotel's facilities are connected by flower-and-tree-lined pathways and ancient corridors

Ted and his family discovered some stunning beaches on Mallorca's south coast - including Cala Pi (pictured)

Enticing beach Cala Marcal, which is a walkable distance from another gem - Cala Brafi

In the mornings, fresh coffee and Spanish pastries would come thick and fast as we perused the maps and guide books and worked out the day's itinerary, often helped by the hotel's superstar guest relations manager, Ana.

We found some treasures, stunning beaches an easy drive away such as Cala Marcal, Cala Brafi and Cala Pi on the south and east coasts – and thanks to some wayward satnav instructions from the BMW X1 hire car, we got to explore some of the island's narrowest, least SUV-friendly roads as a bonus. And I got to practice my 20-point turns.

Was I flustered? Not once I was wrapped in Zoetry Mallorca's seductive embrace.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cruises are a brilliant way to taste a cocktail of destinations as you relax between ports, while a land tour will give you an in-depth experience of a country or region. Now that we can set sail again, both are on the cards, so which should you choose?

Thankfully there is a third option: a hybrid holiday, where there is no need to settle for one or the other. Choose a cruise and land tour and package them into one unforgettable trip for the best of both styles of holiday – variety and downtime, iconic sights and immersive travel.

Of course you could put together a big trip yourself, but by letting an expert do the hard work you’ll have every assurance your money is safe and get good value too. And there are some sensational trips available to book now for next year and 2023.

Take in the iconic sights of the Great Wall of China, the Terracotta Army and Mount Fuji all in one amazing exploration of the Far East

An Antarctica, Argentina and Brazil tour aboard luxury super-yacht Scenic Eclipse showcases the White Continent in extraordinary style, with a helicopter on board to take you swooping over dazzling icebergs and a submarine to take you to the ocean floor.

Before the 11-night cruise you’ll stay in the Argentine capital of Buenos Aires, and afterwards you’ll spend a few days on the Brazilian border at the thundering Iguazu Falls, taking a thrilling jet-boat ride right up close. The 22-day trip ends in the throbbing beachside city Rio de Janeiro where you’ll enjoy sunset drinks at the peak of Sugarloaf Mountain, with 360-degree views of the city and sea. The cost is from £14,799pp, including flights, for departure on January 13, 2023 (scenic.co.uk).

Take in the iconic sights of the Great Wall of China, the Terracotta Army and Mount Fuji all in one amazing exploration of the Far East. This 20-night journey starts in Beijing for a tour of China, followed by three nights in shopping paradise Hong Kong before boarding Cunard’s grande dame, Queen Elizabeth, for costume balls and afternoon teas between ports of call in Manila, Taiwan and Japan’s subtropical island of Okinawa en route to Yokohama. You’ll stay in Tokyo for a couple of days, visiting soaring Mount Fuji and travelling on the legendary bullet train.

Prices for the tour, From The Forbidden City To Mount Fuji: China And Japan Explorer, are from £4,799 and include flights and a balcony cabin, with departure on April 1, 2023 (imaginecruising.co.uk).

Alternatively, how about spying the Big Five safari animals from a hot-air balloon in Africa and a voyage across the Indian Ocean, all in one holiday?

This magical trip and photographers’ heaven starts with a wildlife-packed safari across the Serengeti and in the Ngorongoro Crater in Tanzania.

See flamingoes while hopping around the West Indies with abercrombiekent.co.uk

In Dar Es Salaam you’ll join Golden Horizon, a brand-new cruise ship with acres of creamy-white sails that harness the winds to navigate to Zanzibar and through the Seychelles archipelago, calling at a handful of the most beautiful islands and dropping anchor for snorkelling, diving and watersports from the ship’s marina platform.

The 19-day holiday, starting on March 14, 2022, costs from £9,395pp, including flights, with an option to add a stay at the gorgeous Four Seasons Resort when the cruise ends in Mahe, the Seychelles’ main island (abercrombiekent.co.uk).

Maybe you prefer sensational sightseeing in the US cities of the East Coast and Deep South along with a colourful Caribbean cruise? From Washington DC you’ll start with a four-night escorted tour of Philadelphia and New York. Then, aboard sparkling new ship Enchanted Princess, watch the Statue of Liberty disappear over the horizon as you sail towards Puerto Rico for 13 nights of island-hopping around the West Indies.

Cruise.co.uk offers a 24-night holiday that takes in Philadelphia and New York

Ports of call include Saint Kitts, Saint Lucia, Bonaire and Curacao. And don’t be surprised if you see pink flamingoes strolling along the beach on Aruba.

Refreshed, you’ll disembark in Fort Lauderdale in Florida for a five-night tour from New Orleans to Memphis, with an evening of jazz on a Mississippi steamboat and a visit to Graceland, Elvis Presley’s extraordinary mansion, where you will stay in the Guest House on the estate.

This 24-night holiday departs on November 1, 2022, and costs from £3,799pp including flights (cruise.co.uk).

Sights to savour: Visit the Taj Mahal on a tour of India with uniworld.com

No photographs can prepare you for the beauty of the Taj Mahal, so you’ll be thankful that on this tour, India’s Golden Triangle And The Sacred Ganges, you’ll get to see this astonishing monument to love twice – at sunrise and sunset.

All your senses will be filled on your land tour, including a cycle rickshaw ride around Old Delhi, the bazaars of Jaipur and the vast, hill-top Amber Fort. So, a week’s cruise on luxury riverboat Ganges Voyager II, deep into rural West Bengal, makes a delightful contrast, before disembarking in Calcutta.

Prices for the 12-night holiday are from £5,399pp for departures in January 2023, including flights, with a free one-way business-class upgrade if booked before the end of this year (uniworld.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Alice Hawthorn was one of the greatest racehorses of her generation, winning more than 50 races from 70 starts back in the 1840s.

It’s believed she was named after the blacksmith’s daughter who helped to deliver her, and her winning streak made her so popular that a pub in the North Yorkshire village of Nun Monkton was named in her honour.

Nearly 200 years later, the pub, between York and Harrogate, is still going strong and has just had 12 rooms added – four above the pub and eight in two separate Scandi-chic blocks at the rear that are more Oslo than ’ow do.

The Alice Hawthorn in Nun Monkton, a pub named after a legendary 19th-century racehorse

The Barn at The Alice Hawthorn, which Will says is the cosiest location for dining

Nun Monkton has a tranquil, prosperous air with a willow-framed pond and one of Britain’s tallest maypoles by the village green, and The Alice Hawthorn sits slap bang in the middle. Here the rivers Nidd and Ouse meet, and from June to October a tiny ferry carries six passengers at a time to the other side – a good option for hikers who want a shortcut to the National Trust property, Beningbrough Hall.

The pub is a great base for walkers who want to return to some hearty fare, whether that’s in the bar or something more substantial in the restaurant.

Ask to be seated in The Barn, just behind the main house, for an atmosphere that’s a bit more cosy and intimate.

The pub is a great base for walkers who want to return to some hearty fare, writes Will

Will says of his Scandi-chic room: 'This much wood shouldn’t work but it absolutely does'

One of the bathrooms at The Alice Hawthorn, where rooms start from £120 a night

TRAVEL FACTS The Alice Hawthorn, North Yorkshire. B&B rooms from £120 a night (thealicehawthorn.com). Advertisement

The bedrooms are a revelation. Those around the garden are made from Douglas fir and Siberian larch, and large amounts of glass let light flood in. Four rooms have a shower only, while mine had a walk-in rainhead shower as well as a deep, indulgent standalone tub.

Above the pub there are four rooms that are more traditionally furnished – two of them have views over the village green. But whichever you choose, like Alice Hawthorn, you’ll be on to a winner.

The USP: Traditional country pub with modern, Scandinavian-inspired rooms.

The rooms: This much wood shouldn’t work but it absolutely does. The new rooms are light with beds that are comfortable without being marshmallow soft.

The food: Service was friendly and at just the right speed. Tuck into the Yorkshire Dales lamb, pan-roasted guinea fowl and locally farmed fillet steak.

At breakfast I was caught in a quandary between smoked salmon and scrambled eggs, buttermilk pancakes with bacon and maple syrup, or poached duck egg with asparagus. The pancakes eventually won.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

London has never been quieter — or easier to explore. Pre-pandemic the city was welcoming 21 million international visitors a year, but now its streets are blissfully uncrowded with fewer cars, tourists and commuters.

There’s still a buzz, though. Social distancing has brought outdoor dining to the fore, with pavement tables and rooftop bars creating an almost Mediterranean atmosphere.

Meanwhile, mandatory timed entry to cultural sights means less queuing and more space once inside. The feeling of pent-up creative energy at museums, theatres and attractions is palpable, as reopenings see a blaze of fresh shows and events. Here’s our guide to how to make the most of it...

Post-pandemic, London's streets are quieter and its legendary cultural venues are less crowded - making for an ideal weekend getaway

CATCH A MUSICAL

London's theatres are emerging from their dark days in a wave of new and comeback shows.

Old favourites such as The Lion King and Hairspray have returned, while the Trafalgar Theatre, recently restored to its 1930s glory, stages Jersey Boys. Discounted on-the-day tickets are available through TKTS (officiallondontheatre.com).

Shakespeare's Globe is presenting three Midnight Matinees at just £5 a pop in the coming months

FANCY THIS? Are you a night owl? Shakespeare’s Globe is presenting three Midnight Matinees that start at 11.59pm, with tickets from £5 (shakespearesglobe.com).

STAY AT: Premier Inn London Leicester Square is steps away from several West End theatres. A family room costs from £124. Find more properties at County Hall, Southwark and Bank (premierinn.com).

ENJOY AN EXHIBITION

Van Gogh Alive, which uses large-scale projections and classical music to immerse you in the life and work of Dutch artist Vincent van Gogh, is being staged at a purpose-built venue in Kensington Gardens until September 26 (vangoghaliveuk.com).

French sculptor Auguste Rodin gets the blockbuster treatment at Tate Modern with more than 200 works on show until November 21 (tate.org.uk), while Harry Potter fans will enjoy the Natural History Museum’s Fantastic Beasts, which explores creatures both mythical and real (nhm.ac.uk).

Inspired by the work of J.K. Rowling, the Natural History Museum's Fantastic Beasts exhibition takes a look at the weird and wonderful creatures of history and lore (stock image)

FANCY THIS? Alice: Curiouser and Curiouser, at the V&A, celebrates the enduring appeal of Alice in Wonderland until December 31 (vam.ac.uk).

STAY AT: Close to Kensington Gardens, Citadines South Kensington London is a smart aparthotel with one-bedroom apartments sleeping four from £96. Other locations at Trafalgar Square, Covent Garden and Barbican (citadines.com).

EMBRACE HISTORY

London is home to four UNESCO World Heritage Sites — the Palace of Westminster, the Tower of London, the Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew and Maritime Greenwich. The last is particularly attractive in summer with its hillside park and buildings by Inigo Jones and Christopher Wren.

Home to bright and beautiful plants and flowers all year round, the Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew is a UNESCO World Heritage Site

Don’t miss the free-entry National Maritime Museum and the 19th-century tea clipper Cutty Sark (greenwichworldheritage.org).

FANCY THIS? Learn about Greenwich Mean Time and the Prime Meridian at the Royal Observatory (rmg.co.uk).

STAY AT: Novotel London Greenwich is a well-placed four-star hotel with family rooms from £81. There are other properties at Blackfriars, Waterloo and London Bridge (novotel.com).

FUN FOR ALL

Love dodgems? Until August 22 the courtyard at Somerset House will be a colourful fusion of art, bumper cars, street food and DJs. Pre-booked packages cost from £10 and there are free rides for children on selected days (somersethouse.org.uk). Or take a spin around the skyscrapers of Canary Wharf in a self-drive, electric-powered hot tub boat (skunaboats.com).

Children visiting London Zoo in Regent's Park can receive a 'zoo passport', which will get stamped as they explore

FANCY THIS? Embark on a world tour while travelling through different ‘countries’ at ZSL London Zoo. Children will have their zoo passport stamped as they enter each of the zones (zsl.org).

STAY AT: A family room at the Z Hotel Covent Garden costs from £95. There are ten more Z Hotels in the capital (thezhotels.com).

RIDE THE RIVER

The banks of the Thames come alive in summer and a cruise is the best way to admire London’s magnificent buildings and bridges.

A one-day River Roamer ticket with Uber Boat by Thames Clippers lets you hop on and off at 23 piers all the way from Putney to Woolwich (thamesclippers.com).

Or sit back and let sights such as the London Eye and St Paul’s Cathedral roll by on a leisurely Sunday lunch cruise with live jazz (bateauxlondon.com).

Soak up London's most spectacular sights while cruising along the River Thames, with views of the London Eye, St Paul's Cathedral and Big Ben, pictured

FANCY THIS? Turk Launches offers relaxed trips aboard heritage boats that run between Richmond, Kingston and Hampton Court (turks.co.uk).

STAY AT: Park Plaza Westminster Bridge London is a stroll away from London Eye Waterloo Pier. A Family Experience package for four costs from £259 B&B plus child treats. It has four sister properties (parkplaza.com).

FEEL FREE

Want to learn more about this mighty metropolis? Entry is free to both the Museum of London in the City and the Museum of London Docklands near Canary Wharf. The first covers the city’s history from Roman times to the 2012 Olympics, while the latter looks at its importance as a port and includes a special exhibition about the Havering Hoard, Bronze Age treasure found near the Thames in 2018, until August 22 (museumoflondon.org.uk).

The Wallace Collection is just a stone's throw from Oxford Street - and is free to enter. It houses works by the likes of Titian and Van Dyck

ROLL UP FOR THESE SUMMER TREATS The Royal Albert Hall is celebrating its 150th anniversary. The 5,500-seater concert hall is open for guided tours while full capacity events resumed on July 19 (royalalberthall.com).

Go for brunch, cocktails or dinner at a 22-seater dining table suspended 100 ft above the O2 in Greenwich (londoninthesky.co.uk).

‘Nero: the man behind the myth’, which casts fresh light on the notorious Roman emperor, is at the British Museum until October 24 (britishmuseum.org).

Enjoy Summer Reunion, a free programme of arts, music and outdoor fun on the South Bank, Waterloo, until August 31 (southbankcentre.co.uk).

Mercato Mayfair is a dynamic new food hall in a Grade-I listed church close to Oxford Street (mercatometropolitano.com).

London Wonderground is a one-stop summer venue in Earl’s Court featuring comedy, circus and family entertainment running until September 26 (london wonderground.co.uk). Advertisement

FANCY THIS? The free-entry Wallace Collection is a highly civilised museum north of Oxford Street with works by Titian, Rubens and Van Dyck, plus a charming courtyard restaurant (wallacecollection.org).

STAY AT: SACO Holborn Lamb’s Conduit Street, has one-bedroom apartments for four guests from £114. Other locations include Covent Garden, Fitzrovia and Canary Wharf (sacoapartments.com).

OUTDOOR JOY

The Luna outdoor cinema offers screenings on selected dates at 17 venues across London including Westminster Abbey (pictured), Regent’s Park and the Royal Hospital Chelsea

A walk through London’s Royal Parks is a good way to appreciate the splendour of our capital — the seven-mile Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk takes in four of the best known (royalparks.org.uk). To see some iconic landmarks follow the 15-mile Jubilee Walkway, available in five sections with pavement markers (tfl.gov.uk), or book a Blue Badge tour (guidelondon.org.uk).

FANCY THIS? The Luna outdoor cinema offers screenings on selected dates at 17 venues across London including Westminster Abbey, Regent’s Park and the Royal Hospital Chelsea (thelunacinema.com).

STAY AT: A junior suite sleeping a family of four at Thistle London Hyde Park Lancaster Gate costs from £213. Thistle has another six London hotels (thistle.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every week our Holiday Hero Neil Simpson takes an in-depth look at a brilliant holiday topic, doing all the legwork so you don’t have to. This week: Theme parks with extra fun for families.

Britain's big five theme parks have surprises in store this summer. Top of the list come some of the country’s most unusual hotel rooms, all set within or beside the park gates so guests can be first in line for rides in the morning.

Families with young children should check out the Gruffalo hotel rooms or the rival Room on the Broom rooms at Chessington World of Adventures in Surrey.

Book it: A Gruffalo room at Chessington World of Adventures

A secret gift is hidden in every room, scenes from the picture-books are painted on the walls and the Gruffalo rooms have a larger-than-life model of the Gruffalo itself looming above the main bed.

Rooms sleep up to five, with bunk beds in a separate area for children, and stays include breakfast and ‘early ride’ slots in the park.

The Gruffalo rooms aren’t cheap, with families of four paying about £400 for a night, but prices include parking, theme park, zoo and Sea Life entry, evening entertainment, access to the hotel’s splash pool and more. Animal-themed or ordinary rooms can be half the price (chessingtonholidays.co.uk).

Treehouse room at Alton Towers

At action-packed Alton Towers in Staffordshire a mini-village of star-gazing pods offers an equally unusual place to stay. The wooden pods are small, though they can sleep a family of four, and guests share nearby shower and toilet facilities.

If you want more luxury, the park also offers CBeebies and Caribbean-themed hotels plus en suite lodges, glamping tents and treehouses (some with hot tubs) that sleep up to eight. Star-gazing pods cost from £78 a night, while theme park entry starts at £34pp with under-threes free (altontowersholidays.com)

Quirks are also on offer at the Shark Hotel at high-adrenaline Thorpe Park in Surrey. The ‘bite-sized’ rooms aren’t big – kids get bunk beds – and the only windows are portholes in the doors.

But the fishy theme is fun, with guests walking through the mouth of a giant, sharp-toothed metal shark to get to the sea-blue reception desk. Midweek deals include two days in the park, one night in a shark cabin, parking and breakfast from £129 for two (thorpebreaks.co.uk).

At the Legoland Castle Hotel near Windsor, in-room treasure hunts, free gifts and goodies such as free swim bags come as standard.

Enjoy breakfast surrounded by intricate Lego models, then cross the hotel drawbridge for a day in the park. Themed rooms for a family of four, theme park entry, pools, parking and character ‘meet and greets’ cost between £90pp and £190pp (legolandholidays.co.uk).

Spend the night at Legoland Castle Hotel and then cross the drawbridge for a day in the park

Thomas the Tank Engine is one of the stars of the show at the Drayton Manor Resort in Staffordshire.

Away from the grown-up Maelstrom, Apocalypse and Pandemonium rides there’s a calmer Thomas-land area with rides and experiences for younger guests. In the on-site hotel, the Fat Controller welcomes you, train tracks line the floor and there are Thomas & Friends-themed rooms.

Book a stay from £70pp including park tickets, breakfast and evening entertainment led by characters from the books (draytonmanor.co.uk).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Given that A-roads in Scotland can be so narrow they have passing places, you can imagine just how rustic B-roads there can get.

I turned onto one in the Cairngorms National Park on a Friday evening recently and didn’t see another car for half an hour – and passed through woodlands so ancient and pristine I wondered if we’d been warped into Middle-earth.

Our destination was Banchory Lodge, a hotel that lies just beyond the park's eastern border in a location that entices on multiple levels.

Banchory Lodge lies by the River Dee, just beyond the eastern border of the Cairngorms National Park

Firstly, the Georgian lodge sits, enchantingly, on the banks of the River Dee, facing away from the town of Banchory and out towards rolling forested hills.

Then there’s the proximity of a host of sensational sights.

For starters, Balmoral - the Scottish home to the Royal Family - is just 45 minutes by car to the west within Cairngorms National Park. My partner, three-year-old daughter and I spent a wonderful afternoon there, gallivanting around the surrounding woodland – where we spotted a red squirrel - ambling through the fine vegetable garden, which was almost cartoonishly bountiful, and peeking inside the understated Castle Ballroom, the only room you’re allowed inside.

Ted's room was a ‘Top Notch Terrace Room’ (pictured) - 'and there was much that was indeed top-notch'

The terrace of the Sitooterie, which unfortunately partially blocks the river view from the ground-floor 'Top Notch' rooms

Ted enjoyed 'gold-standard fish and chips' in Banchory Lodge's restaurant

Balmoral - the Scottish home to the Royal Family - is just 45 minutes by car to the west of Banchory Lodge

THE JOYS OF THE TRAIN JOURNEY TO SCOTLAND The most thrilling way of reaching Scotland from England is undoubtedly by train. Our journey to Banchory Lodge begins with the 9am LNER Azuma from Kings Cross to Edinburgh. The Royal Border Bridge at Berwick-upon-Tweed On the way we take in some incredible sights from our seats - the impressive York station, the magnificent Durham Cathedral and the striking Angel of North, just before Newcastle. The arrival into the station there is breathtaking, with amazing views of the city and the River Tyne as the train crosses the mighty King Edward VII Bridge. An LNER Azuma passes Alnmouth As the train hurtles further north, we gaze at the coast at Alnmouth, spot Lindisfarne Castle on Holy Island and are then hypnotised as the train crosses the Royal Border Bridge (which is actually three miles south of the border) before pulling up in Berwick-upon-Tweed station. After this, amazing views of rugged coastline keep us transfixed before the train arrives at Edinburgh Waverley. Six minutes early. We reach Perth (where we pick up a hire car) via a ScotRail HST service via the showstopping Forth Bridge. Unforgettable. On the way home, we catch a direct LNER Azuma service from Perth to Kings Cross, which doesn't go along the Forth Bridge, but does skirt past the awe-inspiring Stirling Castle. Advertisement

Other nearby attractions of old include Crathes Castle and the fairytale-esque Craigievar Castle.

Aberdeen, meanwhile, lies just 19 miles to the east. There you can spot dolphins from the harbour and admire the works on display at the renowned Aberdeen Art Gallery.

We fuelled up for our excursions with breakfasts at a table overlooking the river. The view was superb and the fare was hearty, though the rustic factor was lowered by the service-station-style packets of honey that accompanied the porridge.

Lunchtime fuelling came courtesy of the hotel’s outdoor dining concept – The Sitooterie – which has seating over a patio area and four funky wooden sheds for private dining experiences.

These are really good fun and the barbecue-style grills, salads, tacos and flatbreads served by the outside kitchen seriously filling.

We ordered chilled crayfish and lobster taco, ‘togarashi’ chicken, and lemon pepper mackerel with apple, cucumber and watermelon and could barely move afterwards.

Flavour-wise it was a bit two-dimensional, but there was no arguing with the price. Most of the dishes were under a tenner.

The main-building restaurant cooking in the evening impressed, though. I had gold-standard fish and chips and my partner loved her Shetland scallops. Plus, the service was impressively zippy and chirpy despite the restaurant being full to bursting.

Our room was a ‘Top Notch Terrace Room’ and there was much that was indeed top-notch. But some elements were more ‘middle to lower-middle notch’.

The first-rate bits? The extremely comfy bed, especially the luxurious pillows, the funky flamingo wallpaper, the Art Deco drinks trolley, the distressed industrial-chic TV cabinet and the sheer spaciousness of it all.

And there were plug points by the bed. Thoughtful.

But the entrance end of the room was a bit gloomy and the feng shui of the bathroom felt misaligned - while lying down the loo was in my field of vision if the bathroom door was open and in line of sight to the French doors.

The shower, meanwhile, had a slow-draining plug and while using the rain shower fixture was pleasant, the hose couldn’t muster much more than dribbling water.

The main room had a definite boutique feel to it, but the bathroom, while clean, felt bland and budget by comparison.

The website room billing also left me a tad miffed. ‘Great views of the River Dee’ are promised and French doors ‘you fling open onto your terrace straight out to the River Dee’.

Perhaps this was penned by an estate agent, because the ‘your terrace’ part of the equation was actually an open patio shared with three other rooms (though each room has its own table and chairs) and the view a hedge between this and the Sitooterie, its parasols and the cars in the car park beyond. (During our visit, it was full – Banchory Lodge is very popular.)

The Sitooterie has seating over a patio area and four funky wooden sheds (two pictured here) for private dining experiences

For unimpeded views of the bubbling torrents, book a first-floor river-view room, recommends Ted

Fairytale-esque Craigievar Castle is one of the many local attractions

Sixteenth-century Crathes Castle and its glorious grounds are mere minutes from Banchory Lodge

We could see the river, but only just.

For unimpeded views of the bubbling torrents, book a first-floor river-view room.

Still, we enjoyed our stay at a hotel that is reasonably priced and in, undoubtedly, one of the country’s most Dee-lightful spots.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dungannon Golf Course in County Tyrone was buzzing. In the clubhouse - beyond a picture of Darren Clarke, the former Open champion, who learned his craft here - players chatted. All seats taken. Plenty of banter and Guinness consumed.

Wallace McCarroll, the club's ebullient secretary, joined us. 'Since the lockdowns, membership has shot up to 1,000 from about 600. People are taking to the game because you can get out and about. Long may it last.'

With football (tearfully) out of the way and with the Open Championship just finished at Royal St George's in Sandwich, Kent (where Clarke won his title) a golf holiday is surely in order. And where better than in Northern Ireland, home to dozens of wonderful friendly courses, with no quarantines or time-consuming and expensive PCR tests?

The fifth hole at Royal Portrush Golf Course, which overlooks White Rocks beach

A golfing road trip, you soon find, is a great way to explore the province. Dungannon, an hour's drive west from Belfast, was the start of a long weekend that was to take in Lough Erne in County Fermanagh and Portrush in County Antrim. Three counties in four days, beginning on the rolling hills of Tyrone.

Eighteen undulating holes without many hazards was the ideal reintroduction to the game if you had not (like me) played for a while. The highlight was the 9th, a par three designed by Clarke himself with a water feature by the green, a replica of the short 12th hole at Augusta in Georgia where the U.S. Masters is held.

Up and down the hills we went on a sunny Saturday, getting back into the swing of it. Then we hit the superbly quiet roads to Lough Erne. This grand hotel-resort was where the G8 was held in 2013 and it is a fabulous setting. Three-times Open winner Nick Faldo designed Lough Erne's tricky course, which enjoys many spectacular holes.

Lough Erne Resort directly overlooks the golf course, which was designed by Nick Faldo

Reeds and water feature (a lot) and what a delight it was to score a par on the terrifying 10th with a green sloping perilously on an island, before returning along the loch for the hotel-side finale.

From Lough Erne to Portrush is a two-and-a-half-hour drive northeast to the 'Causeway Coast' named after the Giant's Causeway of 60-million-year-old hexagonal rock formations. We clambered over the peculiar ancient stones, visited the medieval ruins of Dunluce Castle and stopped by at Ballintoy's lovely little harbour.

Next up was the biggie: Royal Portrush Golf Club, scene of the last Open in 2019. This course traverses tumbling sea-facing dunes, the holes rolling this way and that.

Perversely, Portrush was quiet in a normal year, many summer visitors are from America.

Two pars and a birdie. You improve a bit on a golfing holiday were followed by a pint or two of the black stuff and a dram or two of Bushmills whiskey at the nearby Bushmills Inn that evening.

What a fine way to end a fine golfing getaway. We raised our glasses to our golfing adventure with no travel worries, but plenty of good times, across the Irish Sea.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jackie Weaver checks in to our travel Q&A

This week council Zoom-call sensation Jackie Weaver checks in to our travel Q&A.

She recalls her first-ever trip abroad, to Tenerife just 10 years ago, and some choice spots in Scotland.

EARLIEST HOLIDAY MEMORY?

Going with Mum and Dad to Millport on the island of Great Cumbrae in the Firth of Clyde. I remember playing on the beach and getting blue lips from the cold water.

FIRST TRIP ABROAD?

Probably ten years ago, in my early 50s, when I visited Tenerife with my husband.

WHERE DID YOU HONEYMOON?

We stayed in the Elgin part of Scotland, where my parents grew up.

MOST MEMORABLE PLACE YOU’VE VISITED?

The village of Kenmore, on the River Tay in Perthshire, in the Highlands. It just feels untouched by the modern world.

FAVOURITE RESTAURANT?

Kenmore’s Courtyard Bar & Restaurant. It has a fire so is a cosy place to eat Scottish beef or seafood whatever time of year.

DREAM DESTINATION?

I’d love to visit Moscow to see Saint Basil’s Cathedral and other striking architecture.

ARE YOU A GOOD FLYER?

No, I’m terrified of flying and can only manage short journeys.

Jackie reveals that she'd love to visit Saint Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow

HOLIDAY FROM HELL?

A fight once broke out on a plane I was on before it had even taken off.

CAN’T TRAVEL WITHOUT?

My own coffee pot. I don’t like plastic, powdered coffee.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Beauty over efficiency: that’s the philosophy of Britain’s National Cycle Network. Route 1 meanders 1,264 miles from Dover to Tain, in the Highlands, almost always directing you along smaller, prettier, more wiggly country lanes rather than the direct main road. ‘What’s the hurry?’ is the message.

This also happens to be my philosophy, so we’re perfectly suited. I discovered the National Cycle Network during last year’s lockdown and it has changed my life, giving a new momentum and point to bike journeys.

These routes seem tailor-made for non-Lycra, 27-miles-a-day-max cyclists like me, who simply want to relish the hidden beauty of Britain. You roll along narrow lanes, past fields and through orchards from town to village, always keeping your eye out for the next reassuring ‘1’ sign that will direct you along byways you would otherwise never know about. It feels like living in a parallel utopia for cyclists.

Charming: Framlingham College, in Suffolk, is on National Cycle Route 1, which meanders 1,264 miles from Dover to Tain

Saddle up: Ysenda said Route 1 is ideal for 'non-Lycra cyclists' (stock image)

I asked Nigel Brigham of Sustrans, which oversees the National Cycle Network, to recommend a three-day journey along Route 1 in East Anglia, as a mini-break for my husband and me. He suggested: train from London to Colchester. First day: Colchester to Ipswich by bike. Second day: Ipswich to Framlingham by bike. Third day: Framlingham to Beccles by bike, and home by train.

The start turned out to be that Friday in June when a month’s worth of rain fell in 24 hours. We whizzed along on our folding bikes (one pannier each) to London Liverpool Street in an hour of non-deluge, then swooped down from Colchester Station, through Castle Park and round the Norman castle, to the GreyFriars Hotel, where we stoked ourselves up with a delicious dinner involving local asparagus and the best creme brulee ever.

Next morning, the ever-enticing ‘1’ sign was waiting for us, a few metres from the hotel’s front door. Off we pedalled, fortified by our cooked breakfast, with none of the sense of futility you can get from bike rides when there’s no overall plan. You feel enveloped in something great: you’re connected to Dover and Tain!

The route takes you across the Suffolk border to the pretty town of Hadleigh. Vast church; bustling High Street; coffee and sandwiches in Paddy & Scott’s Cafe. Then it directs you eastwards along an enchanting disused railway line on an elevated path through woods. This kind of thing is a hotline to happiness for me, especially when it’s flat (as this was).

Suffolk turned out to be more hilly than expected. I ground my way up the long, shallow hills — and at the top was rewarded with East Anglia laid out ahead, plus the exhilaration of freewheeling down.

Cycling through mile upon mile of arable farmland, your whole currency of what counts as a ‘busy place’ changes. You get excited about arriving anywhere with so much as a shop, rather as a medieval pilgrim must have done. As for reaching Ipswich: we felt like country bumpkins ambling into a metropolis. We arrived at the hyper-trendy waterfront River Orwell, brimming with yachts, and were greeted warmly at the splendid Salthouse Harbour Hotel. Our bikes went up in the lift to our room with its balcony overlooking the river.

The next morning, fortified again, we set off. If you do this journey, do download the Cycle Streets app, which shows you where you are and marks Route 1 in pink, so you can see if you’ve gone wrong. We did once, failing to spot a leftwards sign.

Scenic: National Cycle Route 1 takes you across the Suffolk border to the pretty town of Hadleigh. Pictured is the town's impressive church

Over the level crossing at dear, sweet Woodbridge, we stopped for much-needed coffee and panini beside the River Deben. This ride makes you remarkably river-aware. Colne, Orwell, Deben, Alde, Beck, Waveney . . . quite a geography lesson.

At last, Framlingham hove into view. The Crown Hotel, a charming pub with rooms, is where we stayed. We ate supper at the only restaurant open: Curry India. Delicious, surely the best curry in East Anglia, bursting with flavour and deeply restorative.

And next day, the final 25 miles through the wilds, from Framlingham to Beccles — very nearly Norfolk. As we turned towards the railway station, I saw the ‘1’ sign beckoning us on to Norwich, King’s Lynn, Hull . . . well, maybe another time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As any bucket 'n' spade-wielding aficionado of the British seaside knows, a traditional Punch and Judy show should feature plenty of shouting, screaming and unseemly squabbling.

There are usually cameos from a crocodile, a hapless policeman and — for some long-forgotten reason — a string of juicy sausages.

Amid this scene of mayhem, cartoonish violence inevitably ensues.

But this summer, down on Swanage's waterfront, the argy-bargy has spilled out from the puppet booth on to the golden sands.

And it's not Mr Punch's performance upsetting punters at this Dorset resort. Nor indeed the show's often risqué content, in which double-entendres and slapstick violence are de rigueur.

As any aficionado of the UK seaside knows, a Punch and Judy show should feature shouting and squabbling. Pictured: Henry Deedes at a Punch and Judy show in Swanage, Hampshire

Not at all. It seems that while holidaymakers are happy to stop to enjoy this traditional entertainment, some of them are far less keen on paying for it.

Joe Burns, 29, has been performing his one-man Punch show here for six years. It's been a rough 18 months, as you can imagine.

Last year was all but a write-off. Plus, he's received none of the Government's £1.5 billion rescue fund for the arts.

And — as the Mail reported yesterday — to make matters worse, this year some tight-fisted beach-goers are refusing to fork out the meagre £2 fee to view his shows.

'It's been tricky,' says Joe, sipping a coffee on the seafront as he prepares for his lunch- time performance.

'We've had the odd problem in years gone by but the abuse we've been getting this year has been far worse than anything we've had before. It seems some people want something for nothing.

On Swanage's waterfront (pictured), the argy-bargy has spilled out from the puppet booth as some holidaymakers have not been keen on paying for the show

'The other day, one of my collectors went round after a show asking for donations and this family told us we had ruined their day by doing so. They reported us to the beach manager. Others have told us to 'f*** off'. That's happened quite a lot.'

And there's been worse still: 'Last week, a group of about eight set up in front of the show all day, and when we asked them to chip in they couldn't believe we'd asked.

'There were three of us working and they followed us down the beach screaming at us. It was awful. We do this job out of love. We don't do it to be abused!'

Joe was keen to stress that most people who come to watch are delightful.

He reckons the troublemakers are 'staycationers' who may not be too happy at having to swap Majorca for the English south coast this year, thanks to the chaos of the Government's travel policy during the pandemic.

'It's definitely a different crowd this year. Perhaps they're irritated about being here. But the regulars are fantastic.'

And it's not as the show is free entertainment laid on by the council. On the contrary, Joe has to pay for a licence, while managing other considerable overheads such as insurance — plus he has a staff of four to pay, who help to collect his takings.

And since Joe's not local (off season he works in a theatre in Brighton) he also has to pay for his own accommodation.

For all that Mr Punch has been a joy on British seasides for centuries, Joe is a practitioner (or 'Professor', as Punch operators are traditionally known) of a dying art.

Joe Burns (pictured), 29, has been performing his one-man Punch show here for six years. He's received none of the Government's £1.5 billion rescue fund for the arts amid the pandemic

Once a staple akin to donkeys and candy floss, now just two Punch stands other than Joe's remain: one along the coast in Weymouth and another at Llandudno in North Wales.

But Joe is determined to keep the flame alive. He hopes to one day encourage others to take up the art, the same way he was inspired to during his 'magical' visits to Weymouth as a child.

'I've been doing this since I was 12,' he says. 'I placed my first ad in the Yellow Pages. You can imagine my parents' surprise when someone called asking for a Mr Punch!'

He is following in a rich tradition. Mr Punch's first known performance in England was back in 1662, having found his way over from Italy where he was a cheeky character called 'Punchinello'.

After theatre had been banned under the Puritan Oliver Cromwell following the English Civil War, it didn't take long for Mr Punch and his anarchic act to take hold.

Even London's snooty literary salons were enraptured. The great diarist Samuel Pepys records the puppet show being 'the best that ever I saw'.

Later, Charles Dickens enjoyed Mr Punch's daftness, noting his 'extravagant relief from the realities of life'.

And as for the violence, the novelist remarked that this was an 'outrageous joke... no one in existence would regard it as an incentive to any kind of action'.

But for many people today, the show — in which Judy is regularly the victim of Mr Punch's displeasure — represents a dated relic from more chauvinistic times. Poppycock, insists Joe.

'People who say that haven't seen a show for 50 years,' he says. 'When they were young it probably featured hanging and stuff like that. But it's a happy routine now.'

This year some tight-fisted beach-goers are refusing to fork out the meagre £2 fee to view Joe Burns' one-man Punch show. Pictured: A Punch and Judy show on Weymouth beach

In Swanage, despite the drizzle, a decent crowd — many of them regulars — have come to watch Joe's second performance of the day.

As the brass band music wails over the speakers, families scoff fish and chips while laughing children smear ice cream on their faces. If anything, the rain adds to the scene's British flavour.

And, whatever the claims about some staycationers' behaviour this year, some people told me they were horrified some audience members hadn't paid their way.

Jo Nugent, down for the week from Wimbledon, says: 'I've been coming here for 45 years. My grandparents had a house here and we always come to see Mr Punch. Not once have we not paid. It's a wonderful tradition and it would be terrible if he had to go.'

Drew Webster, from West Sussex, agrees: 'You want entertainment, you have to pay. A bloke's got to make a living. And you can see how much effort goes into it. Someone puts on a show like that, you can't expect it to come free.'

He's right. Punch and his gang are beautifully crafted. Time, effort and a lot of love have gone in to them.

The show itself is bonkers — if incomprehensible at times.

Judy gives as good as she gets to her pugnacious husband, at one point delivering a blow to Punch's nether regions.

'That one's for Women's Lib!' she shrieks, before tottering off, she claims, for 'a date with Matt Hancock'.

Joe is determined to keep the flame alive. He hopes to encourage others to take up the art, the same way he was inspired to. Pictured: Henry Deedes at the Punch and Judy show in Swanage

That joke sails over the little ones' heads, of course; but otherwise, they laugh and scream and join in the obligatory cries of: 'There he is!' and 'Oh no, we won't!'

And they love it whenever Mr Punch gives one of his gang yet another fearsome kicking.

Niall Wilson, who regularly comes to Swanage with his wife Helena, isn't fussed by the violence.

'It's harmless,' he says. 'We watch it every year. The beach wouldn't be the same without it. The kids love it; they're only little but they can see it's just a bit of fun.'

As Joe's performance reaches its end, Inspector Plod appears — and gets the sharp end of Mr Punch's stick. As the Crocodile pops up and clasps those bangers in his jaws, everyone bursts into applause.

Perhaps the weather kept the more thuggish element away, or perhaps word had spread that Mr Punch and his marvellous gangs' exotic threads simply don't pay for themselves.

But everyone I can see is generously tossing their cash into the collector's pouch.

As Mr Punch would surely say in his distinctive twang: 'That's the way to do it!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Summer is made for messing about on the water.

And while accommodation on British shores is filling up fast, there are still berths on boats up for grabs – whether you hire your own canal boat or opt for a cabin on board a yacht.

ON TOP OF THE WORLD IN THE STREAM IN THE SKY

On a canal boating holiday with Drifters you can float across the Pontcysyllte Aqueduct in North Wales, pictured

Float across the Pontcysyllte Aqueduct in North Wales and the 11 miles of the Llangollen Canal that were given Unesco World Heritage status for being a 'pioneering masterpiece of engineering' by Thomas Telford. Dubbed the 'Stream in the Sky', the aqueduct has 18 metal and masonry arches. A three-night weekend in August for four costs from £1,399, excluding fuel (drifters.co.uk).

For picturesque scenery, try the Mid-Worcestershire Ring, a 21-mile loop that can easily be completed on a short break. There are 33 locks to navigate, and take time to explore Worcester, the final resting place of King John. Three-night breaks in the summer cost from £1,499 for six or £1,599 for eight (abcboathire.com).

CATCH A KETCH AROUND POLDARK COUNTRY

If you prefer to charter a whole boat, Venture Sail Holidays has skippered ships available, including the Westcountry cutter Unity (left, with one of its bedrooms pictured right)

A week for four on Venture Sail's Unity costs from £4,800, including all meals. Pictured, the boat's dining room

Think Cornwall will be too crowded this summer? See it from the sea instead, channelling your inner Poldark and starting out from the pretty St Austell Bay harbour of Charlestown on the south coast on a Cornish ketch or schooner. A three-night voyage of the Cornish coast, taking in Fowey, Falmouth and the Helford River, among other places, costs from £375pp, including meals, while a five-night voyage around the Isles of Scilly costs from £725pp (charlestown-harbour.myshopwired.co.uk).

If you prefer to charter the whole boat, Venture Sail Holidays has skippered ships available, including the Westcountry cutter Unity. A week for four costs from £4,800, including all meals (venturesailholidays.com). The company also features trips with single berths.

ROYAL LINKS ON THE COAST WITH THE MOST

Make a splash: Sail the Solent with yacht charter company Fairview Sailing, which is based in Hamble

The interior of an Oceanis 45 yacht, available to rent via Fairview Sailing. A skipper can be hired for £250 a day for those who prefer a more relaxed voyage

Sail the waters made famous by the annual Cowes yachting regatta on the Isle of Wight, taking in Queen Victoria's Osborne House, the circular forts surrounded by water, and the Needles rock formations off the coast. Or sail along the Dorset coast, taking in the natural archway of Durdle Door and dropping anchor in lovely Lulworth Cove. Yacht charter company Fairview Sailing, which is based in Hamble, has availability in the summer, with seven nights from £2,789 for six to eight people in three cabins. A skipper can be hired for £250 a day (fairviewsailing.co.uk).

Click&Boat, the Airbnb of the nautical world, has weekend or week-long availability. A six-berth boat with two cabins, based in Poole Harbour, can be rented for five days in the summer from £1,228, plus £200 a day for a skipper. At the other end of the scale, a skippered 54ft 12-berth vessel, with four en suite cabins, costs from £4,259 for five days in summer (clickandboat.com).

HAVE A WHALE OF A TIME IN SCOTLAND

Explore some of Scotland's more remote gems aboard a Venture Sail Holidays tall ship (pictured), departing from Mallaig on the north-west coast

The luxurious saloon on the Venture Sail Holidays ship that will be sailing around the Scottish coast this summer

A week in August on Venture Sail Holiday's tall ship costs from £1,533pp, including meals

Learn to sea kayak in Scotland on a new five-day trip that's been added in August, in the beautiful surroundings of Loch Torridon and ending with a trip to Kinghorn Island, with its resident seal colony. Five days, starting on August 13, with accommodation in a bunkhouse and including breakfast, lunch and some dinners, costs from £875pp (responsibletravel.com).

Alternatively, take in the same area on a less active break aboard a tall ship, departing from Mallaig on the north-west coast. Explore Kinloch Castle on the island of Rum, the Singing Sands on Eigg, and try to spot basking sharks, minke whales, porpoises and even orca in the waters off Muck. You'll also see Barra and Kisimul Castle, scenically set in the bay surrounded by sea, and North and South Uist, with their white powder beaches. A week in August costs from £1,533pp, including meals (venturesailholidays.com).

Take a canal boating holiday to another level on a Falkirk to Edinburgh return trip, starting in the world's only rotating boat lift, which raises vessels 115ft from the Forth and Clyde Canal to the Union Canal. The route includes the 690-yard-long Falkirk Tunnel, which was blasted through the hillside so that the canal didn't flow through the land of Callendar House, and Scotland's largest aqueduct at Avon. A week for five people on a two-bedroom boat, with space for a dog, costs from £1,899 in July – diesel is extra and costs about £10 a day (black-prince.com).

CRUISE TO THE CITY OF DREAMING SPIRES

With Le Boat, you can captain your own motor cruiser along the western section of the River Thames

The homely interior of a Le Boat motor cruiser. Seven nights costs from £1,459 in a boat for three, or up to £3,109 in a boat sleeping eight

Captain your own motor cruiser along the western section of the River Thames, where moorings are easy to find. Starting and ending at Benson in Oxfordshire, it's a six-hour putter to the dreaming spires of Oxford. Head in the other direction for the same distance and you'll reach Henley-on Thames, home of British rowing. Seven nights costs from £1,459 in a boat for three, or up to £3,109 in a boat sleeping eight (leboat.com).

Landlubbers who prefer to return after a day on the river to a comfortable hotel room should take a look at The Runnymede on Thames, which is just ten minutes from Windsor.

You can head out on one of the hotel's fleet of boats and take a picnic for fun on the water before returning to soak in the outdoor hot tub, where you can carry on watching life on the river float past.

B&B doubles this summer cost from £190 a night, with boat hire from £45 an hour for electric boats, or £100 an hour for diesel-powered craft that take up to 12 guests (runnymedehotel.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Hotel stays don’t get much more heavenly than this.

A former 15th-century monastery in Croatia has been stunningly transformed into a beautiful boutique property reminiscent of a Game of Thrones set.

Guests can enjoy 'unique suites filled with rare pieces of art', relax in an 'ancient medicinal garden' with over 80 species of plants and 'eat delicious local wine and food, created by world-class chefs'. There are also spell-binding coastal views, because the property sits right next to the glittering Adriatic Sea on Lopud island, just seven miles from Dubrovnik.

Lopud 1483, pictured, is a former 15th-century monastery in Croatia that has been stunningly transformed into a beautiful boutique hotel

The property is located right next to the glittering Adriatic Sea on Lopud island, just seven miles from Dubrovnik

The property used to be a home for Franciscan monks called Our Lady of the Cave

The hotel’s origins can be traced to the year 1483. Back then it was a monastery for Franciscan monks called Our Lady of the Cave.

Monks lived at the monastery until 1822, when it was seemingly abandoned, having fallen into disrepair and become uninhabitable.

In 1992, the ruins of the complex were spotted by London-based art collector Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza, while on a boat trip to Lopud with a local friar. She had been visiting Croatia to help to rescue artworks damaged in the war after the break-up of the Balkans.

She couldn't believe 'such an architectural marvel' had been neglected for so long and soon after paid a second visit to the monastery with world-renowned architect Frank Gehry.

Inside the hotel's recreation of an ancient pharmacy, which includes original 15th and 16th-century manuscripts and mortars

The Old Kitchen, pictured, has an ancient open fireplace and bread oven, which is used to make fresh pizzas

Monks lived at the monastery until 1822, when it was seemingly abandoned, having fallen into disrepair and become uninhabitable. Pictured is the Old Kitchen

Inside the dining room at Lopud 1483. In 1992, the ruins of the complex were spotted by London-based art collector Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza while on a boat trip to Lopud with a local friar. She then set about restoring the property

Thyssen-Bornemisza was persuaded to take on the restoration of the old monastery and adjoining fortress by world-renowned architect Frank Gehry. Pictured is the hotel's hallway

Gehry persuaded her to take on the restoration and she set about a 20-year project to transform the monastery and its adjoining fortress, which needed to be rebuilt - although miraculously some of the original plaster from the 16th century had survived.

Engineers managed to consolidate the structure - without losing the patina of the walls - while architect Rujana Markovic planned the monastery's new layout.

Now called Lopud 1483, it boasts five 'generous suites' rather than 12 small monk cells, with each one featuring '21st-century technology and amenities'.

Meanwhile, the hotel says that in the suites and around the rest of the property, guests will be able 'to live in the manner of great art collectors' thanks to an impressive collection of artworks.

The selection of works housed in the monastery includes 'original renaissance and Gothic furniture as well as decorative arts and paintings', most of which adorned the Thyssen-Bornemisza home - Villa Favorita in Lugano, Italy - and are being presented in the monastery for the first time in decades.

In the entrance to the property, there are two wood-carved angels that used to grace the entrance to the Villa Favorita museum in Italy.

Inside the hotel's master suite. Lopud 1483 boasts five 'generous suites' rather than 12 small monk cells, with each one featuring '21st-century technology and amenities'

The hotel says that in the suites and around the rest of the property, guests will be able 'to live in the manner of great art collectors', thanks to an impressive collection of artworks

The selection of works housed in the monastery includes 'original renaissance and Gothic furniture as well as decorative arts and paintings'. Pictured is the salon

The hotel says: 'This special property offers the perfect balance between contemporary comforts of a modern home, within an authentic historical setting, complete with splendid views over the Adriatic and its numerous islands.' Pictured is the living room

The hotel adds: 'Lopud 1483 is a place that encourages togetherness, whilst also providing for solitude and silence'

The heavy walnut dining table in the old refectory dates from 1550 and was used by Thyssen-Bornemisza’s father at his home for dinner parties. It is surrounded by walnut leather chairs, made in Dresden in the early 18th century.

An early 1600’s masterpiece by Furini of St Sebastian hangs above it, alongside a cabinet holding precious Renaissance mugs, chalices and decorative bowls collected by her grandfather.

Also found in the dining room is one of Thyssen-Bornemisza’s favourite pieces - a Franco Maria Pretti painting of the liberation of St Peter, which is dated 1645.

In the salon, there is a 16th-century tapestry of a king, who was dedicated to collecting rare species of flowers. This competes for attention with an impressive Thomas Struth photograph of the Raffaelo chambers in the Vatican.

The monastery also boasts a recreation of an ancient pharmacy, which includes original 15th and 16th-century manuscripts and mortars. Franciscan monks, like the ones who used to live in Lopud 1483, specialised in creating medicines and their pharmacy in Dubrovnik dates back to 1317.

Outside, in the medicinal herb garden, wide lawns have been created, dotted with olive and lemon trees and intersected by a gravel path and a long pergola.

Above the monastery, on the rooftop of the fortress, a sunset terrace has been created

The hotel says that it is 'crowned by a renaissance fortress reminiscent of a Game of Thrones set that doubles up as an event venue'

There are spectacular views from the rooftop's loungers and shaded four-poster daybeds of Lopud’s village and coastal paths, as well as the neighbouring islands of Sipan and Mljet

It has 'nine stations in energetically charged places and beds of healing botanicals' where guests can meditate.

For those preferring to just lie and soak-in the sea views, a wooden deck has been set into the lawns and scattered with beanbag loungers.

Meanwhile, above the monastery, on the rooftop of the fortress, a sunset terrace has been created, complete with loungers and shaded four-poster daybeds.

Guests here can gaze at Lopud's village and coastal paths, as well as the neighbouring islands of Sipan and Mljet and, on a clear day, Korcula – the reputed birthplace of Marco Polo.

Direct sea access is possible, meanwhile, via a secret underground cave, which the monks would use to go for discreet dips in the sea.

Lopud 1483 says: 'The 5,000-square-foot monastery complex offers complete privacy and security as it is surrounded on all sides by an impressive fortification'

In the medicinal herb garden, pictured, wide lawns have been created, dotted with olive and lemon trees and intersected by a gravel path and a long pergola

The garden has 'nine stations in energetically charged places and beds of healing botanicals' where guests can meditate

In April and October, individual suites may be available to book from €2,000 (£1,700) per night on a B&B basis

On the food front, guests will enjoy dishes made from traditional recipes and Croatian ingredients such as oysters from nearby bays, Dalmatian ham, locally caught fish and octopus.

Meals will be served outdoors, in the formal dining room or in the Old Kitchen, with its ancient open fireplace and bread oven, which is used to make fresh pizzas.

The hotel offers versatility, too.

Groups can take over 'The Map Room', a multi-purpose indoor space 'appointed with high tech audio and visual equipment available for conferences for up to 30 people'.

The hotel says the space can also be transformed into a dedicated children’s area, private cinema room or for a yoga and therapy retreat.

Meanwhile, the 400-square-metre (4,305-square-foot) fortress 'provides an incredible fresco rustic event space, complete with a high-end projector and sound system, with the ability to host parties for up to 250 people'.

The 400-square-metre (4,305-square-foot) fortress 'provides an incredible fresco rustic event space, complete with a high-end projector and sound system, with the ability to host parties for up to 250 people'

The spectacular view out across the Adriatic. The island of Lopud can be reached via public ferry from Dubrovnik in less than an hour. It is also accessible by speedboat from Brsecine, a small village on the mainland about 40 minutes by car from Dubrovnik Airport

The hotel says: 'This special property offers the perfect balance between contemporary comforts of a modern home within an authentic historical setting, complete with splendid views over the Adriatic and its numerous islands.

'The 5,000-square-foot monastery complex offers complete privacy and security as it is surrounded on all sides by an impressive fortification, crowned by a renaissance fortress reminiscent of a Game of Thrones set, which doubles up as an event venue.

'Lopud 1483 is a place that encourages togetherness, whilst also providing for solitude and silence.'

Lopud 1483 is available for exclusive hire during April - October. The rate for all five suites, sleeping 10 guests, is €10,000 (£8,560) per night on a half-board basis. In April and October, individual suites may be available to book from €2,000 (£1,700) per night on a B&B basis. For more information contact booking@lopud1483.com or visit www.lopud1483.com.

The island of Lopud can be reached via public ferry from Dubrovnik in less than an hour. It is also accessible by speedboat from Brsecine, a small village on the mainland about 40 minutes by car from Dubrovnik Airport.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The best fine-dining restaurants have been named by Tripadvisor, with Michelin-starred The Old Stamp House Restaurant in the Lake District rated number one in the UK and the world, beating France into second place.

The low-key eatery has been handed the accolade as part of Tripadvisor's 2021 Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards, which are decided by an algorithm that analyses the millions of reviews and opinions collected in a single year from travellers around the world.

The second-best restaurant in the global ranking is Restaurant La Maison d'a Cote in quaint Montlivault, central France, followed by Ise Sueyoshi in Tokyo. America failed to make it into the top ten, but the lavish Inn at Little Washington in Virginia is 12th overall, and for Instagrammers, the 'epic' aquarium-style Koral Restaurant in Nusa Dua, Bali, takes home the gong in the Picture-Perfect category.

The best fine dining restaurants have been named by Tripadvisor, with Michelin-starred The Old Stamp House Restaurant in the Lake District rated number one in the UK and the world, beating France into second place

The Old Stamp House Restaurant (dish from it above) has been handed the accolade as part of Tripadvisor's 2021 Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards

The top-rated spot, the Old Stamp House Restaurant, is located in the heart of the Lake District village of Ambleside.

Housed in the former office of William Wordsworth, this intimate restaurant boasting a Michelin star celebrates the cultural heritage of Cumbria with dishes such as black pudding 'bon bon' and crab from the west coast of the region.

One glowing review said: 'This was our first time dining at a Michelin-starred restaurant and it certainly did not disappoint. Every course was immense.

'The letter we received on the table with all the details of the ingredients was such a nice touch and really set the tone for the rest of the meal. The staff were very friendly and engaging. So glad we booked the Old Stamp! Cannot fault.'

Another said: 'Excellent Michelin star taster menu. Innovative ideas for vegetarian. Fish courses superb as was the lamb.'

The second-best restaurant in the world ranking is Restaurant La Maison d'a Cote in Montlivault, France

In third place is Ise Sueyoshi in Tokyo's Nishiazabu district, which serves up a sequence of small, artistically prepared dishes

Fourth on the global list is Restaurante Benazuza in Cancun, Mexico, which has a five out of five rating on Tripadvisor for the food, service, value and atmosphere

Silver-medal winner Restaurant La Maison d'a Cote has two Michelin stars and offers four, six and nine-course tasting menus, with all of the ingredients, including eel and guinea fowl, sourced from the Pays de la Loire region.

Bronze-medallist Ise Sueyoshi in Tokyo's Nishiazabu district serves up a sequence of small, artistically prepared dishes.

The menu changes according to what produce is available and sake pairings are available.

Fourth on the list is Restaurante Benazuza in Cancun, Mexico, which has a five out of five rating on Tripadvisor for the food, service, value and atmosphere.

THE 2021 WINNERS OF TRIPADVISOR'S TRAVELLERS' CHOICE RESTAURANTS AWARDS Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants Worldwide 1. The Old Stamp House Restaurant, Ambleside, United Kingdom 2. Restaurant La Maison d'à Côté, Montlivault, France 3. Ise Sueyoshi, Nishiazabu, Japan 4. Restaurante Benazuza, Cancun, Mexico 5. Les Plaisirs Gourmands Schiltigheim France 6. El Xato, La Nucia, Spain 7. Martin Berasategui, Lasarte-Oria, Spain 8. Oro Restaurante, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 9. Quintessenza, Trani, Italy 10. Ristorante Villa Crespi, Orta San Giulio, Italy Favourite Everyday Restaurants in the UK 1. Rio Brazilian Steakhouse, Newcastle upon Tyne 2. Makars Gourmet Mash Bar, Edinburgh 3. Scarlett Green, London 4. Olive Tree Turkish Mediterranean Restaurant & Bar, Milton Keynes 5. Simla Restaurant, Newcastle upon Tyne 6. The Bank Bar & Grill, Blackpool 7. The Lowestoft Tandoori, Lowestoft 8. The Laundrette, Manchester 9. Taste Of Nawab, London 10. Liquor & Loaded, King's Lynn Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants Europe 1. The Old Stamp House Restaurant, Ambleside, United Kingdom 2. Restaurant La Maison d'à Côté, Montlivault, France 3. Les Plaisirs Gourmands, Schiltigheim, France 4. El Xato, La Nucia, Spain 5. Martin Berasategui, Lasarte-Oria, Spain 6. Quintessenza, Trani, Italy 7. Ristorante Villa Crespi, Orta San Giulio, Italy 8. Auberge Du Vieux Puits, Fontjoncouse, France 9. Ristorante Don Alfonso 1890, Sant'Agata sui Due Golfi, Italy 10. The Kitchin, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants in the US 1. Inn at Little Washington, Washington 2. Cafe Monarch, Scottsdale 3. Halls Chophouse, Charleston 4. Sazón, Santa Fe 5. Collage Restaurant, St. Augustine 6. Mama's Fish House, Paia 7. GW Fins, New Orleans 8. Lahaina Grill, Lahaina 9. Circa 1886 Restaurant, Charleston 10. Kokkari Estiatorio, San Francisco Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants in the UK 1. The Old Stamp House Restaurant, Ambleside 2. The Kitchin, Edinburgh 3. L'Enclume, Cartmel 4. Adam's, Birmingham 5. Moor Hall, Aughton 6. Winteringham Fields, Winteringham 7. Maison Bleue Restaurant, Bury St. Edmunds 8. Outlaw's New Road, Port Isaac 9. Restaurant Sat Bains With Rooms, Nottingham 10. John's House Restaurant, Mountsorrel Favourite Fine Dining Restaurants in Australia 1. Juniper & Bay, Como 2. Wild Harvest, Grassy 3. Pipeclay Pumphouse, Mudgee 4. Chez Pierre, Nedlands 5. Pepper & Salt Restaurant, Denmark 6. EXP. restaurant, Pokolbin 7. Friends Restaurant, Perth 8. Melaleuca, Port Douglas 9. The Stunned Mullet, Port Macquarie 10. Sunset Food and Wine, Kangaroo Island Source: Tripadvisor Advertisement

Coming in fifth in the global ranking is Les Plaisirs Gourmands in the city of Schiltigheim in north-eastern France

Rounding out the top 10 in the global ranking is Ristorante Villa Crespi in Orta San Giulio, Italy

One customer wrote after a visit in July: 'If you are a foodie, love molecular gastronomy, or want something different, definitely come here! Amazing culinary journey in Cancun! Started at the bar with some innovative cocktails and progressed through 22 courses.'

In fifth is Les Plaisirs Gourmands in the city of Schiltigheim in north-eastern France. This venue was described by one diner as 'pure pleasure all along'.

The rest of the worldwide top 10 comprises El Xato in La Nucia, Spain (sixth), Martin Berasategui, in Lasarte-Oria, Spain (seventh), Oro Restaurante in Rio de Janeiro (eighth) and Quintessenza in Trani, Italy (ninth), and in tenth-place is Italy's Ristorante Villa Crespi, in Orta San Giulio.

The Kitchin in Edinburgh, which is second in the UK ranking, has over 3,200 'excellent' ratings

Third in the UK ranking is L’Enclume (left) in Cartmel, Cumbria, which boasts two Michelin stars and has a £175 tasting menu (right)

Coming second in the UK ranking is The Kitchin in Edinburgh, a Michelin-starred spot serving up 'fantastic' seasonal Scottish produce, with specialities including a whole Newhaven lobster cooked 'a la plancha' and a roasted loin of roe deer from the Hopetoun Estate.

Third in the UK ranking is L'Enclume in Cartmel, Cumbria, which boasts two Michelin stars and has a £175 tasting menu.

Fourth in the UK is Adam's in Birmingham, which ranked number one in 2019 and is run by husband and wife team Adam and Natasha Stokes. In the contemporary dining room guests enjoy modern British cuisine made using ingredients such as Isle of Wight tomatoes and Cornish turbot.

Fourth in the UK is Adam's in Birmingham, which ranked number one in 2019 and is run by husband and wife team Adam and Natasha Stokes

In the contemporary Adam's dining room guests enjoy modern British cuisine (above)

Two-Michelin-starred Moor Hall in Aughton comes fifth in the UK ranking. The glass-fronted restaurant boasts 'lovely views' over the lake on the Moor Hall estate.

The other restaurants in the UK top 10 are Winteringham Fields in Winteringham (sixth), Maison Bleue Restaurant in Bury St. Edmunds (seventh), Outlaw's New Road in Port Isaac (eighth), Restaurant Sat Bains With Rooms in Nottingham (ninth) and John's House Restaurant in Mountsorrel (10th).

Top-ranked American restaurant, the Inn at Little Washington in the town of Washington in Virginia, doubles as an upscale hotel and restaurant, with both in the prestigious Relais & Chateaux portfolio.

The eatery is intimate, with just 30 tables, but boasts a ginormous 14,000-bottle wine cellar. The bills for guests are big, too. Tasting menus start from $265 (£194).

Moor Hall in Aughton is fifth in the UK fine-dining ranking. This two-Michelin-starred glass-fronted restaurant boasts 'lovely views' over the lake on the Moor Hall estate

Top-ranked American restaurant The Inn at Little Washington has just 30 tables, but a 14,000-bottle wine cellar

One of the most popular creations from chef and proprietor Patrick O'Connell includes a warm Granny Smith apple tart with buttermilk ice cream, with the recipe listed on the website. One reviewer said of the creation: 'Apple tarts are a common item and most are quite good even in lesser restaurants, but this tart was the exemplar for what all apple tarts should be.'

The other restaurants in the US top 10 are Cafe Monarch in Scottsdale (second), Halls Chophouse in Charleston (third), Sazón in Santa Fe (fourth), Collage Restaurant in St. Augustine (fifth), Mama's Fish House in Paia (sixth), GW Fins in New Orleans (seventh), Lahaina Grill in Lahaina (eighth), Circa 1886 Restaurant in Charleston (ninth) and Kokkari Estiatorio in San Francisco (10th).

Meanwhile, the top-rated restaurant in Australia is Juniper & Bay in Como.

The small high-end eatery describes its cuisine as being a blend of 'sophisticated European and modern Australian cuisine'.

Cafe Monarch in Scottsdale is second in the US Fine Dining Restaurants category

The other restaurants ranking in Australia's top ten are Wild Harvest in Grassy (second), Pipeclay Pumphouse in Mudgee (third), Chez Pierre in Nedlands (fourth), Pepper & Salt Restaurant in Denmark (fifth), EXP. restaurant in Pokolbin (sixth), Friends Restaurant in Perth (seventh), Melaleuca in Port Douglas (eighth), The Stunned Mullet in Port Macquarie (ninth) and Sunset Food and Wine in Kangaroo Island (10th).

However, no Australian restaurant made it into the top global list.

This year there are five new subcategories - Hottest New Restaurants, Picture-Perfect, Best Vegan Spots, Best Brunch Spots and Date Night.

THE 2021 WINNERS OF THE NEW CATEGORIES IN THE TRIPADVISOR RESTAURANT AWARDS Best Picture-Perfect Worldwide 1. Koral Restaurant, Nusa Dua, Indonesia 2. Le Grill Restaurant, Prague, Czech Republic 3. DOR Tohanu Nou, Romania 4. I due Roccoli Iseo Italy 5. Tin Lung Heen, Hong Kong, China 6. The Grand Getaway by Grand Hyatt Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur Malaysia 7. Sabayon, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 8. OPSO Dubai, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 9. Ristorante Pizza Incontro, Limone sul Garda, Italy 10. Mistico Restaurant, Armacao dos Buzios, Brazil Hottest New Restaurants Worldwide 1. Asil Restaurant, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 2. Soul Street, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 3. Parole Tulum, Tulum, Mexico 4. MareaViva, Seville, Spain 5. Tercer Acto, Malaga, Spain 6. La Table de Colette, Paris, France 7. Ministry Of Crab - Bangkok, Bangkok, Thailand 8. Wistèria Restaurant, Venice, Italy 9. MeatEater steak & wine, Prague, Czech Republic 10. Opera Restaurant, Naples, Italy Best Vegan Spots Worldwide 1. Vegan Beat, Athens, Greece 2. Blu Bar, Barcelona, Spain 3. Cosmic Kitchen, Plymouth, United Kingdom 4. Scoop 'n Dough, Lisbon, Portugal 5. Twelve Eatery, Bournemouth, United Kingdom 6. EFE Macrobiotic, World Rawai Thailand 7. Alquimia Campos Do Jordao Brazil 8. Arte Sano Holbox Island Mexico 9. Kunda Vegan Vegetarian Chiang Rai Chiang Rai Thailand 10. Hum Vegetarian, Cafe & Restaurant Ho Chi Minh City Vietnam Best Vegan Spots In The UK 1. Cosmic Kitchen, Plymouth 2. Twelve Eatery, Bournemouth 3. Offbeet, New Forest, Southampton 4. Indigo Greens, Liverpool 5. Tansy's Pantry, Godshill 6. The Tipsy Vegan, Norwich 7. Amrutha Lounge, London 8. Cafe Van Gogh, London 9. Corarima, Wakefield 10. BA-HA, Birmingham Best Brunch Spots Worldwide 1. Scarlett Green, London, United Kingdom 2. Mama Zonia, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 3. Augusto Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal 4. Billy Brunch, Barcelona, Spain 5. Salt Café, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 6. Spice Market, Doha, Qatar 7. Suzzi, Bordeaux, France 8. Les Bariolés de Maud, Paris, France 9. the kitchen table, Sentosa Island, Singapore 10. Zenith Brunch & Cocktails - Lisboa Lisbon Portugal Best Brunch Spots In The UK 1. Scarlett Green, London 2. Salt Café, Edinburgh 3. Jo & Co Restaurants, Hove 4. E-Street Cafe, Glasgow 5. ToasT Oxted, Oxted 6. Fore Street Café Bar, Newquay 7. Homeground Coffee + Kitchen, Windermere 8. The Fig, Rye 9. Robinsons Cafe, York 10. FINT, Leeds Best Date Night Spots Worldwide 1. Degusteria Italiana agli Uffizi, Florence, Italy 2. Elements Restaurant Palm - Eagle Beach, Caribbean 3. Lotus Eaters Restaurant, Elounda, Greece 4. Cafe Des Artistes Los Cabos San, Jose del Cabo, Mexico 5. Mistico Restaurant, Armacao dos Buzios, Brazil 6. L'Osteria Villa Casato por chef Ajax Cavenaghi Campos Do Jordao Brazil 7. L'Outsider Gordes France 8. Kepitu Restaurant Ubud Indonesia 9. The Old Stamp House Restaurant Ambleside United Kingdom 10. La Sosta Restaurant Swellendam South Africa Best Date Night Spots In The UK 1. The Old Stamp House Restaurant, Ambleside 2. Paul Ainsworth at No. 6, Padstow 3. Antidote, Ilfracombe 4. Corner Grill House, York 5. Samphire Seafood Restaurant, Inveraray 6. Marmalade's Bistro, Sheringham 7. Kysty Ambleside, Ambleside 8. Wayfarer Bistro, Robin Hoods Bay 9. One Fish Street, St Ives 10. The Hall - Restaurant of St Mary’s Hall Hotel, Hugh Town Source: Tripadvisor Advertisement

Instagrammers take note - Koral Restaurant in Nusa Dua, Bali, has been crowned world number one in the Picture-Perfect category. Tripadvisor says of the venue: 'At this epic aquarium restaurant you'll feel as though you're dining underwater as tropical fish swim around and above you and a hypnotic soundtrack plays to complete the full below-the-waves experience'

For those looking to inject a little romance into dinnertime, the best date spot in the world is Degusteria Italiana agli Uffizi in Florence

The grand global prize in the Best Vegan Spots category goes to Vegan Beat in Athens

Brunch has quickly become the trendiest meal in town and Scarlett Green in Soho, London, is the winner in Tripadvisor's Best Brunch Spot category both globally and in the UK

Winner of the Hottest New Restaurant global category is Asil Restaurant in Dubai, which already has an impressive 637 'excellent' reviews on Tripadvisor out of 773.

For those looking to inject a little romance into dinnertime, the best Date Night restaurant in the world is Degusteria Italiana agli Uffizi in Florence, while in the UK list the Old Stamp House Restaurant in Ambleside scores gold again, and in the US it's The Silver Fork in Manchester, Vermont, that comes out on top.

The grand global prize in the Best Vegan Spots category goes to Vegan Beat in Athens, while Cosmic Kitchen in Plymouth tops this category for the UK and Full Bloom Vegan on Miami Beach for the US.

Instagrammers take note - Koral Restaurant in Nusa Dua, Bali, has been crowned world number one in the Picture-Perfect category. Tripadvisor says of the venue: 'At this epic aquarium restaurant you'll feel as though you're dining underwater as tropical fish swim around and above you and a hypnotic soundtrack plays to complete the full below-the-waves experience.'

Brunch has quickly become the trendiest meal in town and Scarlett Green in Soho, London, is the winner in Tripadvisor's Best Brunch Spot category, both globally and in the UK.

The hip eatery, inspired by Melbourne and Sydney cafe culture, serves up a brunch menu with smashed avocado, smoked salmon croissants and shakshouka among the most popular picks. There's also the option to go 'bottomless', with free-flowing fizz and mimosas for 90 minutes.

Commenting on this year's outcomes, Martin Verdon-Roe, general manager of hospitality solutions at Tripadvisor, said: 'It's no secret that the restaurant industry has taken a hit over the past year or so, but the good news is that would-be diners all over the world are hungrier than ever to dine out again.

'There is so much good out there to explore this summer and beyond and no matter what you're craving, the Best of the Best Restaurants Awards is on hand to serve as a menu of options to satisfy your appetite.'

To view the full winners lists for the 2021 Tripadvisor Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards, visit www.tripadvisor.co.uk/TravelersChoice-Restaurants.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Costly PCR tests. Specialist travel insurance. Fear of countries on the Green List suddenly turning Amber. Like many, I thought a family holiday abroad was going to be nigh-on impossible or at least not worth the stress.

But persevere we did – to the Hotel Riu Palace Tres Islas in Corralejo, Fuerteventura – and thank goodness we did, as we rediscovered how transformative holidays still are.

We plumped for an all-inclusive resort where we could take stock and relish the small things, the previously unacknowledged precious moments of being with your family; to swim in a pool in the sunshine; to run through the waves with your children.

Balcony seat: The view from a room at the Hotel Riu Palace Tres Islas in Fuerteventura

For a brief week, all the uncertainty and worry that has come with the pandemic felt a long way away.

The hotel was traditional in its styling but, more importantly these days, it was clean. Scrupulously so. Hand-sanitiser stations were everywhere, while the staff could not have been more attentive.

The hotel boasts two pools, both bracingly cold but which proved extremely welcome on typically hot days. There was also a heated outdoor Jacuzzi, very much in demand when the temperatures dropped a tad.

All meals were taken buffet-style in the main restaurant, while local beers, wines and spirits were also included in the price.

The sand dunes of Corralejo are one of Fuerteventura's top attractions

If you have been craving activities and want to squeeze more out of a break, Tui organises a number of trips exclusively from the resort. For the more adventurous there is a combined 4x4 and catamaran tour that allows you to drive along deserted beaches, then set sail on the high seas.

Want to stay put? Pick up some rackets and head to one of four tennis courts available on site, all free to use and with equipment supplied, or else relax in the spa.

As the sun set on yet another lovely day and the view from the balcony over the pool, beach and sea stretched before us, we realised that holidays are precious and that the world is waiting for us to visit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Holiday Guru is always on hand to answer your questions.

This week issues tackled include entry requirements for Ireland and what to do if your outbound flight is cancelled but not your return.

Q. Could you give me information on travel to the Republic of Ireland? I can’t seem to find anything about it online and am desperate to go.

Tommy Jones, via email.

Rugged: Here’s hoping we can visit the Irish coast in July without quarantining

A. UK Visitors must have a negative PCR test taken 72 hours before travel, complete a Passenger Locator Form (gov.ie) and quarantine for 14 days (with a ‘test to release’ possibility on day five). For information, go to gov.uk/foreign- travel-advice/ireland/entry-requirements.

However, from July 19, rules are set to change. Ireland plans to welcome British visitors who are double-vaccinated and have a negative PCR test or proof they have had the virus. No quarantine or further test will then be required.

Q. Our easyJet flight to Kefalonia, Greece, in July has been cancelled, but our return flight has not. What can we do about it?

Colin Colbrook, via email.

The Holiday Guru helps a reader with a query about their easyJet flights

A. Easyjet says that if one flight is cancelled, you can claim a refund or a voucher to the value of the whole booking — or transfer flights to a later date.

Q. In 2019, I won tickets in the Wimbledon draw and booked two nights at the Antoinette Hotel (£324). When the tournament was cancelled in 2020, I rang the hotel and asked to move the booking to this year. Now, due to number restrictions at Wimbledon, my tickets have again been postponed. I asked the hotel for a refund, which it has refused. Instead, it has moved my reservation to next year. But am I due my money back?

Deborah Phillips, via email.

A. The Competition and Markets Authority, the UK’s competition regulator with an eye on consumer rights, states that consumers should be treated ‘fairly and responsibly’ when lockdown laws — such as restrictions to the number of Wimbledon visitors — cause a cancellation. However, this language is open to interpretation, and in disputes courts must adjudicate. The hotel switching your stay to next year would seem ‘fair and reasonable’. However, after being contacted by us, it is now offering a refund as a gesture of goodwill.

WE’RE HERE TO HELP

If you need advice, the Holiday Guru is here to answer your questions. Email us at holidayplanner@dailymail.co.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Not even the grandest sandcastle can trump this.

Video footage has emerged of a mysteriously abandoned villa with Roman-style columns on a tropical beach in El Salvador, which has the appearance of having been washed ashore.

The clip shows explorers on La Puntilla Beach clambering around the villa, wading knee-deep into the swirling waters of the Pacific Ocean to access the building.

Video footage has emerged of a mysteriously abandoned villa with Roman-style columns on a tropical beach in El Salvador

Explorers on La Puntilla Beach clamber around the villa, wading knee-deep into the swirling waters of the Pacific Ocean to access the building

Some even brave the staircase, climbing to the top of the dilapidated structure - and ignoring the 'danger' signs spray-painted across the walls.

A spotlight fell on the eerie half-sunken property last month when a Salvadoran YouTuber named Cholopanza filmed himself investigating it. His clip went viral and now the ghostly property, which some say is haunted by a 'tall man', is drawing in visitors from far and wide and garnering multiple reviews on Google.

The graffiti on the walls, however, suggests that the cracked pale-pink villa, built using iron and concrete, has been a local secret for years.

A spotlight fell on the eerie half-sunken property in July when a Salvadoran YouTuber named Cholopanza filmed himself investigating it

Locals believe the villa used to be a hotel called Hotel Puerto Ventura

The eerie villa is located 75km (46 miles) south of El Salvador's capital, San Salvador

A local fisherman, Oscar Valencia, said: 'They built too deep into the beach, that's what happened'

The best time to access it is in the morning, as the tide reportedly spills in during the afternoon, filling the rooms with saltwater.

It's not clear why the villa was abandoned on the beachfront - 75km (46 miles) south of the capital, San Salvador - but according to Salvadoran newspaper La Prensa Grafica, locals believe it used to be a hotel called Hotel Puerto Ventura, reportedly built on the beach so tourists could feel closer to the sea.

The engineering hadn't been thought through, though.

A local fisherman, Óscar Valencia, told the publication: 'They built too deep into the beach, that's what happened.

'Before, official permission was not requested to build, and that is what happened. They went too far.'

Some locals claim the hotel was abandoned 25 years ago, whereas others insist it was deserted after Hurricane Mitch hit the shoreline in 1998.

Some say the abandoned property is haunted by a 'tall man' at night

The walls of the villa are embellished with graffiti, suggesting it has been a local secret for years

The hurricane is the second-deadliest Atlantic hurricane on record and caused 240 fatalities in El Salvador, the smallest country in Central America.

While travelling over the country, the tropical cyclone dropped intense volumes of rain, leading to flash flooding and mudslides.

It appears the abandoned villa failed to weather the storm, its substructure succumbing to the pull of the sand.

Some locals claim the hotel was abandoned 25 years ago, whereas others insist it was deserted after Hurricane Mitch hit the shoreline in 1998

Hurricane Mitch ravaged Central America in 1998. The villa would not have stood much of a chance

Certain tourists take a risk in climbing the staircase to access the top of the structure

It is rumoured the villa was once turned into a Christian church, before it was left to decline

Danger signs have been spray-painted over the walls, but that doesn't always put explorers off

A high-relief Star of David was found on the ceiling of one of the ground floor rooms

After it was abandoned, there is speculation the villa became a Christian church, as there is a high-relief Star of David on the ceiling of one of the ground floor rooms.

Tourist Julia Ramirez, who travelled to catch a glimpse of the villa with her friends, told Ruptly: 'It seems to me a very interesting tourist place, a place that many should come to visit.'

Thanks to Flickr users Lugeralfes and Michael J for granting MailOnline Travel permission to use their imagery.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

So much of life in the past 18 months has been back to front - so let’s embrace the idea of a summer (rather than winter) holiday in the Caribbean, where ‘green lights’ have finally been switched on all over the place.

Regular visitors to this balmy region are rejoicing at the prospect of a return to its fabulous beaches, potent rum cocktails and charismatic islanders. Or if you’ve never been, this could be the year to discover its charms.

For a getaway with the least hassle, go for the four destinations served by direct flights: Antigua, Barbados, Grenada and Turks & Caicos. All have superb sands, high-class resorts and plenty to enjoy, from cultural tours to catamaran cruises at sunset.

'So much of life in the past 18 months has been back to front,' writes Nigel Tisdall, 'so let’s embrace the idea of a summer (rather than winter) holiday in the Caribbean.' Pictured is Half Moon Bay in Antigua, which is on the green list

Hoteliers and tour operators are now offering tempting discounts to these islands. For example, British Airways Holidays has up to £300 off a summer package if you book by July 6.

Of course, Covid-19 protocols still have to be obeyed. Green-listing means there is no requirement to quarantine on your return to the UK, but you will need to have a negative Covid-19 test taken three days before flying home, complete a passenger locator form, then take another test within two days of your return.

Each destination has its own rules for incoming travellers, too, with those who have received both coronavirus vaccinations enjoying the smoothest entry. Once there beside the palm trees and turquoise sea, face masks, sanitising and social distancing remain the norm.

Bountiful: A fruit and vegetable stall on the green-list Caribbean island of Anguilla

Colourful chattel houses are a common feature of the Caribbean. The one above is in Barbados

A good reason to go soon is that life is currently relaxed because there are few visitors, and cruise ships have yet to start calling into port.

Renting a villa is a smart way to get some space and privacy, and it is a good idea to book restaurant tables, spa treatments and activities in advance.

PARTY IN ANTIGUA

Antigua boasts 365 beaches and it's a cinch to drive from coast to coast, plus it has the most relaxed travel entry rules

Antigua has the most relaxed Covid-19 entry protocols and has never closed its borders completely. The island claims to have 365 beaches and there’s definitely one that will hit your spot, from lively Dickenson Bay to remote Half Moon Bay. All-inclusive resorts make it easy to fly in and flop, but if you want action there’s sailing, watersports and hiking.

Antiguans love to party and on Sunday afternoon a huge crowd heads to the panoramic Shirley Heights Lookout for a famous barbecue with steel pan music that has been running for more than 30 years.

You can drive anywhere on the island in 45 minutes, with World Heritage-listed Nelson’s Dockyard at English Harbour a must-see for its graceful Georgian buildings set beside eye-popping superyachts (visitantiguabarbuda.com).

BEST FOR: Beach bars, sailing, families, a late deal.

GOOD TO KNOW: You will need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken within seven days of departure, children under 12 are exempt (covid19.gov.ag).

SPLURGE: Seven nights at Carlisle Bay, departing on August 17, from £2,399pp B&B including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow and transfers (caribtours.co.uk).

ON A BUDGET: Seven nights at all-inclusive Royalton Antigua, departing on August 31, from £1,627pp including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow and transfers (firstchoice.co.uk).

BOOK A VILLA: Seven nights at Ffryes House, a three-bedroom villa five minutes’ walk from Jolly Beach, departing on August 5, from £1,510 self-catering. Flights and transfers not included (jollyvillas.com).

BALMY BARBADOS

Taste of the good life: This image shows dreamy Bottom Bay in Barbados. If you are new to the region, start here, says Nigel

A friendly ice-cream seller at Cobblers Cove Hotel

No island in the Caribbean makes us feel more at home than Barbados, with its familiar-looking parish churches, cricket pitches and place-names such as Scarborough, Worthing and Brighton.

If you are new to the region start here. Stay on the west coast if you like things refined, or head south for beach fun and nightlife.

Barbados is only 21 miles by 14 and, while parts are overdeveloped, there is much to enjoy.

Don’t miss the wild and windy Atlantic coast or St Nicholas Abbey, a splendid Jacobean mansion with a scenic railway, while the capital, Bridgetown, has World Heritage status on account of its outstanding British colonial architecture.

Taxis and restaurants are expensive, so consider getting a villa and a car, or hop on the cheap and efficient local buses (visitbarbados.org).

BEST FOR: First-time visitors, families, fans of cricket and horseracing.

GOOD TO KNOW: Fully vaccinated travellers need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken three days prior to arrival. You must then stay at your accommodation until the results of a second test, taken on arrival, come through in the next day or two (barbadostravelprotocols.com).

SPLURGE: Seven nights in a butler-service suite at all-inclusive Sandals Royal Barbados from £3,209pp, departing on August 15, including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow and transfers (sandals.co.uk).

ON A BUDGET: Seven nights at all-inclusive Barbados Beach Club, departing on August 30, from £1,434pp including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow and transfers (tui.co.uk).

BOOK A VILLA: Seven nights at Jasmine, a three-bedroom townhouse close to Mullins Beach, departing on August 9, from £2,660 self-catering. Flights and transfers not included (hammertonbarbados.com).

GORGEOUS GRENADA

Go with the flow: Au Coin is one of many waterfalls on the lush island of Grenada

MANGOS, FESTIVALS & SAVINGS You can save money. Hotel rates are traditionally highest from mid-December to early April. Many properties are offering free nights or discounts, such as Cobblers Cove in Barbados, which has 30 per cent off until September 30 (cobblerscove barbados.com). It's hot — Barbados can hit over 30c (86f) in July and August. By contrast, average winter temperatures are a couple of degrees cooler, with a jacket or pashmina needed on some evenings. Summer holidays are all about enjoying the seaside, and the Caribbean offers beaches galore, from remote coves for a romantic picnic to action-packed sands with rum bars and watersports. Mangos are in season. More than 100 varieties are grown in the Caribbean and the islands make delicious use of them in cocktails, ice creams, salsas and salads. It's party time on some islands, with Crop Over on Barbados, Spice Mas on Grenada and the Antigua Carnival all major summer celebrations. 2021 festivities may be curtailed by Covid-19, but check tourist board websites to see what is happening. Advertisement

For a taste of the friendly, authentic Caribbean that has not sold out to tourism, choose Grenada. The well-kept, mile-and-a-half-long sands of Grand Anse Beach are a highlight and never get too busy, while the charming capital of St George’s is worth a wander and a lazy fish lunch at BB’s Crabback overlooking the harbour.

The island is also a treat for foodies, with four rum distilleries, five artisan chocolate-makers and a profusion of spices.

Nutmeg features on the national flag for good reason and you can learn about the many uses for this and cocoa beans at Belmont Estate, a working farm dating from the 17th century.

Take a tour of some private gardens to understand why Grenada regularly wins Gold Medals at Chelsea Flower Show, or get some thrills tubing through the rainforest on the Balthazar River (puregrenada.com).

BEST FOR: Explorers, garden-lovers, devotees of rum, spices and chocolate.

GOOD TO KNOW: Fully vaccinated travellers need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken three days prior to arrival. You must then stay at your accommodation until the results of a second test, taken on arrival, come through within 48 hours (covid19.gov.gd).

SPLURGE: Seven nights at Calabash Grenada, departing on August 23, from £2,385pp half-board including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow and transfers (inspiringtravelcompany.co.uk).

ON A BUDGET: Seven nights at all-inclusive Coyaba Beach Resort, departing on August 18, from £1,749pp including British Airways flights from Gatwick and transfers (tropicalsky.co.uk).

BOOK A VILLA: Seven nights in a three-bedroom villa at Grenada 473 boutique resort, departing on July 19, from £2,100pp based on six sharing, including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow, transfers and breakfast (justgrenada.co.uk).

TRY TURKS & CAICOS

Green-listing has brought this British Overseas Territory into the spotlight.

A scattering of 40 low-lying islands, of which only eight are inhabited, it lies 30 miles south of the Bahamas and has all the dreamy sands and luridly-coloured cocktails you need for a holiday in paradise. Playing in the sea is the most rewarding activity, be it snorkelling the world’s third-largest barrier reef, diving with sharks or parasailing above Grace Bay Beach, a seemingly endless stretch of powdery white sand on the gateway island of Providenciales.

Here, luxury tourism and American values are to the fore — Miami is just a 100-minute flight away, service standards are high, and the currency is the U.S. dollar. For a more relaxed scene push on to North or Middle Caicos Islands (turksandcaicostourism.com).

BEST FOR: Beach bliss and diving, as well as luxury resorts and villas.

GOOD TO KNOW: You will need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken five days prior to arrival and an online travel authorisation (travelauthorisation.turksandcaicostourism.com).

SPLURGE: Seven nights at COMO Parrot Cay, departing on August 17, from £2,749pp B&B including British Airways flights from Gatwick and transfers (turquoiseholidays.co.uk).

ON A BUDGET: Seven nights at Ports of Call Resort on Providenciales, departing on August 1, from £1,119pp room only including British Airways flights from Gatwick. Book by July 6 (ba.com/turksandcaicos).

BOOK A VILLA: Seven nights at three-bedroom Villa Waterloo on Providenciales, departing on August 22, from £4,042 self-catering. Flights and transfers not included (islandescapestci.com).

TWO FLIGHTS BUT WORTH IT

If you don’t mind the additional effort and expense of a second flight, continuing to a smaller island promises a quieter and more exclusive holiday. These three escapes are also on the green list, but note you will have to meet the Covid-19 requirements of both your transit island and destination. Montserrat and the Cayman Islands, also green-lighted, have not yet opened to leisure travellers (visitmontserrat.com, visitcaymanislands.com).

LUXURY IN ANGUILLA

If your priority is prime stretches of sand, then Anguilla could be for you

Just 16 miles long, this arid and low-lying island has some of the best beaches in the Caribbean. It is also has exceptional resorts, such as Belmond Cap Juluca and Malliouhana, and top-end villas that attract the private jet-set every winter.

Being a British Overseas Territory, driving is on the left, postboxes are red and the Union Jack has a corner of the island flag — so it’s easy to feel at home. Life is not all about lazing beside an azure ocean — Anguilla has an excellent museum, nocturnal adventures to spot turtles by kayak and a vibrant restaurant scene including plentiful fresh lobster.

BEST FOR: Beach addicts, luxury travellers and foodies.

GOOD TO KNOW: Fully vaccinated travellers need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken five days prior to arrival and must apply online for entry in advance (escape.ivisitanguilla.com).

BOOK NOW: Seven nights at Malliouhana, departing on August 12, from £2,619pp B&B including British Airways flights from Gatwick to Antigua, inter-island flights and transfers (elegantresorts.co.uk).

HIKE ON DOMINICA

Dominica, sandwiched between Guadeloupe and Martinique, is a wild and mountainous destination

Had enough of being cooped up at home? If you want to stretch your legs, get muddy, trek through towering rainforest and stand inside a thundering waterfall screaming with joy, Dominica is ready for you.

Sandwiched between Guadeloupe and Martinique, this wild and mountainous island is all about embracing nature. Adventures include hiking through the World-Heritage-listed Morne Trois Pitons National Park to a volcanic lake that boils like a witches’ cauldron, snorkelling in the bubbling geothermal waters of Champagne Reef and freshwater swimming in one of 365 rivers (discoverdominica.com).

BEST FOR: Walkers, birdwatchers, divers.

GOOD TO KNOW: Fully vaccinated travellers need a negative Covid-19 PCR test taken three days prior to arrival and must remain in certified ‘Safe in Nature’ accommodation until the result of second test, taken the day after arrival, comes through (domcovid19.dominica.gov.dm).

BOOK NOW: Seven nights at Jungle Bay, departing on July 20, from £2,815pp including Virgin Atlantic flights from Heathrow to Barbados, inter-island flights, transfers and full board with non-alcoholic drinks (tropicbreeze.co.uk).

EXPLORE VIRGIN ISLANDS

Life in the 60 islands of this super-scenic British Overseas Territory revolves around the sea. At present there are few visitors, making the coming weeks a good time to go yachting, snorkelling and diving in its warm, clear waters followed by some rum in a toes-in-the-sand beach bar.

Head for the largest island, Tortola, if you like to explore on land, while smaller Virgin Gorda includes the Gorda Peak National Park where you can get a panoramic view over the archipelago. Accommodation ranges from easygoing beachside resorts to luxury enclaves like Rosewood Little Dix Bay and privately-owned Guana Island, or charter a skippered yacht and go island-hopping (bvitourism.com).

BEST FOR: Yachties, divers, star-gazers.

GOOD TO KNOW: Fully vaccinated travellers need a negative Covid-19 PCR test five days prior to arrival and online authorised entry (bvigateway.bviaa.com).

BOOK NOW: Seven nights at Sebastian’s on the Beach on Tortola, departing on July 13, from £2,005pp B&B including British Airways flights from Gatwick to Antigua and inter-island flights (bviholidays.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Motorists wave as the vintage campervan rumbles into view. A warning that lights are on the blink or the exhaust is falling off? The latter seems most likely as there is a deep growl coming from an old engine lurking under the boot. But no, it’s just another friendly greeting from fellow free-spirited drivers who love the iconic Volkswagen bus.

This year, with the uncertainty of international travel, a campervan makes for a perfect bubble, without the need to bother with hotel rooms, and an ideal retreat, especially if you want to visit the Cornish hotspots.

The cult of the ‘Vee Dub’ began in the ‘flower power’ era of the Sixties, with its ability to transport motorists on a music-festival adventure providing a symbol of freedom. Yet its origins sprung from the ashes of Nazi Germany.

'Pootling along at little more than 40mph, you feel king of the road,' writes The Mail on Sunday's Toby Walne (pictured above)

Tight squeeze: The picture-postcard port of Mousehole has a steep drive down to the harbour

The bus was unveiled at the 1949 Geneva Motor Show as an economic way to escape post-war austerity. Over the next four decades, five million campers rolled off the production line. The first models were nicknamed ‘splitties’ as the windscreen was made up of two panes of glass. The ‘bay window’ followed in 1967 and in 1979 a box-shaped ‘wedgie’ model arrived.

Our campervan Olive (they all have a name) is a 1973 bay window from near Falmouth in Cornwall. She is a two-litre Westfalia model, with a pop-up roof to add space. With a top bunk, the van sleeps up to four. Inside is a small kitchen – stove, cool-box fridge, sink, table, and lots of utensils.

Adverts of the period show images of a wholesome family enjoying a carefree picnic beside the tiny show home on wheels. It harks back to a bygone era before motorway traffic jams, the internet and smartphones had been invented, and it is this nostalgic desire to unplug from modern life that lures enthusiasts.

Once settled in Olive, we take the 20-mile drive south to the wild coastline of Lizard Point for a cliff walk. Sitting in the driving-seat high chair with a steering wheel the size of a dustbin lid hovering above the lap, it takes a while to relax and go with the flow. Looking at the van clock, permanently fixed at a quarter to nine, time slows right down but does not actually stop.

Pootling along at little more than 40mph, you feel king of the road and you have a clear way ahead as you snake through narrow rural lanes – because other motorists must follow behind.

Olive offers a great budget adventure for one or two, plus there’s room for two youngsters to make for a fun family break.

Toby describes the van as having a 'Tardis-like quality'. Pictured is a neat little kitchen area, revealed behind a sliding door

The hippy vibes of Henry’s Campsite at The Lizard encourage campers to sit around campfires and unwind. Rolling up as a couple, our pitch costs £32.

The thought of washing dishes at a campsite can be a turn-off for many. For us, the built-in gas stove is used for boiling the kettle and the ample food larder is turned into a gin palace. For meals, visits to pubs in easy walking distance are justified because of the savings made from not staying in a swanky hotel, Airbnb or bed-and-breakfast – all of which are already booked up.

A spur-of-the-moment decision to travel 30 miles north-west to the picture-postcard port of Mousehole is easy in a campervan – travelling like a snail with accommodation on board. But it still takes more than an hour to navigate the maze of hedge-lined paths, and a steady nerve for the steep drive down to the harbour.

Rugged: Toby drove to the wild coastline of Lizard Point for a cliff walk and to soak up the stunning views

An old sea-salt car-park attendant offers sage advice – reverse into a parking spot, rather than head-first, as otherwise it may be a struggle to leave. Fortunately, by now the art of finding reverse gear and managing the trombone-like handbrake is mastered.

Next stop is Padstow, where you can simply turn up at Dennis Cove Campsite and find a ‘wild’ place for £33. But to guarantee a space, you should always phone ahead. At the top of the hill overlooking the harbour there is no electricity to plug into or water tap – and the spotlessly clean toilet block is 200 yards away. Yet for tranquillity, this is a perfect pitch.

Padstow is a gastro delight and the Halfway House Inn at nearby St Jidgey offers something special: a £49 seven-course meal, each small but perfect dish paired with a different glass of beer from Sharp’s Brewery. A highlight is wild sea bass trawled from the sea that morning by the fisherman father of waitress Kelly, and washed down with Atlantic Pale Ale.

Toby spent a day at the tropical gardens of the Eden Project, which is one of Cornwall's tourist hotspots

There is a Tardis-like quality to the way Olive swallows up luggage yet still offers space to sit back and relax with a book on the retro green and white rear sofa. At night a ‘rocknroll’ mechanism means that it takes just a moment to turn this cosy couch into a double bed.

Following a day trip to the tropical gardens of the Eden Project, the Stay Wild campsite near Helston boasts private en suite luxury ideal for a modest camper but providing the best of both worlds. For £70, you get your own three-acre field and a shepherd hut-style annexe – inside which is a gleaming bathroom with roll-top bath, shower, two sinks and flushing loo.

The adventure over, it is finally time to rejoin the 21st Century and the joys of road congestion as we leave Cornwall. The only relief is an occasional sight of an old campervan – and with a wave, we wish the occupants peace and love.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Want to pimp up your Instagram feed?

Then take a seat at any one of these stunning restaurants and snap away.

They are the most Instagrammable restaurants in the world, according to the 2021 Tripadvisor Travellers’ Choice Best of the Best Restaurants Awards, with the 20 dining spots showcased here making up the ranking for the Picture-Perfect Restaurants category.

The list includes the ‘dark and sultry’ Craft in Birmingham, a restaurant in China with a ‘wine corridor’, a spot in Greece with ‘unparalleled views of a volcanic caldera', and Sunset Monalisa in Mexico, which offers a sensational coastal sunset panorama.

Turkey, Thailand, Argentina, and Spain are also represented here.

Scroll down to see pictures of all 20 of the Picture-Perfect restaurants, presented here in reverse order.

20. NEMO RESTAURANT & LOUNGE, KADRIYE, TURKEY: Tripadvisor touts this eatery as a ‘feast for the eyes and taste buds’ that offers an ‘other-worldly experience as you descend into the restaurant via a floating staircase’ to be met with ‘striking decor and an aquarium backdrop’. The site adds: ‘We know, another aquarium restaurant. Can you ever have enough aquarium restaurants?’

19. CRAFT, BIRMINGHAM, UNITED KINGDOM: Here diners are immersed in ‘dark and sultry vibes’ and the occasional imitation cherry blossom tree. Plus, there’s a ‘striking’ glass-walled private dining room

18. HAOMA, BANGKOK, THAILAND: Here, in what’s claimed to be Bangkok’s first urban farm dining restaurant, diners sit in a two-storey glass house surrounded by lush greenery

17. LA COLLINE RESTAURANT, FIRA, SANTORINI, GREECE: Want ‘unparalleled’ vistas of the Santorini caldera while you munch? This is the spot, apparently

16. EL MIRADOR RESTAURANT, TODOS SANTOS, MEXICO: What’s on the menu here? A stunning view of the Pacific coast, the desert and surrounding mountains, says Tripadvisor

15. STAG, SAN CARLOS DE BARILOCHE, ARGENTINA: One diner described the lake view here as 'amazing' and the dinner 'exquisite'

14. SUNSET MONALISA, CABO SAN LUCAS, MEXICO: The name might sound a bit cheesy, but as the image shows, the owners would be justified in hyping their restaurant even more

13. PEACH BLOSSOMS, SINGAPORE: ‘One for fans of minimalism,’ says Tripadvisor. ‘This restaurant features light woods, a nature-inspired palette and a touch of oriental. And with that, views of the iconic Marina Bay’

12. ENTRE DOS FUEGOS, TOLEDO, SPAIN: The beautiful architecture on show here matches that of this ancient city, says Tripadvisor – ‘a stunning mix of the various periods of its history and the cultures that converged there’

11. SAMSHA, VALENCIA, SPAIN: Diners here (just 16 at a time) are treated to ‘jaw-dropping artistic cuisine’ and a show with music and lights

10. MISTICO RESTAURANT, ARMACAO DOS BUZIOS, BRAZIL: The aesthetics here are droolworthy – there’s a gorgeous infinity pool and a panoramic view of the Bay of Armacao

9. RISTORANTE PIZZA INCONTRO, LIMONE SUL GARDA, ITALY: Here there are spellbinding views of Lake Garda for diners to digest

8. OPSO DUBAI: This restaurant exudes ‘chic style’ thanks to a ‘combination of gold, tan, orange and blue accents throughout’, says Tripadvisor. It adds: ‘The panoramic views of Dubai don’t hurt either’

7. SABAYON, KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA: This ‘seriously stylish rooftop restaurant’ has ‘dreamy high ceilings, mood lighting to die for and stunning views of the Kuala Lumpur landscape, including the famous Petronas Twin Towers'

6. THE GRAND GETAWAY BY GRAND HYATT KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA: This restaurant at the Grand Hyatt Kuala Lumpur lets you travel around the world through its 360-degree virtual dining experience

5. TIN LUNG HEEN, HONG KONG, CHINA: Two words – ‘wine corridor’. That’s Tripadvisor’s summation here

4. I DUE ROCCOLI, ISEO, ITALY: The set menu of stunning views here includes 16-mile-long Lake Iseo and the surrounding mountains

3. DOR, TOHANU NOU, ROMANIA: This eatery definitely has the Elven Middle-earth vibe nailed

2. LE GRILL RESTAURANT, PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC: Le Grill serves up a hearty dose of Bridgerton styling

1. KORAL RESTAURANT, NUSA DUA, INDONESIA: Located within the luxury Apurva Kempinski hotel, Koral offers a dining experience that's truly fin-tastic
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The ghosts of bygone times lie all around us.

And here we present fascinating photos of them - pictures of abandoned buildings, boats, bridges and more that link the present with the past and beckon us to unravel their stories.

There's the enormous palace-like army barracks that lies in ruins in Hungary, a moss-covered railway track in Taiwan and a rusting old French tank sitting incongruously on a remote and rugged stretch of Norwegian coastline.

This rummage through history also takes in a locomotive lying upside down in a river and the world's longest curved wooden trestle bridge.

One photo, meanwhile, shows a haunting set of stone stairs in the middle of a forest.

Scroll down and embark on an intriguing journey of discovery into a world lost in time.

Located in the Spanish town of Torrelodones, close to Madrid, the Palace of Canto del Pico dates back to the 1920s when the Count of Las Almenas built it. After the death of his only son, the count left the estate in 1947 and it was inherited by General Franco, the former dictator of Spain, who used it as a weekend residence. When he died in 1975 it passed to his heirs, who eventually sold it to Stoyman Holdings Ltd in 1988. The firm had hoped to transform it into a luxury hotel. However, it has lain in ruins since then as attempts to gain permission to turn it into accommodation failed. Recently, after years of wrangling with the authorities, it was reported that Stoyman Holdings Ltd was just waiting on approval to start work on restoring the building

Hajmaskér Barracks was built in the 19th century under the orders of Franz Joseph I, leader of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It is located in the small village of Hajmaskér, in present-day Hungary. According to Atlas Obscura, it grew to become one of the biggest barracks in the empire and during the First World War housed a prisoner-of-war prison and even had its own currency. During World War II it became a Nazi base. After their defeat it was occupied by Soviet soldiers until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990. It was then abandoned and has been left to the elements ever since

A former anti-aircraft missile commando post left to ruin in the village of Mor'ye in Russia's Leningrad Oblast region

Rusting gas pumps at an abandoned Derby service station and garage in the city of St James, Missouri. Route 66 used to run through the city

An abandoned section of track on the former Jancing Forest Railway in Taipingshan National Forest Recreation Area in Taiwan. The former railway was 3.4-miles long and now part of the track runs alongside a short hiking trail called the Jancing Historic Trail. Describing the experience of walking the trail, Taiwan travel guide Taiwan Scene says: 'You’ll see remains of the tracks, cross a suspension bridge, and encounter all kinds of Taiwanese plant life, including cherry blossoms if you visit during the right season. You may even see the odd disused log cart, giving you a glimpse into Taipingshan’s logging industry past'

Inside a ruined hospital on the abandoned island of Poveglia in the Venetian lagoon in Italy. It's an island with a fascinating, if grim, history. Its population grew in the 9th century, but in 1379 during an attack on Venice, the people there were moved to Giudecca - another island in the Venetian lagoon. It remained uninhabited for centuries until the 1770s, when it became a checkpoint as well as a quarantine station, where countless victims of the plague were sent to die. In 1922, the hospital buildings on the island were converted into asylums for the mentally ill and were later used as nursing homes. Since the nursing facilities closed in 1968, it has largely been uninhabited and visitors are banned. In 2014, Poveglia was sold by the Italian government for $521,000. It is hoped the old asylum can be converted into a luxury hotel

A tank lies abandoned near the Norwegian hamlet of Veidnes in the far north east of the country. It is believed to be a French Renault FT tank that was captured by German forces and used during the invasion of Norway in 1940. The photographer who took this image, Anne Synnove Harestad, said: 'The locals have always been very respectful of all World War II remnants but over the last few years, increased exposure has led to an increase in tourists "robbing" it and stripping it for parts'

This abandoned school building in Elmira, Illinois, dates back to 1851 and was in operation until 1964. By then a new school building had been created elsewhere in Elmira. It has now been left to ruin and the back wall of the building is missing

These ruins are all that remain of Schloss Schlobitten - a castle in the village of Slobity in Poland. The castle dates back to 1624 when it was built for the Dohnas, a German noble family. However, during the Polish-Swedish War (1600-1629) the castle was devastated by looters and only poorly restored. But between 1695 and 1722, the castle underwent a major restoration and extension in the Baroque style. It stood until 1945, when it was set on fire by the Red Army, the inhabitants having fled. The castle has been listed on Poland's list of historical monuments since 1968

This castle was abandoned before it was even completed. Called Lapalice Castle, it is located in the small Polish village of the same name. Construction began in 1979, the building designated as a home and studio for artist Piotr Kazimierczak. According to Atlas Obscura, Kazimierczak planned for it to be a 'grand estate, complete with a swimming pool, ballroom, ramparts, and 12 towers representing the 12 apostles'. However, building work hit a snag when officials realised they needed planning permission. In addition, the project also ran into financial difficulties. Now, all that remains is an empty shell

The rusting wreck of the MS World Discoverer cruise ship lies abandoned in Roderick Bay on the Solomon Islands. The vessel came to rest there in 2000 after it struck an unchartered reef nearby, causing it to list. The ship was brought into Roderick Bay, where all the passengers and crew were safely rescued. According to Atlas Obscura, several attempts have been made to salvage the ship but none have been successful

An old locomotive lies at the bottom of a mountain river close to an old narrow-gauge railway in the Guam Gorge in Adygea in the Caucasus region

Left to rack and ruin: An abandoned church in the small Russian village of Zasechnoye, in the north west of the country

This eerie stone staircase is all that remains of a grand house in Chesterfield, New Hampshire, that burned to the ground. It was owned by famous Broadway costume designer Madame Sherri and, according to Atlas Obscura, it was here that she would throw 'fabulous parties' in a property that many referred to as a 'castle'. However, Madame Sherri fell on hard times and by the 1960s, the castle was disused. After a fire in 1962, all that remained were the foundations and this section of staircase. Walking trails have been added around the ruins and the forest is now called the Madame Sherri Forest

Roof garden: Snaps of this cottage rack up thousands of likes on Instagram. It can be found near Tuv in Norway, just over 100 miles from the country's capital, Oslo

This is the awe-inspiring Goat Canyon Trestle Bridge in Anza-Borrego Desert State Park in California. With a length of 750ft (229m) and a height of 200ft (61m), it is the longest freestanding curved wooden trestle bridge in the world. It was built using redwood timber in 1933 as a connection in the cross-border San Diego and Arizona Eastern Railway, which linked San Diego with Plaster City via Tijuana in Baja California. The railway was engineered through such treacherous desert terrain that it was dubbed the 'impossible railroad'. The last train to cross the remote trestle was in 2008, when it was closed for repairs that have still not been carried out. Today it's a popular destination for hardy hikers - reaching it requires preparation as the trail there is tough, barely marked, completely lacking in shade and temperatures can be dangerously high. A sign on the bridge warns visitors that it's unsafe and that crossing it is trespassing

There's no denying the closed sign in the window of this abandoned vintage diner in New Jersey

Pictured is the auditorium of an abandoned high school in Detroit. Dozens of schools have opened, closed and been either abandoned or demolished there. Urban adventure tour companies run photo tours of some of the sites
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The rush for a holiday in France is on.

Skyscanner revealed that as a result of the country's status changing on the traffic light system, week-by-week bookings from the UK to France are up by 75 per cent.

According to the travel search site, the most-booked French airports are Paris, Marseille and Nice.

Skyscanner revealed that as a result of France's status changing on the traffic light system, week-by-week bookings from the UK to the country are up by 75 per cent. Pictured is Montmartre, Paris

The average prices for return airfares for these destinations are £102 for Paris, £164 for Marseille and £55 for Nice.

France moved from ‘amber plus’ to 'amber' on Sunday, August 8, meaning fully-vaccinated Britons do not need to quarantine upon their return. However, unvaccinated travellers still have to self-isolate at home for 10 days after holidaying in France, according to the FCDO.

Skyscanner also revealed that interest in trips to Dubai rocketed after it was announced that the UAE would move off the red list and onto amber.

Searches for trips from London to Dubai went up 235 per cent between August 2 and 9 compared to the previous week, and by 287 per cent for flights from Manchester to Dubai.

The airport in the coastal city of Nice (pictured) has also proven a popular choice among sun-starved holidaymakers

Holidaymakers are also looking to central Europe, with searches for Slovenia booming by 235 per cent following its green-list move.

Searches for Latvia, which was moved to the green list at the same time, have also been rising over the past month, with a 70 per cent week-on-week increase in searches by Britons.

Romania, another new addition to the green list, has seen a 51 per cent surge in searches following its change in status.

Laura Lindsay, Destination Expert at Skyscanner, said: ‘International travel is definitely back on people’s agendas and while the selection of destinations trending amongst Britons in 2021 may look a little different, it is clear that UK travellers are jumping at the chance of a break in the sun, returning to favourite spots whenever they can do so safely and within the rules.

Dubai, pictured, was moved off the red list and onto the amber on August 8

‘The new guidance for vaccinated travellers means that much-anticipated trips to traditional favourites like Spain and France can take place once again.

‘We’ve seen the addition of the UAE to the amber list drive a surge in searches and bookings, as well as extend travellers’ gaze into the autumn to take advantage of the climate and luxury escapes.

‘The list of quarantine-free destinations for unvaccinated travellers is smaller, but summer sun can still be enjoyed in Malta, Croatia and newcomers like Slovenia.’

Travel searches for Slovenia rocketed by 235 per cent after it was moved to the green list. Pictured is Lake Bled

It comes as the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) vowed to crack down on the cost of PCR and antigen tests, after Health Secretary Sajid Javid referred the travel test market to the watchdog.

More than 400 private firms are listed on the government's website for holidaymakers.

The CMA warned it would 'not hesitate to take enforcement action' against providers flouting the law and not giving customers what they paid for.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

I'm staying in one of the greatest hotel suites in Scotland - and discovering there are actually hardships well-heeled guests must endure here.

There's the slog from the loo to the rain shower, which is in an alcove at the far end of a dressing room on the opposite side of the vast space.

Decisions must be made about which window seat to occupy – the small padded one for views north across Loch Faskally or the semi-circular banquette by a trio of windows that afford views of the magnificent 2,759ft-tall Ben Vrackie mountain.

Dreamy: The Castle Penthouse (pictured) at Fonab Castle Hotel & Spa features a seven-foot 'And So To Bed' Dickens Nickel Bed worth £10,000

Fonab is an imperious red-sandstone 19th-century Baronial-style castle in Pitlochry, Perthshire

Fonab, which has just had a £2.5million refurb, is certainly historical, but it has a polished swagger, writes Ted

THE JOYS OF THE TRAIN JOURNEY TO SCOTLAND The most thrilling way of reaching Scotland from England is undoubtedly by train. Our journey to Fonab Castle Hotel begins with the 9am LNER Azuma from Kings Cross to Edinburgh. The Royal Border Bridge at Berwick-upon-Tweed On the way we take in some incredible sights from our seats - the impressive York station, the magnificent Durham Cathedral and the striking Angel of North, just before Newcastle. The arrival into the station there is breathtaking, with amazing views of the city and the River Tyne as the train crosses the mighty King Edward VII Bridge. An LNER Azuma passes Alnmouth As the train hurtles further north, we gaze at the coast at Alnmouth, spot Lindisfarne Castle on Holy Island and are then hypnotised as the train crosses the Royal Border Bridge (which is actually three miles south of the border) before pulling up in Berwick-upon-Tweed station. After this, amazing views of rugged coastline keep us transfixed before the train arrives at Edinburgh Waverley. Six minutes early. An LNER Azuma train at Hilton Junction, south of Perth, as the line enters the Moncrieffe Tunnel. Measuring 1,220 yards, it is the longest railway tunnel in northern Scotland We reach Perth via a ScotRail HST service via the showstopping Forth Bridge. Unforgettable. On the way home, we catch a direct LNER Azuma service from Perth to Kings Cross, which doesn't go along the Forth Bridge, but does skirt past the awe-inspiring Stirling Castle. Advertisement

And then there's the toil of bedtime. Plush drapes need to be pulled down over each of the aforementioned windows and an attempt made on the summit of the seven-foot 'And So To Bed' Dickens Nickel Bed.

It's outrageously huge – and vertiginous. Vast enough to accommodate two Hagrids and tall enough to warrant a small run-up and jump to get on top.

Our ravishing chamber is the Castle Penthouse, a mini kingdom with a vaulted ceiling at the top of the imperious red-sandstone 19th-century Baronial-style Fonab Castle Hotel & Spa in Pitlochry, Perthshire. And I really am quite taken with it, despite the hard work involved.

The bed, worth around £10,000, is as comfortable as it is gargantuan, relaxing in the standalone oval bathtub (in a turret with the loo) a wonderful indulgence and those views... mesmerising, whatever the weather.

Fine views, it turns out, are there for the taking from multiple locations at this most beguiling property, including the Lounge Bar and the Fonab Brasserie, which both have floor-to-ceiling windows through which guests can drink in a fine slice of Scottish geology.

The former is a drinks-only establishment, the latter where breakfast, lunch and dinner are distributed, with the quality consistently impressive.

At breakfast we enjoy top-notch porridge, with sugar and cream for it served in mini saucepans, to the particular delight of my three-year-old daughter. We also love the elegant afternoon-tea-style cake stands populated by fruit, pastries, and pots of yoghurt and berries.

For lunch and dinner we try pan-roasted hake with squid-ink risotto (£25); plaice with mussels, cider and chervil sauce (£25), and the Fonab burger (£17.95). Top marks all around. The meat for the burger is excellent, the risotto bursting with flavour and my plaice beautifully presented.

At the hotel's three-AA-rosette restaurant, Sandemans, the cuisine demands a new set of superlatives.

Cocooned in a bewitchingly boutique-y dining room we work our way through a tasting menu of exquisite dishes and amuse-bouche, with superb wines to match.

What's on offer is an experience easily worthy of a Michelin star – a mini culinary odyssey of cleverly combined flavours, temperatures and textures.

The journey begins with crab rillettes with pickled cucumber and gazpacho; duck foie gras with riesling jelly; West Coast scallops with wild garlic, pea puree and bellota ham, and confit salmon with oyster and Oscietra caviar.

Then it's on to breast of Peking duck, an ingenious dessert containing a yogurt mousse fashioned into a bright red strawberry and another consisting of heavenly dark chocolate with caramelised popcorn for a bit of crunch.

Wine-wise our palettes are treated to a Burgundian Volnay Pinot Noir, a velvety Chateau Beau-Site red Bordeaux and a sweet Sybille Kuntz Riesling.

The wine list actually spans both Sandemans and the Brasserie and in the latter I'd already quaffed a delightful 'Saskia' Chenin Blanc/Viognier and a knock-out 'Polish Hill' Riesling from Australia.

The service purrs in Sandemans and is courteous and spritely in the Brasserie. It isn't always perfect, with a 20-minute wait for the taking of a breakfast food order one morning, but it's a dropping of the ball. Apologies are issued and faultless waiter and waitressing resumes thereafter.

Outside the food and beverage realm, the staff are also rather smashing.

For instance, one of the maintenance men spontaneously takes time out of his schedule to show my daughter how to feed the hotel chickens, which roam the grounds and supply the eggs for the chefs.

And we meet the affable spa staff when we go for a splash about in the enticingly-tiled 15-metre indoor pool.

So, is this the Scottish castle-hotel of your dreams?

Not if you're dreaming of a rustic, step-back-in-time experience.

Fonab, which has just had a £2.5million refurb, is certainly historical, but it has a polished swagger – like some of its guests. And their cars.

A group of Lamborghini-owning friends are using the hotel as their touring base during our stay, so we rise in the morning to the sound of cockerels crowing and V12 engines roaring.

No self-respecting castle is complete without a set of commanding spiral stairs

At Fonab's three-AA-rosette restaurant, Sandemans (pictured), Ted works his way through a tasting menu of 'exquisite dishes'

Fine views are there for the taking from multiple locations, including the Fonab Brasserie (above, with Loch Faskally beyond)

The Lounge Bar, pictured, is perfect for drinking in the scenery with a dram or two

I'm not surprised they're drawn to Fonab, given that it's positioned just to the south of the Cairngorms National Park amid, as we discover, some of the very best driving roads anywhere in Britain.

We arrive in Scotland from London via a thrilling high-speed LNER train ride from Kings Cross to Edinburgh, then a ScotRail service across the mighty Forth Bridge to Perth, where we pick up a very cool Mercedes AMG C200 hire car.

We cruise from the castle up the A9, snaking between dramatic peaks to Aviemore, where we turn right and head a few miles along the road to Loch Morlich and the Cairngorm Reindeer Centre, which manages Britain's only wild herd of reindeer.

Ted's plaice with mussels, cider and chervil sauce, which he enjoys at the Fonab Brasserie

Pictured left is an amuse-bouche served at Sandemans of seaweed cones filled with salmon mousse and caviar accompanied by Parmesan Gougere. Pictured right is the eatery's exquisite strawberry dessert

The image on the left shows Ted's Sandemans confit salmon with oyster and Oscietra caviar. On the right, duck foie gras with Riesling jelly

They were introduced to the sub-Arctic Cairngorm mountains in 1952 by Swedish reindeer herder Mikel Utsi.

There are now 150 of the Christmassy beasts living freely on the slopes above Loch Morlich.

We join a guided tour and hang out with a group of them for half an hour as one of the Centre's experts fills us in on the reindeer way of life and how they are cunningly adapted to cold weather (they're so well insulated that if they lay down on snow, it won't melt).

It's a magical experience.

I also take the C200 over from Fonab to Braemar, a journey that ranks as the most spectacular drive of my life.

The Cairngorm Reindeer Centre manages Britain's only wild herd of reindeer (pictured)

Ted takes his Mercedes AMG C200 hire car along the A93 through glorious Glenshee and past the ski station. He ranks the journey as the most spectacular drive of his life. The image on the left shows the road on the north side of the ski centre and the image on the right shows Ted's hire car and the Glenshee valley on the south side

Double rooms at Fonab Castle Hotel & Spa start from £295 per night on a B&B basis

The wine at Fonab is excellent. Ted enjoys several fine glasses, including a velvety Chateau Beau-Site red Bordeaux and a sweet Sybille Kuntz Riesling

The scenery is glorious for the duration but becomes mind-blowingly epic at Glenshee on the A93. I actually struggle to contain my excitement as I power up the 12-per-cent-gradient climb to the Glenshee ski station, the imposing mountains on either side making me feel totally insignificant.

Back at the hotel there is yet another summit to conquer – the bed.

It's a hard life... and I can't wait to tough it out again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Think of the dream holiday the pandemic has denied you this summer. Think of that long golden beach and the bright twinkling surf, just a moment from your stylish hotel and its supremely classy restaurant.

Good news - you don’t have to dream it. It’s yours for the taking, if in a rather unexpected location. Northumberland.

Some readers will already know the charms of England’s northernmost county, which is too often overlooked. They may in fact cherish its secret, and scorn me sharing it here. Too many of us, however, have for too long not give it the attention it deserves. I grew up little more than an hour away in Carlisle but still only discovered its wonders, decades later, on a trip this June.

The Whittling House, in the village of Alnmouth, is a short scenic drive up the coast from Newcastle

Whittling House calls itself a restaurant with ten rooms - and James says it’s right to put that principal focus on the food

While most of the rest of England wallowed in an unseasonal and unrelenting monsoon, my few days in Northumberland were ravishingly sunny. In such conditions, it’s as fine a place as I’ve ever visited in our fair nation, and top of my list now for further adventures.

I made my base at a brand new boutique hotel, The Whittling House, in the village of Alnmouth, a short scenic drive up the coast from Newcastle. It first opened for a few brief days between lockdowns last Autumn, but is back now with arms open, doubly eager to welcome you. Boutique hotel may not be the best term: already this conjures to mind something airbrushed, airless and prim that The Whittling House coolly, confidently sidesteps.

It calls itself a restaurant with ten rooms, and though the rooms – which we’ll come to in a moment – are gorgeous, it’s right to put that principal focus on the food.

In lockdown, we’ve all longed for a first-class meal we’ve not had to make ourselves. Whittling House head chef Dan Duggan not only fulfils this prospect, he generously sprinkles cinder toffee on top for good measure. I could have scoffed every delectable prospect on his menu. In the end, I selected the twice-baked Northumbrian cheese soufflé, still sizzling in its skillet and zinging on the tongue with its dusting of sea salt and chives, then a plump chunk of halibut bathing with a score of mussels and soft unsalted capers in a lagoon of sumptuous beurre blanc.

You’ll be hard-pressed to find anything nationwide to liberate you so quickly from 18 months of familiar recipes and takeaways. This is not just destination dining: it’s food as therapy.

James says his room was 'lovingly, luxuriously furnished' with 'an extravagant armchair that felt like it had been upholstered with the most cuddlesome poodle'

The Whittling House seemed remarkably assured and snag-free for a new hotel, writes James

Local sourcing – from menu to furnishings – is a particular point of pride for manager Lottie Haylock and her team

I wasn’t planning on dessert but I overheard the couple next to me, back for the second night in a row, ordering what they called ‘the best sticky toffee pudding ever tasted’. How could I resist such a proposition? And indeed they were right, principally due to the aforementioned cinder toffee, strewn across the dark treacly sponge. Any sticky toffee pudding that henceforth comes without it will seem stark naked.

Touches like that truly define The Whittling House, which seemed remarkably assured and snag-free for a new hotel. My plush bedroom was so lovingly, luxuriously furnished: the weighty, ornately-embroidered curtains; the range of designer lamps all of which I wanted to pinch; the extravagant armchair that felt like it had been upholstered with the most cuddlesome poodle (rest assured, it hadn’t); most strikingly of all, the array of eclectic, elegant prints brightening every wall, mostly sourced from the gorgeous Old School Gallery just up the road.

Indeed, local sourcing – from menu to furnishings – is a particular point of pride for manager Lottie Haylock and her team, themselves all part of The Whittling House’s charm. For indeed, that’s another plus of visiting Northumberland: the locals are so cheery and welcoming. They are so proud of their county and are so pleased to share its treasures with you.

'I could have scoffed every delectable prospect on the menu,' James says of his dining experience at The Whittling House

Alnmouth is bordered on one side by the River Aln and the sea on the other - and is brimming with characterful little shops

TRAVEL FACTS James was hosted by The Whittling House, 24-25 Northumberland St, Alnmouth, Alnwick, NE66 2RA. Rooms cost from £140. Visit thewhittlinghouse.co.uk, call +44 (0)1665 46300 or email info@thewhittlinghouse.co.uk. Rating: Advertisement

Alnmouth is a treasure in itself: an intimate haven, bordered on one side by the River Aln and the sea on the other. A short stroll down the high street of characterful little shops (including one of those gemful English post offices that sells everything in the world, not least fine local ales) and, within a minute, a pathway through grassy dunes invites you to the most gorgeous sandy beach. What’s more, a few smiling dogwalkers aside, I had it all to myself.

It turns out there are many more beaches of this kind stretching the thirty miles up to the Scottish border. I particularly recommend the deep, ample, uncrowded stretches at Craster, Budle Bay, and Longhoughton. The latter is quaintly found via a farm where they ask for a pound in their honesty box to traverse their land. Best pound I’ve spent all year.

One day I took a boat out to the Farne Islands to see the magnificent birdlife that gathers there: it’s rather like an avian Vegas with seemingly billions of guillemots and puffins ignoring all social-distancing etiquette and clearly having the time of their lives. I also visited several of the county’s signature coastal castles: Lindisfarne (the famous one), Bamburgh (the resplendent one) and Dunstanburgh (the ruined one): there are roughly 70 more to explore.

The pandemic may have drastically whittled down what we can do this year, but you’ll feel enlarged, enlivened and refreshed, as I was, with an escape to Northumberland and The Whittling House.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A whirr of wings as a bird approaches the landing ground on a wide, green plateau of Skomer Island, guarded by majestic cliffs and the wild Atlantic.

Close-up, the powerful flier turns into an endearingly plump and ungainly figure, splaying out its big, webbed, orange feet and winding its wings back to slow and stall. Finally, it plops down into the grass near to its mate and their sandy burrow.

Quite a few of the birds actually land so clumsily that they do a beak-dive and tumble, only to pick themselves up, look rapidly about to make sure no one is watching and then waddle over to their nest.

Puffins arrive in vast numbers to nest on Skomer Island, off the coast of Pembrokeshire, every May

The Atlantic puffin is probably the most appealing of British birds. Even its Latin name is ridiculously cute: Fratercula arctica, meaning Arctic Friar, as its black-and-white plumage looks something like a monkish robe. But this could also be translated as Little Arctic Brother. I love that.

I've driven out west to Pembrokeshire, the Welsh region with probably the gentlest appeal — although really they're all special, from the thinly peopled hill country of Powys, to the dark mountains of Snowdonia, or Eryri, as locals call it.

Just as it's only polite to learn a little French when going to France, one should learn a bit of Welsh if going to Wales. When two ladies stand aside on a narrow stretch of coastal path for me to pass, I say 'thank you' and they say 'Croeso'. 'You're welcome.' 'Diolch!' ('Thank you'), I call back. They smile. It's not hard.

It's the coastal path I'm here for — and the puffins, which arrive in vast numbers to nest on Skomer and nearby Skokholm Island every May. I drive down through Marloes — 'Twinned with Llareggub,' reads a cheerfully irreverent sign at the village edge. An old Dylan Thomas joke. (Read Llareggub backwards and you'll get it.)

Winging it: Walking the coast path near St David's where the waters are crystal clear (stock image)

We sail from tiny Martin's Haven, a gaggle of bird lovers. The little boat rocks and rolls across the big grey swell, and you think again how lucky we are to live on such a wild sea-cloaked island, with more than 4,000 islands of at least half an acre.

Even before we come into Skomer's North Haven, the seas and cliffs are clamorous with shearwaters and guillemots. But it's the quaint and comical puffins we've come to see, so untroubled by humans that you can stand within a few feet of them as they waddle back and forth between their burrows; or stand sentry, watching anxiously for their mates to return from fishing; or have neighbourly tiffs here and there.

St David's on the mainland is the starting point for this walking tour, where I spend my first evening on the beach at Caerfai Bay with a beer, watching the sunset. 'Better than any pub garden, eh?' says an old chap with a ponytail.

The next day is the trip to Skomer, and then many other glorious moments on this seven-day exploration of Pembrokeshire's coastline. I walk ten to 12 miles a day. With plenty of bracing ups over headlands and downs to hidden coves, it is about five hours' walking. In the little bay of Porthsychan I see five or six seals yards from the beach, eyeing me warily but curiously.

Dinas Head makes for a magnificent, near-circular walk, by way of Pwllgwaelod beach, returning to the sheltered cove of Cwm-yr-Eglwys. I go wrong a little after this, but it means I discover the fairy glen of Cwm Rhigian. And at Newport there is the wide sunlit estuary of Afon Nyfer, and excellent food and pints of Doom Bar at The Golden Lion.

The picturesque village of Fishguard with its cluster of colourful waterside cottages

'The Atlantic puffin is probably the most appealing of British birds,' writes the Daily Mail's Christopher Hart

You should also eat at the Royal Oak in Fishguard, while imagining a crackpot little French invasion here in 1797, when troops surrendered to the Fishguard Fencibles, the Dad's Army of the time. Why Fishguard? One explanation is that the French were very drunk.

In summer the clifftop paths are colourful with wildflowers and bees. It can be squally on this coast — this is part of the appeal. Mid-week a huge Atlantic storm sweeps in, and I spend a morning in pouring rain on Fishguard's Marine Parade, and then the afternoon back at my B&B, reading old Welsh folk tales.

The next day, in rustling waterproofs, I set out for Strumble Head. The clifftop paths seem narrow indeed above the boiling white sea, and 50mph wind gusts buffet me. Exhilarating too, though, as I scramble over the steep tor of Garn Fawr, then down to the coast, and the lighthouse on Ynys Meical.

The wind eases, and I meet a man on the headland, watching the Manx Shearwaters.

'I hope the puffins are all right on Skomer,' I proffer.

'They'll be all right,' he nods. 'They were here before us, and they'll still be here after we're gone.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ministers were last night branded 'hypocrites' over the cost of Covid travel tests as it emerged they have failed to reduce their own prices for summer.

The Health Department is now charging more than four times what the cheapest private provider is advertising on the Government's website.

A Mail analysis found this ratio has increased from earlier this summer when it was charging double what the cheapest private firm did for a single PCR swab.

Critics last night branded the fiasco 'a national scandal' and said it suggested ministers have no intention of ending 'Wild West' testing costs facing travellers.

It came as Commons transport committee chairman Huw Merriman wrote to Health Secretary Sajid Javid demanding answers about the testing system.

He questioned ministers' justification for forcing holidaymakers into shelling out for pricier PCR tests when only 5 per cent of positive cases are being sequenced for virus variants of concern.

It also emerged that health ministers have not assessed the potential benefits to hard-working families of capping test costs despite pledges to drive down prices.

The disclosure came in the answer to a written parliamentary question from former Tory minister David Davis, who asked health minister Jo Churchill if her department had assessed 'the potential benefits' to British holidaymakers of capping costs.

Ministers were last night branded 'hypocrites' over the cost of Covid travel tests as it emerged they have failed to reduce their own prices for summer [File photo]

She replied: 'The department has not made a specific assessment.' She also insisted testing costs 'have fallen significantly' in recent months. But the Mail's analysis found the Government is continuing to demand £88 for a post-arrival PCR test – the same as it was charging in June.

This is more than four times the £20 being advertised by the cheapest private firms on the Government's list of approved providers.

In June the amount was double what the cheapest private firm was advertised as charging, then £44. It means the Government's prices could add more than £350 to the cost of a foreign break for a family of four to a green or amber list country, as even the double-jabbed are required to take a PCR swab by day two of their return.

And its price for a two-test package, required for non-fully vaccinated people arriving from amber countries, remains £170.

This could add nearly £700 to the cost of a family getaway.

Boris Johnson previously pledged to make it 'as easy as possible' for families to travel abroad this summer. But critics last night said ministers' failure to reduce their prices meant this promise had been broken.

Labour MP and former minister Ben Bradshaw said: 'It is quite clear that despite Boris Johnson's promises, the Government has no intention of doing anything to bring down the cost of tests.

'While separated families can't afford to travel to see one another and thousands of jobs in the travel industry are being needlessly sacrificed, mates of ministers are raking it in with these outrageous prices.'

Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy the PC Agency, said: 'Ministers are absolutely hypocrites. Actions speak louder than words and sadly, as this demonstrates, there have been very few actions by ministers. The PCR testing regime is not only a national embarrassment, but a national scandal.'

Boris Johnson previously pledged to make it 'as easy as possible' for families to travel abroad this summer. But critics last night said ministers' failure to reduce their prices meant this promise had been broken [Stock image]

There is no obligation to choose the Government's post-arrival testing package instead of a private provider's.

Although some private providers are advertised on the Government website as offering single-swab packages for £20, the Mail yesterday revealed how these rates are often not realistically obtainable for many, as when clicking through to each firm's website they are mostly out of stock or only offered in centres, meaning many would have to travel hundreds of miles.

Mr Merriman demanded to know why returning travellers can't take cheaper rapid tests when so few positive cases are being sequenced. He pointed to NHS figures showing sequenced cases fell from 49 per cent during late February to early March.

For the first three weeks of July, there were 6,977 cases with 354 sequenced – just 5 per cent. He also asked why more than 90 per cent of Government-approved private testing companies are yet to be accredited as competent operators.

Only around 38 of the more than 400 firms on the list have been fully approved by the UK Accreditation Service, responsible for vetting the firms.

A Health Department spokesman said: 'Companies that fail to meet the high standards required will be removed from our list of approved suppliers without hesitation.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

It was a pipe dream - now it's a reality.

A Russian architect has designed and built an amazing stainless-steel 'pipe house', complete with a shower, sleeping quarters and a kitchen.

The quirky abode - which has a diameter of 3.5 metres (11.4ft) and a length of 12 metres (39.3ft) - hangs over the edge of a slope, giving the illusion it is floating.

An architect has designed and built an incredible stainless-steel 'pipe house' in a Russian park

The decor is stylish and minimal, with a dark wooden kitchen unit, a dining table, and a double bed

Architect Sergey Kuznetsov, 44, spent two nights living in the apartment, which has been installed in Nikola-Lenivets art park in the Kaluga region, 155 miles from Moscow, for the annual Arkhstoyanie arts festival.

Describing the project, which is titled 'Russian Quintessential', Sergey, who has been the Chief Architect of Moscow since 2012, told MailOnline Travel: 'People call it the Pipe, and I think it's perfectly normal.

'It's like flying or floating over the ground.

The unconventional abode hangs over the edge of a slope, giving the illusion it is floating

Architect Sergey Kuznetsov (pictured) spent two nights living in the apartment, which has been installed for the annual Arkhstoyanie arts festival

'For me, it is the most interesting part of the concept. Of course, the interior, the steel surface, but the most exciting thing is the flying element of the construction.'

The 12-tonne tube is kept level thanks to an underground 'reinforcement cage' and a concrete slab at one end, which act as a counterweight.

Inside, the decor is stylish and minimal, with a dark wooden kitchen unit, industrial stools, a dining table, and a double bed.

The walls of the interior are lined with light wood, and a glass door opens up to a balcony, which sits at the most elevated point.

As day moves to night the light interacts with the building's reflective qualities, the verdant forest surrounding it mirrored on its steel surface.

Sergey observed: 'At some points of view you see construction mixing with nature, making it transparent. It is the dual nature of this building, combining contrast and transparency.

'People call it the Pipe, and I think it's perfectly normal,' the architect said

Light interacts with the building's mirrored surface throughout the night and day

'I think partly this is what excites people about it. Most of them feel some kind of magic from it.'

When it came to the build, designing was the easy part - the logistics of the construction, ferrying materials to the rural park, proved trickier.

Sergey admitted: 'We should remember that it is built 250km away from Moscow and in quite wild surroundings, without any construction traditions, without any serious constructions at all.

Designing was the easy part of the build, but the logistics of the construction proved trickier, Sergey said

Those travelling to the Nikola-Lenivets art park can rent the unique apartment for a night

'The production, logistics and installation on the site was far more difficult than the design process.'

Those visiting Nikola-Lenivets art park, which is home to tens of sculptures and architectural installations, can rent the unique apartment for a night.

Sergey has no current plans to market the building, but any prospective buyer is bound to be left feeling like they're floating on air.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seeing Holland’s famous bulbfields as they burst into bloom in spring is one of the world’s most wonderful experiences.

The blossoms blanket the countryside in a riot of vibrant reds, oranges, pinks and yellows – and on our unique five-day, full-board cruise, you’ll witness this spectacle in the company of landscape designer and Gardeners’ World presenter Adam Frost.

Sailing from the capital, Amsterdam, in April 2022 and travelling along Holland’s pretty canals and waterways, you’ll enjoy picturesque views of the bulbfields.

Colourful treat: The magnificent bulbfields in front of a Dutch windmill

You will sail from Amsterdam in April 2022 and travel along Holland’s pretty canals and waterways

OUR SPECIAL GUEST You will be joined by Adam Frost Since setting up his own landscape business in 1996, Adam Frost has designed gardens around the world and won seven gold medals at the Chelsea Flower Show. He is a popular presenter on BBC’s Gardeners’ World, an RHS ambassador for education and founder of the Adam Frost Garden School in Lincolnshire. Adam has written two books – Real Gardens and How To Create Your Garden. Advertisement

You will also discover the historic maritime city of Hoorn, lovely Den Helder, the harbour at Harlingen and the lively port of Lelystad.

You’ll be joined by Adam, who will give a fascinating talk about his life and career, as well as answering all your horticultural questions in a special Q&A session. Adam will accompany you on an unforgettable visit to the world-famous Keukenhof Gardens in Lisse, where more than seven million bulbs are planted each year across 79 acres, including a stunning 800 varieties of tulip.

Adam says: ‘Spring is a magical time of year to visit Keukenhof Gardens when the tulip displays are at their most beautiful. I can’t wait to explore alongside Mail on Sunday readers next year.’

Reasons to book

Visit Keukenhof Gardens with Adam Frost: The Gardens are known as one of the largest and most beautiful in the world, and you’ll enjoy an exclusive visit with Gardeners’ World presenter Adam. As well as countless tulips, Keukenhof features daffodils and hyacinths amid pretty lakes, trees and pavilions.

Private talk with Adam Frost, and free book: Adam Frost will give an exclusive talk about his horticultural career and take part in a Q&A session at Keukenhof Gardens, during which you will be able to ask him your own gardening questions. In addition, each booking will receive a complimentary copy (one per booking) of Adam Frost’s How To Create Your Garden, which he will be happy to sign for you.

Sail in style: You will sail on Arena’s four-star ship MS Arena, which boasts a fitness suite, sun deck, library, lounge bar and restaurant, as well as spacious cabins with floor-to-ceiling panoramic windows and French balconies so you can enjoy the river views from the comfort of your room.

Enjoy time in Amsterdam: You will have the opportunity to wander around the Dutch capital’s picturesque centre, go cycling along the city’s canals or take an optional canal cruise.

Maritime cities: During your memorable trip, you’ll also stop at Hoorn, a former Dutch East India Company base with a charming 17th Century town centre; Den Helder, on the northernmost tip of the Netherlands, with its beautiful nature reserve and a naval base; and Harlingen, which has more than 600 monuments marking its long tradition of fishing and shipping.

Traditional Dutch specialties: Join an optional excursion to the Medemblik Bakery, a quaint two-storey museum where you’ll see how gevulde koek, an almond paste cookie, and speculaas, delicious gingerbread cookies, are made.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

'There's something about the sight of a white-tuxedoed barman serving drinks that gladdens the heart.'

So writes my chum in response to a picture I WhatsApp him of where I'm sitting – the gloriously frescoed Le Bar Josephine at Hotel Lutetia in Paris.

As the dapper chap hands me a splendid glass of Cotes de Provence Chateau Minuty rose, I consider his comment, and find that I absolutely concur.

Sante! The gloriously frescoed Le Bar Josephine at Hotel Lutetia in Paris, which underwent a 200-million-euro (£177million) revamp in 2019

But this is not an isolated incident – every aspect of the Lutetia gladdens said heart.

Of course, the hotel underwent a 200-million-euro (£177million/$245million) revamp in 2019 and carries the prestigious 'palace' rating from the French Government, so its excellence doesn't come as a surprise.

It's a hotel that oozes class throughout – and, for bonus points, has a fascinating history.

The name is a nod to the Roman city of Lutetia, Paris's predecessor, which was centred near the hotel's location in the chic Saint-Germain-des-Pres neighbourhood.

One of the star attractions of this area is Le Bon Marché - the first modern department store.

'The subterranean spa is truly magnificent,' writes Ted, 'like stepping into a Roman emperor's bathing house'

It was originally a novelty shop called Au Bon Marché, which opened in 1838, but it was transformed by Aristide Boucicaut and his wife, Marguerite, in 1852 into a store that would change how Parisians – and then the world - shopped.

The innovations included fixed prices, reduced margins, home delivery, exchange of articles, mail-order sales, white goods, sales, private concerts and a library corner.

In 1907, the board of Le Bon Marché turned its attention to hoteliery and decided to open a luxury hotel directly across from its famous store.

After all, it reasoned, it would be perfect for lodging customers and suppliers.

Hotel Lutetia was born. And it went on to become just as legendary as its department store sibling.

Charles and Yvonne de Gaulle chose it for their wedding night on April 7, 1921, and Nikita Khrushchev, George Pompidou, François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac have all held meetings here.

Other famous names to cross the threshold include Pablo Picasso, Ernest Hemingway, Juliette Gréco, Boris Vian, Jean Cocteau, Paul Morand, Albert Camus, James Joyce, Samuel Beckett, Hubert Nyssen (founder of the Actes Sud publishing house) and Jean-Paul Sartre.

When the hotel shut its doors in 2014 for the revamp it contained no less than 280 listed artworks.

To me, the hotel itself is a work of art – and luxurious down to the finest detail.

Pictured is Ted's room - a junior suite with 'eye-catching split-level floor-standing Art Deco lights, beautiful chaise longue and wonderfully comfortable king-size bed'

Breathtaking features abound, with perhaps the most striking being the marble bathrooms, which can be found in all 184 rooms.

And we're not talking marble flourishes – the floors are marble, the walls are marble, the (double) sinks are marble. And each one-ton bathtub has been carved from a single 1.9-ton block of marble.

This is a hotel singularly dedicated to wanton finery.

We're in a junior suite and after hauling our jaws up from the floor following a sweep of the be-marbled bathroom (with toiletries by Hermès, naturally) we discover that we also love the view of the Eiffel Tower, the liberal use of elegant blue Eucalyptus wood for statement panelling, doors and drawers, the eye-catching split-level floor-standing Art Deco lights, the beautiful chaise longue and the wonderfully comfortable king-size bed.

Every bedroom in Hotel Lutetia features an all-marble bathroom, complete with a one-ton marble bath

A window-facing view of Ted's junior suite, which affords him views of the Eiffel Tower

Ted says of his room, pictured: '[I love] the liberal use of elegant blue Eucalyptus wood for statement panelling, doors and drawers'

Every element in the room, and in fact throughout the hotel, works in perfect harmony to create a wonder-world of refinement.

Each area is ripe for a magazine cover shoot.

Even the corridors, which are beautiful.

They're covered in varnished wood with a mirror finish and brown and cream carpets.

It's a deliberate luxury liner vibe.

Jean-Michel Wilmotte, the architect in charge of the renovations, said: 'We carried through a strong wood theme to add warmth to the entire project - 1910 was the time of the big Transatlantic adventures. Our idea was to draw in some of the atmosphere from those big old yachts by using the varnished wood in every circulation pathway.'

The view from the Saint Germain Penthouse, which was designed by Oscar-winning director Francis Ford Coppola

Charles and Yvonne de Gaulle chose Hotel Lutetia for their wedding night on April 7, 1921, and Nikita Khrushchev, George Pompidou, François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac have all held meetings there

The subterranean spa, meanwhile, is truly magnificent – like stepping into a Roman emperor's bathing house.

Huge pillars line a 17-metre pool and there's a great curved plunge pool in a room to the side with mini-waterfalls.

Our evening meal is also Wowsville.

We dine in Lutetia Brasserie, which is overseen by chef Gérald Passédat, owner of three-Michelin-star Le Petit Nice restaurant in Marseille.

He doesn't cook there – but he does visit regularly I'm told and is the creative force behind the menu.

The seafood is the establishment's forte.

I highly recommend the 'oyster tasting' platter, which comprises oysters from Veules-les-Roses, Utah Beach, and two fines de claire specimens (oysters cultivated in ponds connected to the sea known as 'claires').

And for mains, my turbot with meat juice and capers and mash is very good indeed.

The staff exude excitable bonhomie - as do most of the guests.

Ted and his family dine in Lutetia Brasserie, pictured, and enjoy an 'oyster tasting' platter

Breakfast – in the L'Orangerie – is far more subdued.

The atmosphere is hushed (aside from my two-year-old daughter giving a rousing rendition of Twinkle Twinkle Little Star) as we and our well-heeled fellow guests savour gourmet pain au chocolats and exquisitely cooked Eggs Benedict.

As we leave, the burly security guard in the lobby spots us struggling with our luggage paraphernalia (pram, multiple bags full of toddler toys and so forth) and instantly steps forward to assist.

Then offers to take our photograph on the steps outside after lifting it all into our waiting taxi.

Heart-gladdening to the very end.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Some of the very best times you might remember spending in Italy – the fifth most visited country in the world – are probably based around its ancient towns: frivolous afternoons sitting in sun-blasted piazzas; getting lost in winding streets; searching for the ultimate cherry gelato; soaking up faded frescoes in cool, marble galleries.

But beyond these gems Italy is graced with some 5,000 miles of coastline. Ask any Italian and they will – no doubt – have a favourite beach. These are often found off the beaten track, and will be sewn into the fabric of their family traditions.

The Italian Riviera, on the Ligurian coast, is where the Apennine mountain range seems to tumble into the sea. The historic port of Genoa gives way to understated beach towns, lined with blue-and-white striped parasols and frequented by locals in search of the sun and the freshest cuttlefish spaghetti for lunch.

Old favourite: The 10th Century abbey that overlooks the beach at San Fruttuoso, Liguria

Move south, past the magnificent Portofino, with its super-yachts and high-end boutiques, and you'll soon come to clusters of magical bays and hidden inlets.

One of these is San Fruttuoso, a small cove that you can reach by boat from Portofino or, if you are feeling energetic, by hiking along the hilly terrain. Once you've arrived, all the effort is worth it. It's a one-of-a-kind place, where the beach is dominated by a 10th Century abbey. You can roam around inside and glimpse the glittering sea through its arched Romanesque windows.

Otherwise, the day is spent dipping into emerald-green waters or hopping on to one of the glass-bottom boats to embark on a mini-voyage to see the Christ of the Abyss statue, found submerged a few metres off the coast. Placed there in 1954 to commemorate those lost at sea, Christ's face and arms are raised up towards the light – making for an eerie spectacle.

Once other day-trippers depart, you can actually have the bay all to yourself by renting a simple fisherman's cottage, Casa di Mar, perched high behind the abbey and owned by the Landmark Trust. Wake up early to watch the sun rise over the Golfo Paradiso and you'll see the rolling waves, scudded with clouds of foam, light up for miles in front of you. Price from £763 for four nights for four (landmarktrust.org.uk).

Cala Mar Morto in Tuscany is dotted with rock pools and it's perfect for snorkelling

Spiaggia di Frontone on Ponza Island is lapped by a vivid kingfisher-blue sea. From here you can hire a small boat, drop anchor in sheltered coves and swim into the Pilate's Grottoes – a series of enchanting, underwater caves

In Tuscany, try bypassing the area's beloved rolling fields and medieval hillside towns, and move on to the wilder Monte Argentario peninsula in the Maremma region. A former island, it is now connected to the mainland by two strips of land – although it still feels wonderfully remote from other Tuscan tourist haunts. Here, fortresses, steep cliffs and Mount Argentario itself shield a necklace of sandy beaches.

Cala Mar Morto, a 20-minute drive along the coast from the elegant seaside town of Porto Santo Stefano, translates to mean Dead Sea and is so-called because of its placid, crystal-like waters. Dotted with rock pools, it's perfect for snorkelling. Alternatively, hire a canoe to paddle around Isola Rossa, a giant red rock facing the beach.

For a peaceful summer retreat, book the restored farmhouse, L'Agrumento dell'Isola. Whitewashed rooms are scented with sea breezes and citrus fruits, wafting in from the lemon and orange trees outside. Follow the tree-lined path to discover your own slice of beach, from £1,439 per week for two (tuscanynowandmore.com).

When in Rome, do as the Romans do when the temperatures rise and leave the city. Spiaggia di Frontone is found on Ponza Island, a favourite holiday destination among locals. It's an hour's drive south-west of the city, and then a ferry ride across to the main port town. The beach, on the north west of the island, is lapped by a vivid kingfisher-blue sea. From here you can hire a small boat, drop anchor in sheltered coves and swim into the Pilate's Grottoes – a series of enchanting, underwater caves.

At lunchtime, follow the path up into the rocks and you'll find the Associazione Culturale Cala Frontone, a casual little trattoria serving seasonal, rustic dishes such as fried courgette flowers and octopus with black pepper potatoes (assocalafrontone.it).

Fringed by the Cilento National Park, Capo Palinuro is a rocky headland, surrounded by deep blue grottoes and wide, sandy beaches

You'll know you've arrived at the village of Maratea in the rugged region of Basilicata when you spot the Christ the Redeemer statue (top left) looking down from the top of Monte San Biagio

With its breathtaking clifftop towns such as Positano and Ravello, the Amalfi Coast is the jewel in the crown of Italy's coastline. But further south – and away from the crowds – is the Cilento Coast, one which the Italians have kept to themselves.

Fringed by the Cilento National Park, Capo Palinuro is a rocky headland, surrounded by deep blue grottoes and wide, sandy beaches, such as the secluded Spiaggia della Marinella. While away the hours basking in the sun on the sand, rent umbrellas and sunbeds at the lido or take off in a pedalo to find your own private cove.

When it is time to bed down for the night, head along the craggy coast – bordered by the valleys and peaks of the Dolomiti Lucane – to the village of Maratea in the rugged region of Basilicata. You'll know you've arrived when you spot the Christ the Redeemer statue looking down from the top of Monte San Biagio. Check in to the atmospheric La Locanda delle Donne Monarche, carved out of an 18th Century convent, and tuck into a traditional Maccheroni di Fuoco – home-made pasta deliciously laced with chilli. From £104 per room per night (locandamonache.com).

The atmospheric La Locanda delle Donne Monarche hotel is carved out of an 18th Century convent

Calabria, in the toe of Italy, is often overlooked by tourists for the more manicured destinations of Sicily or Sardinia. But the region has a faded beauty and warm-hearted authenticity loved by many Italians. Known as the Coast of the Gods, it also has a unique topography, where the Tyrrhenian and Ionian Seas merge.

With 500 miles of coastline, there are many standout beaches to be found, such as Spiaggia di Grotticelle, an arc of cotton-white sand that you reach down steps carved out of the cliff face. Overlooked by the lighthouse on Capo Vaticano and surrounded by high bluffs, the bay with its natural shelter and warm clear sea to bathe in feels blissfully cocoon-like.

Calabria, in the toe of Italy, is often overlooked by tourists for the more manicured destinations of Sicily or Sardinia. But the region has a faded beauty and warm-hearted authenticity loved by many Italians

You'll soon be shaken out of your sun-kissed stupor by a visit to the buzzy seaside town of Tropea. It's beautifully scenic – from the clifftop sanctuary of Santa Maria dell'Isola (a 6th Century Benedictine monastery) to the cobblestone-lined old town. It's also where you'll find the chic Villa Paola, a boutique hotel converted from a former monastery, set in its own organic Mediterranean gardens. From £180 per room per night (villapaolatropea.it).

Found in the heel of Italy, and extending up the eastern coast, Puglia is known for its sun-baked vistas, curious-looking trulli houses and an abundance of traditional food, such as orecchiette pasta and taralli – a mini, twisted breadstick flecked with fennel. It also has some of the best beaches on the mainland, stretching from Salento in the south to Gargano in the north.

The buzzy seaside town of Tropea is beautifully scenic with the clifftop sanctuary of Santa Maria dell'Isola (a 6th Century Benedictine monastery) being one of the must-visit spots

Stairway to heaven: The walkway down to the beach at Dune di Campomarino, Puglia

As a base to explore the province of Puglia, Villa Minni, a stylish, trullo-style house, is just a 15-minute drive north, and comes with its own herb garden and pool

For total seclusion, Dune di Campomarino, close to the village of Maruggio, is firmly off the tourist trail. Found on Puglia's Salento peninsula, high sand dunes and fragrant juniper bushes give a stunning contrast to the azure Ionian sea. As a base to explore the province, Villa Minni, a stylish, trullo-style house, is just a 15-minute drive north, and comes with its own herb garden and pool. From £2,501, for a seven-night stay for six (oliverstravels.com).

On the Adriatic side, Torre Guaceto, close to Brindisi, is a protected nature reserve and remains quiet and untouched. It is surrounded by marshes and wetlands, and stretches for miles, so the only crowds you'll face will be flocks of egrets and herons flying overhead.

Capture the bare-foot beauty of the area with a stay at Rocco Forte's Masseria Torre Maizza, worth the 30-minute drive on towards the town of Bari. The 16th Century traditional house is surrounded by olive groves and has exquisite rooms designed by Olga Polizzi, Rocco Forte's designer sister. Best of all, the rooftop bar is just the place for a cold Apulian Negroni. From £86 per night for two (roccofortehotels.com).

Further north, off the coast of Gargano, Italy's Tremeti Islands are another untapped source of joy. Once a penal colony, the five islands now offer an intoxicating escape for travellers coming from the mainland, and you can easily sail across by ferries which leave from five different port towns. San Domino – known as The Pearl of the Adriatic – has the only sandy beach in the archipelago: Cala delle Arene.

Italy's Tremeti Islands are an untapped source of joy. Once a penal colony, the five islands now offer an intoxicating escape for travellers coming from the mainland

Named after the area's traditional fisherman-hut structures, which look like Thai stilt houses built over the sea, the Trabocchi Coast in Abruzzo is perhaps Italy's most unsung destination

You can trek across the whole island through aromatic pine woods in just two hours, while divers can roam the ocean's depths to find a Roman shipwreck 75ft underwater off the beach at Cala Zio Cesare. Seafood here is sublime, and the lobster tagliatelle will be the tastiest you'll ever have. It can be found at Ristorante Da Pio, in the main village.

Named after the area's traditional fisherman-hut structures, which look like Thai stilt houses built over the sea, the Trabocchi Coast in Abruzzo is perhaps Italy's most unsung destination. You can see a few of the odd-looking constructions from the quiet Spiaggia di San Nicola beach, just north of the medieval town of Vasto. The beach is one of the most unspoilt along this stretch and is found by following old coastal railway tracks from the main road.

Ancona in Le Marche is just a two-hour drive north, but, as is typical throughout Italy, the regional differences are stark. In early summer the countryside is alive with fields of nodding sunflowers while its shimmering coastline, the Riviera del Conero, can be as impressive as the Amalfi Coast.

Spiaggia del Due Sorelle is one of the area's standout beaches, named after two rocky outposts – the 'two sisters' – that rise out of the sea. The beach can be reached only by boat, but the reward is crystalline waters and shade under limestone cliffs. Nearby is the pretty town of Numana.

Head to the main square and La Gelateria La Morelli, an ice-cream parlour that opened in 1927. Its window will lure you in with its pastel-hued, creamy confections such as pistachio, melon, ginger and strawberry. If you fancied working your way through the whole rainbow of flavours, the shop offers a basic B&B – making it the ideal bolthole for sweet dreamers. From £65 per night for two (morellicamerenumana.it).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

It's not just the grand slam courts that are showstoppers in the world of tennis.

We've scoured the planet and found 10 tennis courts in unlikely places that all have (or had) the wow factor.

For instance, there's the jaw-dropping court on the paradise Emerald Cay Estate island in Turks and Caicos, which appears to float on the water; the remote tennis court on Scotland’s Isle of Harris, and the regulation-size court that hotel guests can use that's been laid out on a rocky cliff face on Italy's breathtaking Amalfi Coast.

There are also courts in the Arizona desert and in the middle of the African wilderness.

We also discovered some mind-blowing 'stunt' tennis courts - such as the one that appeared 692ft up on the helipad of the Burj Al Arab hotel.

Scroll down for pictures of courts that are undeniably ace.

Practice for a pretty penny – in paradise: A stay on the jaw-dropping Emerald Cay Estate island in Turks and Caicos costs a whopping £25,874.09 ($35,714) a night. But for that princely sum guests can work on their shots on an incredible tennis court that almost seems to float on the water. And after a few rallies they can relax in one of eight bedrooms, sip wine from a 6,000-bottle cellar or lay out in the sun on one of two perfectly formed beaches. Visit www.islandescapestci.com/villas/emerald-cay

Dubai's striking Burj Al Arab hotel created the loftiest tennis court in the world in 2005 - on its 211m- (692ft) high helipad. The temporary court was constructed ahead of the Dubai Duty Free Men's Open and former Wimbledon champs Andre Agassi and Roger Federer were invited to break-in the grass and play a match on it. Federer described the experience as 'unbelieveable'

Remote rally: Bunabhainneadar tennis court on Scotland’s Isle of Harris is one of the most isolated in the world. It was built with £62,000 and 2,000 tons of rock from the Clisham which, with a height of 799m (2,621ft), is the highest mountain on Harris. The court overlooks Loch Tarbet and has attracted visitors such as former British number one Tim Henman and Andy Murray’s mother, Judy, who said: ‘Sheep on the court is your only hazard’

Serve a sea view: Guests at Il San Pietro Di Positano, a luxe resort built on a cliff face on Italy’s stunning Amalfi Coast, can descend 384 steps from the main building and play on a regulation-sized tennis court overlooking the Mediterranean

Fancy doubles in the desert? Book into Enchantment Resort in Sedona, Arizona, and you can play on three courts against a backdrop of the towering red rocks of Boynton Canyon. The hotel says its courts are available for casual games and that tennis pros and experts offer instruction from beginner to advanced levels

Grab your racket and sunglasses for a knockabout on the dazzling neon-pink tennis court at the legendary Pikes Ibiza hotel, which randomly features a giant climbable roller skate in one corner. It’s just one of many eclectic design elements and Instagram-worthy photo-ops at the hotel, whose past guests include George Michael, Freddie Mercury, Idris Elba and Zoe Ball

And the crowd goes wild! If you fancy a match set in the timeless wonder of the untouched African wilderness book a stay at Singita Castleton in South Africa, which has a tennis court and pavilion in its tranquil grounds. Players can cool down afterwards in the nearby swimming pool. Stays cost from ZAR 266 400 (£13,461/$18,531) a night for a lodge accommodating up to eight people

Private club Tennis De La Cavalerie in Paris has a heated court on the seventh floor of an Art Deco building that’s also home to an Aston Martin car dealership and located between the Eiffel Tower and the Trocadero Gardens. The honeycomb ceiling was built with $2milllion and 1,400 pieces of wood after a storm destroyed the original one in 1999

Blessed backhand: In 2016 the deconsecrated Church of Sao Paolo in Milan, which features 16th-century paintings of Paul the Apostle, had a fully functioning tennis court fitted as part of an installation by artist Asad Raza called Untitled (Plot For Dialogue)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sixty million people around the world watched the raising of the Mary Rose in 1982.

And the story of that Tudor warship, which sank during the Battle of the Solent on July 19, 1545, continues.

On Monday, a new immersive experience called Experience 1545 — When Their World Ended launches at the museum in Portsmouth’s Historic Dockyard.

Sixty million people around the world watched the raising of the Mary Rose in 1982

Visitors are greeted with a voiceover by Dame Judi Dench who recalls her experience watching the ship being raised, before an actor playing Henry VIII sets the scene of the battle.

You then proceed into a narrow room where projections on the walls show an interpretation of the sailors’ experience as the ship went down.

On that day Henry VIII watched as his prized warship sank while leading an attack to repel a French Invasion fleet. Of the 500 men aboard, it is thought only 35 survived.

It’s dramatic stuff, after which the exhibition continues as normal with its views of the preserved remains of the Mary Rose.

The ship’s wreck was located in 1971 and after ten years of excavation, the hull was finally raised, producing the largest collection of Tudor artefacts in the world.

There are medieval longbows, swords, clothing, canons, tankards, bowls, jewellery, musical instruments and even the complete skeleton of a dog.

A new immersive experience is launching at the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth’s Historic Dockyard

These items reveal secrets of Tudor England and give an insight into what life was like in the 16th century. Displays reveal where crew members came from, explain ideas about ship construction during the reign of Henry VIII and shed light on the mystery of exactly why the Mary Rose sank. A couple of hours is needed to explore the full story and there’s plenty of interactive displays children will enjoy.

The seaside location doesn’t hurt either as the Historic Dockyard is a spectacular setting with views of HMS Victory, HMS Warrior and plenty of other attractions on offer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The first signs of a crackdown on 'rip-off' travel test companies emerged last night as the competition watchdog vowed to help swiftly tackle rogue firms.

The Competition and Markets Authority said it was working on imminent 'interim' measures to ensure families can get a well-earned foreign break or reunite with loved ones abroad.

And it warned it would 'not hesitate to take enforcement action' against providers flouting the law and not giving customers what they paid for.

More than 400 private firms are listed on the Government's website for holidaymakers. Double-jabbed travellers from countries on the green and amber lists must book one PCR test to be taken within two days of arrival in Britain. Non-fully vaccinated passengers must book another test to take on day eight when returning from amber nations.

The Competition and Markets Authority said it was working on imminent 'interim' measures to ensure families can get a well-earned foreign break or reunite with loved ones abroad [Stock image]

On Tuesday, the Mail revealed how some firms are charging more than five times the price of a return flight to Europe for each swab.

Yesterday, among the 426 private firms on the Government-approved list, the average price for a single post-arrival PCR swab was £91. Advertised prices range from £20 to as much as £400 each.

Scrapping VAT on PCR's 'would give economy a £5bn boost' Axing VAT on Covid travel tests could boost the UK economy to the tune of £5billion, new modelling shows. The figures were based on the estimated 6.7million Britons who would be encouraged to go on holiday if PCR tests were cheaper. The study from the University of Hull Business School challenges the Treasury's reported argument that VAT from tests, pictured, is an important source of income amid soaring pandemic debts. The research projects that cheaper tests could boost spending generated by outbound international travel from £9.4billion to £14.7billion for this quarter, or July to September. In turn, the overall tax take in relation to holiday spending could rise from £1.92billion to £2.06billion. Avi Lasarow, boss of testing firm Project Screen by Prenetics, said VAT on tests was a 'stealth tax' and that companies could drive down prices if it was removed. A spokesman for the Government said it was working with private providers to try to reduce costs. Advertisement

The Daily Mail has campaigned for weeks for a fairer deal for would-be travellers by calling for test prices to be driven down and unscrupulous practices stamped out.

It comes after Health Secretary Sajid Javid referred the travel test market to the CMA amid growing reports of 'rip-off' prices and travellers receiving tests and results several days late.

Some have not received them at all, while others have wrongly been sent another person's results.

It has led to some having to extend their quarantine period or even miss flights. Dozens of complaints have been made to Action Fraud.

Mr Javid has asked the CMA to conduct a 'rapid' review of 'exploitative practices' among private providers of PCR tests.

Yesterday, the watchdog released a statement following suggestions it may not complete its work until the summer break is over, which sparked an angry backlash from MPs and travel industry chiefs as many hope to travel before schools reopen in September.

George Lusty of the CMA has acknowledged that it's a 'pressing issue' and added: 'That is why we are providing ongoing support to [the health department], including on steps that could be considered in the interim before the rest of our work on the PCR testing market is concluded.'

The watchdog will investigate whether private firms are breaching consumer law, what wider structural problems exist in the market and the action ministers should take.

The move was welcomed last night. Rory Boland, of Which? Travel, said 'it's encouraging to see the CMA recognise the urgency of this issue'.

The CMA has powers to fine companies, take them to court or it can order them to change their procedures.

But a source said the watchdog believes that the most effective and swift action is likely to be through providing advice to Mr Javid about the actions he should take.

This is because more formal CMA investigations usually take place over long periods.

The Department of Health said: 'While we await the CMA's advice, the Government will continue to ensure testing providers are held to account by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service. Companies that fail to meet the high standards required will be removed from our list of approved suppliers without hesitation.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

In the days of the Poldarks, Bodmin — Cornwall’s county town — was a destination. The residences of the Georgian mine-owners were arranged in handsome streets and squares; there was a castle, a corn exchange and an assizes. And for when the Cornish were being more than usually truculent, there was a vast jail complex.

It had 74 ft granite walls with gargoyles and two massive cell wings.

When the mines closed and the big money fled to the coast, the now Grade II-listed jail became a white elephant. But its new owner — Russian millionaire Timur Gorman — saw things differently. Bodmin Jail Hotel’s £60 million architectural transformation is sensational.

Bodmin's Grade II-listed jail has had a 'sensational' £60 million makeover to become a swanky hotel

Today’s Bodmin jail inmates occupy three knocked-through cells, rather than one

An underfloor-heated bathroom replaces the slopping-out pail and communal shower

You arrive in the exercise yard (in which previous residents concluded their stay on the end of a hangman’s rope) to find that the two cell blocks have been connected by sleek modern inserts, containing the lift shafts.

The reception area, the whole floor of one cell block, is simple and striking, lit by the original full-length skylight.

Around it, on two upper walkways, are the 70 guest rooms. You’ll know the layout from TV’s Porridge.

Bodmin Jail Hotel is owned by Russian millionaire Timur Gorman, who saw an opportunity to turn a white elephant into something special

The reception area, the whole floor of one cell block, is simple and striking, says the Inspector, lit by the original full-length skylight

Today’s inmates occupy three knocked-through cells, rather than one, and an underfloor-heated bathroom replaces the slopping-out pail and communal shower.

The thickness of the walls and the high viewless windows looking up at ‘the little tent of blue that some men call the sky’ — as Oscar Wilde put it — provokes a humorous unease.

To reach the restaurant you pass the bar. Its Cornish mixologist also holds forth on the ghosts who haunt the building and I bet his customers lap it up, as they do the à la carte menu in the adjacent former chapel.

The Inspector says that the Cornish mixologist at Bodmin Jail Hotel 'holds forth on the ghosts who haunt the building'

To the people of neglected Bodmin, the hotel must seem like a lifeboat. I drink the local Camel Valley hock, rightly celebrated and of a standard, and price, to rival the French and German vineyards. And the bouillabaisse is utterly delicious.

I sleep peacefully, despite each room carrying a photograph of an unluckier historic occupant of the same room.

On leaving, I still can’t work out at whom the hotel is aimed, but if the jail attraction takes off, then the coach parties may follow. And Bodmin could become a destination once more.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Not many cities have a milkmaid to thank for their fame. But in AD995, Lindisfarne monks were wandering the north-east with the 200-year-old body of Saint Cuthbert, and the plan was to lay his coffin in ‘Dun Holm’ (Durham’s Anglo-Saxon name).

Completely lost, they chanced upon a milkmaid who was seeking her missing dun cow (‘dun’ means ‘hill’), which she’d last seen in Dun Holm.

They followed her to a ‘wooded hill-island’, laid their coffin down and set about building something to house it.

Spiritual haven: Durham Cathedral, where many pilgrims head to see St Cuthbert’s shrine

This was to become today’s Romanesque Durham Cathedral, completed in 1133 after 40 years. Together with an adjacent Norman castle, it became a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1986. All roads in the city’s historic centre are cobbled, steep and lead to this cathedral.

One is called Dun Cow Lane and it’s from here, during a history walking tour, that I captured my first full glimpse of this magnificent church. Look closely and you’ll spot a statue of that milkmaid and cow on the sandstone facade. It’s Saint Cuthbert the pilgrims come to see, as well as the stained glass rose window.

Legend has it that his skeleton is still perfectly preserved and has the power to heal. I ask a church volunteer if Cuthbert’s healing powers have waned. ‘Ah,’ she smiles knowingly. ‘That depends on what you believe.’ I have an achy back and arm and, as I while away time by his shrine, I’m prepared to be open-minded.

The central tower can be climbed (325 steps up a narrow, spiral stairwell), offering giddying views of the cloisters (where Harry Potter was filmed) and the surrounding region. The River Wear loops around the cathedral’s hill in an oxbow.

The Daily Mail's Jo Kessel enjoyed a serene walk along the River Wear, which loops around the cathedral

Magical: Durham Cathedral's ancient cloisters doubled as a film location for Hogwarts in the Harry Potter movies

TRAVEL FACTS Durham Cathedral’s tower climb costs £5.50 (durhamcathedral.co.uk). Guided history tours start from £25pp (ilestours.co.uk/durham-tours). Doubles at the Radisson Blu Hotel start from £99 on a B&B basis (radissonblu.co.uk/hotel-durham). London to Durham LNER trains from £44 return (lner.co.uk). For further information visit thisisdurham.com. Advertisement

Over the centuries, Normans and Scots failed to conquer Durham — heads of the most handsome Scottish warriors were paraded on sticks around town.

Many believed Durham’s success in battle had nothing to do with the city’s defensive hilltop position and everything to do with Saint Cuthbert.

In fury, William the Conqueror demanded Cuthbert’s coffin be opened, threatening to kill everyone if the corpse was not intact. But as he approached the saint’s unwrapped body, William collapsed from a seizure and, terrified, galloped out of town.

Henry VIII was the next to interfere with the saint — in around 1539 his men looted the shrine and smashed it open with a sledgehammer.

In so doing they broke one of Cuthbert’s legs, but found him otherwise intact, as if he was sleeping, with stubble on his chin.

The serenity of the River Wear offers respite from such dramas. A one-hour riverside walk circles the cathedral.

Trees arc over the river, their boughs reflected in the water, with only the occasional duck, swan or passing row-boat for company. Durham is a collegiate university town and colleges have their own boathouses.

Students give the city a buzz, and a couple of university-run attractions are open to the public: the beautifully landscaped Botanic Garden and the Oriental Museum.

The latter is devoted to art and archaeology from Northern Africa and Asia, with Egyptian mummies and an 18th-century Qing dynasty bed, no less.

Don’t leave without trying a couple of saintly dishes. One is a ‘St Cuthbert’s Slice’ — think Bakewell tart meets almond cake. It’s a safely-guarded recipe and only served in the cathedral cafe.

The other is monkfish cheeks with monk’s beard at The Cellar Door restaurant in Saddler Street.

As for my aching back and arm? Healed, of course.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Long sandy beaches, bustling resorts, bucket-and-spade family holidays – this is how most people think of Majorca, the largest of the Balearic Islands, beloved of Britons since it first welcomed tourists in the 1950s.

Yet away from the cluttered developments, there is a different island to discover – from the forested peaks of the Tramuntana mountains to the central plains and the lesser-known north-east coast, there are perfect villages and towns to discover where life goes on much as it always has.

Many of the prettiest villages are found in the Tramuntana, the jagged backbone of Majorca, a dramatic mountain range stretching for 55 miles from Andratx in the south to Cap Formentor in the north. The best way to explore is by car – particularly if you want to reach some of the most remote villages – and although roads can be small and winding, they’re generally in good condition.

Bay of plenty: Majorca has perfect villages and towns to discover where life goes on much as it always has. Pictured is Port de Soller

Most visitors make straight for Deia, arguably the most beautiful village. Whichever way you approach, either along the vertiginous coastal road from Soller or north from Valldemossa, the first glimpse is unforgettable – a cluster of auburn-hued houses and terracotta roofs clinging to the mountainside, dotted with cypress trees and palms.

Beloved of writers and artists since the poet Robert Graves lived in the village from 1929 until his death in 1985, the streets are filled with art galleries, cafes and some of the island’s best restaurants. Reserve a table on the terrace at Es Raco d’es Teix (esracodesteix.es) for wonderful views.

Further south and much less well known, sleepy Banyalbufar is one of the last remaining undeveloped coastal villages on Majorca. The views are the big draw here, with ancient terraces stepping down towards the sea.

Unforgettable: The poet Robert Graves lived in the village of Deia from 1929 until his death in 1985

Take some time to drink in the views and a glass of local Malvasia wine at the San Tomas restaurant, or stay a night or two at Son Borguny (sonborguny.com) – a 15th Century townhouse.

If you’re not keen on mountain roads, the good news is that some of the island’s most charming villages are accessible on foot.

Leave the car in the leafy town of Soller and follow the ancient path up to Fornalutx. The seven-mile walk takes in the hamlet of Binibassi and gives spectacular views of the Puig Major – Majorca’s highest peak.

Fornalutx, with shady, cobbled streets that date back more than 1,000 years, has been voted the prettiest village in Spain. Pottering around the flower-dotted alleys is a lovely way to spend an hour or two, and there are several places to stop for a leisurely lunch.

Es Turo has wonderful mountain views from the terrace and serves up classic Spanish dishes – the seafood fideua (similar to paella but made with noodles instead of rice) is legendary (esturo.com). If you want to stay a night or two, Can Reus (canreusmallorca.com) is an enchanting boutique hotel.

An aerial view of the Tramuntana mountains near Banyalbufar, one of the last remaining undeveloped coastal villages on Majorca

From Fornalutx, follow a different route back to Soller on foot, taking in the smaller and quieter village of Biniaraix.

From the centre of the village, waymarked trails stretch out across the wooded hills, and the tables outside Bar Bodega are often busy with hikers and rock-climbers, filling up on pa amb oli (a classic dish of bread smothered in garlic and tomatoes).

If driving on mountain roads doesn’t faze you, follow the winding lane from Alaro to Orient, one of the island’s most remote villages. Although it has a population of just 30, in the summer months and at weekends it buzzes with walkers and Palma residents who flock to the trio of restaurants that serve some wonderful local dishes.

Pottering around the flower-dotted alleys of Fornalutx is a lovely way to spend an hour or two, writes Annabelle

Fideua is a classic Spanish dish similar to paella but made with noodles instead of rice

Stay a night or two at the Finca Hotel Son Palou (sonpalou.com), which has 15 elegant bedrooms, and tuck into beautifully presented dishes in its cosy restaurant.

In the far north of the Tramuntana, many visitors miss the inland town of Pollenca. A long-time hub for artists and writers, drawn to the beauty of the area, the town has a sophisticated atmosphere and an impressive square fringed with cafes and restaurants. Bag a table at Q11 (q11restaurant.com), which is renowned for its refined tapas and wine list.

Capdepera, on the north-east coast, is an under-the-radar gem. A clutch of saffron-coloured houses and alleys are dominated by a spectacular 14th Century fortress said to have been built by King Jaime II at the time of pirate attacks.

Visit on a Wednesday when the market is in town, selling everything from food to patterned ceramics, jewellery and clothes.

Stop for lunch at La Fragua (lafragua.es) and book a romantic night at Cases de Son Barbassa, a hotel overlooking the sea, just outside the village (sonbarbassa.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

What a turn-around. On our previous visit five years ago, there was little positive to report about Oakley Court.

It was a corporate monstrosity with ugly added wings, all in need of salvation — and it has come to pass.

Built in 1859, this imposing Gothic mansion sits in 35 acres overlooking the Thames upstream from Windsor (the Queen once dropped in to witness swan upping, the annual census of unmarked mute swans — which all belong to her) and has been the setting for TV shows and films such as The Rocky Horror Picture Show and Tommy Steele’s Half A Sixpence.

Oakley Court, built in 1859, sits in 35 acres overlooking the River Thames, upstream from Windsor

The Inspector admired the sitting rooms (left and right). A fortune was spent on the hotel during lockdown and a ‘rebranding exercise’ is now in progress

During lockdown, a fortune was spent on it and a ‘rebranding exercise’ is now in progress, says one of the young staff, most of whom wear white T-shirts and are unfailingly cheerful.

Hence the link-up with Soho House, which has arrived in the form of a pop-up in the Summer River House across the main lawn, with a trendy tent, restaurant and bar, sun loungers, fire pits and DJ sets.

Almost half of the 100 or so rooms have been refurbished.

The Inspector writes: 'It was a corporate monstrosity with ugly added wings, all in need of salvation — and it has come to pass'

The Inspector believes Oakley Court's refurbishment 'shows what some love and lots of money can achieve'

The Inspector found there was 'little positive to report about Oakley Court' upon his last visit, but was impressed by its makeover. There is talk that an outside swimming pool will be fitted on the grounds in the coming months

TRAVEL FACTS Oakley Court, Windsor Rd, Windsor. SL4 5UR. Doubles from £275. For more information call 01753 609988. Rating: Advertisement

Last time, I overlooked the car park even though the hotel was almost empty; on this occasion I am billeted with a river view, albeit after paying a hefty £325 for the privilege — and that’s without breakfast.

There is a touch of Soho House in the room, too: bare wood floor; drinks tray with cocktail shaker, ice bucket and bottles of ready-mixed Negroni; Roberts radio; complimentary soft drinks in the fridge; a picnic hamper with posh crisps and jelly babies.

In the coming months, a spa will be added and there is talk of an outside swimming pool.

We like the sitting rooms (one with a Japanese theme) and conservatory— especially the tables dressed in crisp white cotton spilling out onto the terrace.

It’s not quite warm enough to eat alfresco, so instead we adjourn to the Parlour restaurant.

Its all-day menu is enticing, with options to share, pizzas and some ‘premium bites’ such as 30 grams’ worth of King’s Platinum caviar for £84.

Oakley Court is a work in progress — but already it shows what some love and lots of money can achieve.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The motto suited the setting. ‘Dat nuh bother me’ was the message on Linky’s car windscreen. Linky was short for ‘Lincoln’ and, like the former U.S. President, he was a man who took matters in his stride.

‘If someone stressing about my business, I just say “dat nuh bother me” and that’s that.’ Fair enough.

We were on a tour with Linky across the volcanic landscape of Carriacou, with sweeping views of coral-lined beaches as we rose on narrow winding lanes that, in usual years, attract thousands of people.

Laid-back: A breathtaking view over Carriacou’s main town, Hillsborough

This laid-back attitude is understandable. In Carriacou and neighbouring island Petite Martinique, both part of the nation of Grenada, there is yet to be a single case of Covid.

Green lights all round. And last week Virgin Atlantic and British Airways began direct flights to Grenada from the UK. Tourism normally accounts for about 40 per cent of the country’s economy; locals have been forced to fall back on agriculture and fishing.

Grenada, known as the ‘Spice Island’, is one of the world’s main nutmeg producers and a big source of cocoa and bananas.

Carriacou has a population of 7,000 and is seven miles long and two miles wide. It's currently on the UK's green list

‘Business is way down, man,’ said Cuthbert, owner of Cuthbert’s Bar, a clapboard structure by the blissfully quiet seafront in Hillsborough, Carriacou’s main town. He was watching the West Indies play Australia on TV and drinking a Stag beer with his only customer, a friend named Kester, a retired construction worker.

For a while, with the waves lapping and pelicans swooping, Cuthbert, Kester and I discussed cricket, in particular the merits of West Indian greats Brian Lara and Sir Garfield Sobers. The pandemic seemed a long way away, although the subject did, after a while, crop up.

‘Vaccines? I’m not taking a chance, man,’ said Kester. Cuthbert felt the same, as did Uthan, another construction worker. ‘I don’t trust jabs,’ he said, waving his bottle of stout as though underlining his point. Such views are not held by a minority. Only about a fifth of Grenadians have been vaccinated.

Heavenly: Pictured is the beautiful sandy beach and blue sea at Anse La Roche Bay on Carriacou island

Women carry fruit trays on ‘Spice Island’ Grenada

In a country of 112,000 people, where 164 Covid cases have been reported (one death), the attitude of many is indeed ‘dat nuh bother me’ regarding jabs. Overseas visitors, however, must be fully vaccinated and take a PCR test before flying out and another (costing £73) on arrival, ahead of quarantine for 48 hours while waiting for the result.

Is all this worth it? The answer, on the basis of my visit this week: absolutely.

After self-isolation on the main island of Grenada at the Calabash Hotel, just outside St George’s, Grenada’s capital — spent beside an empty palm tree-lined beach — it was a short hop north on a 90-minute ferry to Carriacou. If Grenada is remote, its sister islands feel off the map. Carriacou has a population of 7,000. It is seven miles long and two miles wide.

There are a couple of dozen guesthouses and simple hotels, the best being the 22-room Mermaid Hotel on the beach at Hillsborough. It is worth paying £40 extra for one of the top rooms. This was where I stayed, amid a handful of other guests who were on staycations from Grenada.

The bar is an enjoyable spot to ‘lime’ (have a drink, in the local parlance) before heading off elsewhere. Our first stop-off with super-cool Linky was the boatbuilding village of Windward, where workers were refining a hull in between breaks at the neighbouring Hot Bush Bar (Stag beers £1).

Next was the military base where Americans arrived during the 1983 invasion to end a hardline Marxist revolution. In the event, the small local force surrendered peacefully.

Then we visited several of the old slave plantation houses.

Some of these are now in ruins and at the small museum in Hillsborough you can learn more about this dark past involving the French and, later, the British, who took over Grenada in 1763 and granted it independence in 1974.

Also look out for the collection of vivid works depicting island scenes by the talented local artist Canute Caliste, who died in 2005. The Queen, no less, is a fan and has some of his works. A few are still available, costing about £1,000.

The ferry from Carriacou to Petite Martinique takes 20 minutes. It is shared with islanders, mainly working in fishing, as well as the doctor and — quite often — nuns in blue and white robes who attend to the sick and provide religious education for children. You are a stone’s throw from the neighbouring island of Petit St Vincent — part of St Vincent and the Grenadines, where Oprah Winfrey and Bill Gates are said to rent villas — at the little dock on the much more down-to-earth Petite Martinique (population 900).

Goats roam free by the quayside and it did not take long to explore the hilly interior, with its strong cultural ties to Africa dating from slavery days. These find their form in ‘big drum’ celebrations at festivals throughout the year and during flamboyant weddings.

The Daily Mail's Tom Chesshyre recalls listening to the waves lapping and watching pelicans swooping on Carriacou

The African-influenced dish saraca is served at a restaurant of the same name near the docks: chicken or mutton with dumplings, peas, green bananas and rice.

There are guest houses on Petite Martinique, but most visitors merely make a day trip. Then it is back to the ‘metropolis’ of Carriacou, where taking it slow and easy seems to be the local religion.

A couple more Caribs with Linky, Rani and Kester at Cuthbert’s as the sun sets in a blaze of pink, orange and peach across the silvery sea and suddenly all the jabs, tests and forms of Covid-days travel, well, they don’t seem so tiresome after all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

‘I needed to prove to myself that I can still do it,’ says Alex Polizzi, who, after a decade telling hapless hoteliers how to up their game in Channel 5’s The Hotel Inspector, is putting the finishing touches to her new project.

‘And,’ she adds, ‘it was a chance to do something with my mother.’

Few hoteliers have been as influential as Alex’s mother Olga. Tresanton, which opened in St Mawes in 1998, was instrumental in giving Cornwall its high style reputation. And The Endsleigh in Devon, which Alex opened for her mother in 2005, brought significant verve to the country house hotel scene.

Alex Polizzi's latest project is The Star in the East Sussex village of Alfriston

‘I needed to prove to myself that I can still do it,’ says Alex, who has spent a decade telling hapless hoteliers how to up their game in Channel 5’s The Hotel Inspector. Pictured is The Star's library

The Star is a truly British melange of a 15th Century inn plus later additions and modern extensions, writes Sarah

The food? Chef Tim Kensett has cast his net over nearby countryside and coast for his menu, says Sarah

Sarah describes the rooms as a love letter to the English countryside and its craft traditions

For the past 18 months, the pair have been renovating The Star, a truly British melange of a 15th Century inn plus later additions and modern extensions in the East Sussex village of Alfriston. It was once part of Trusthouse Forte, the group owned by Charles Forte, Olga’s father and Alex’s grandfather.

The Star isn’t just a family affair – it’s a village affair too. The local blacksmith has made the table lights, the curtain-maker lives nearby, and the books in the hotel library come from Much Ado, the bookshop four doors down.

The backbone of The Star’s employees are local as well. ‘My assistant manager has five grandchildren and they’re all working here,’ says Alex. ‘So is our painter’s daughter and the plumber’s son.’

The Star has 30 bedrooms, all different and decorated with wallpaper and gentle spring colours

The Star is in one of Sussex’s key wine-growing regions – and to help guests explore it, the hotel has Panama hats and Rockfish wellington boots in every size to borrow

The furniture goes from antique to mid-century and modern with complete confidence, Sarah enthuses

Alex and her mother have chosen the art, from Glyndebourne programmes to lino cuts

Alex, left, says that The Star project 'was a chance to do something with my mother'. Sarah describes the bathrooms as being beautifully balanced between grey marble and sage-painted weatherboarding

TRAVEL FACTS The Star, Alfriston, East Sussex. B&B from £190 per night. Visit thepolizzicollection.com for more information. Advertisement

The furniture goes from antique to mid-century and modern with complete confidence. Alex and her mother have chosen the art, from Glyndebourne programmes to lino cuts, and commissioned an intricate floor painting for the restaurant. There’s wit too – the library has a secret door that leads to the restaurant and a shelf is propped up by a giant wooden hare’s head.

If The Star has evolved over the centuries, so has the area. The fields are still dotted with sheep but this is now one of Sussex’s key wine-growing regions – and to help guests explore it, the hotel has Panama hats and Rockfish wellington boots in every size to borrow.

The USP: Consummate style within a community. Step outside and there are churches, the village green and the National Trust’s very first property. The Star’s bar, still in the oldest part of the building, is companionable, with ancient beams and strongly chosen wines and beers. Dogs are welcome.

The rooms: With wallpapers and gentle spring colours, the 30 bedrooms – all different – feel like a love letter to the English countryside and its craft traditions.

The bathrooms are beautifully balanced between grey marble and sage-painted weatherboarding. There are flowers everywhere.

The food: Chef Tim Kensett has cast his net over nearby countryside and coast for his menu, with mackerel married with rhubarb, chilli and horseradish, South Downs spring lamb, and turbot and Jerusalem artichoke. Breakfast is served from a vast 16th Century sideboard, with local honey and yogurt alongside sausages, smoked salmon and granola.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sir Chris Bonington checks in to our travel Q&A

This week British mountaineer Sir Chris Bonington checks in to our travel Q&A.

He recalls his most memorable trip, climbing The Ogre in Pakistan, and his most lavish holiday, to the Galapagos islands.

EARLIEST TRAVEL MEMORY?

While I was still at school, around the age of 16 and living in Hampstead, London, I went hitchhiking with a mate all the way to Snowdonia just so we could go climbing.

MOST MEMORABLE TRIP?

Climbing a mountain named The Ogre, which is 7,285 metres high, in the Karakoram mountain range in Pakistan. In 1977, it presented a superb unclimbed challenge.

One of our team, Doug Scott, slipped and fell on the first abseil from the summit and broke both his legs.

He crawled all the way down the mountain, helped by me, Mo Anthoine and Clive Rowland.

We went for around five days without food, first aid and painkillers yet somehow we survived.

LAST HOLIDAY?

Last year we drove to our second home in the South of France for the summer.

MOST LAVISH HOLIDAY?

The Galapagos islands in 2009. We were on a small cruise boat owned by a close friend of ours. It was in the early stages of my wife Wendy’s motor neurone disease, so she was still able to walk, and the Galapagos was somewhere she had always wanted to visit.

At the end of the cruise we stayed for a few days in a little estancia with no internet, then went to a hotel in Quito, the capital of Ecuador.

We stayed up all night watching the election results when Barack Obama became U.S. President.

DREAM TRIP?

I would like to be transported to a satellite station in space, so I could get a distant view of Earth.

Sir Chris remembers cruising around the Galapagos islands with his wife

HOT OR COLD CLIMATES?

I much prefer colder climates.

PLACE EVERYONE SHOULD GO?

Rome, to see all the ancient artefacts.

ONE PLACE TO AVOID?

Disneyland.

ESSENTIAL TRAVEL ITEM?

I always travel with my Kindle.

ANY PACKING DISASTERS?

I once left a box of all my gear for an expedition on the platform at Euston.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

A reworked world map has revealed the most popular cocktails around the globe - and it's the Pornstar Martini that's the runaway winner.

On the map - generated using Google search data – country names have been supplemented by their residents' most-searched-for cocktail.

There were over 18.4million searches worldwide for Pornstar Martini, with the Pina Colada - top in America – ranking second with 10.5million searches and the Aperol Spritz in third with more than 8.2million registered searches.

On this map, country names have been supplemented by their residents' most-searched-for cocktail

The map has been drawn up by lingerie and swimwear brand Pour Moi, which used the Google data to establish the search volume in each country for terms associated with cocktails over one year.

The top-ranked tipple was invented by London bartender Douglas Ankrah in 2002, who dreamt up the name 'Pornstar Martini' after a trip to a gentlemen's club in Cape Town.

The UK is one of many countries where the Pornstar Martini - a combination of passionfruit liquor, passionfruit juice, vanilla vodka and a prosecco chaser - is the most searched for.

Second-place Pina Colada, which originated in Puerto Rico, is a blend of coconut milk, pineapple juice and rum, and not only is it the firm favourite in the United States, but also in Russia and Mexico.

As for Europe, the UK prefers Pornstar Martinis, while Aperol Spritz is the clear favourite in Scandinavia

THE WORLD'S MOST POPULAR COCKTAIL CHOICES 1. Pornstar Martini - 18.4million Google searches 2. Pina Colada - 10.5million searches 3. Aperol Spritz - 8.2million searches 4. Sangria - 7.6million searches 5. Negroni - 6.9million searches Source: Pour Moi 6. Espresso Martini - 5.5million searches 7. Long Island Ice Tea - 4.4million searches 8. Caipirinha - 4.3million searches 9. Daiquiri - 3.8million searches 10. Mojito - 2.8million searches Advertisement

Bronze medal winner Aperol Spritz, combining Aperol, prosecco and a dash of soda water, earned the number one spot in Germany and the United Arab Emirates.

Pour Moi said: 'The distinctive orange cocktail of Aperol Spritz has taken the world by storm in recent years, but Italians have been loving this bubbly and bitter cocktail since 1919.'

Made with red wine and chopped fruit, Sangria (7.6million searches) is the fourth most popular cocktail, ranking in first place in Argentina and Thailand.

Fifth to the finish line is the Negroni (6.9million searches), a mixture of Campari, sweet red vermouth and gin that is favoured by Uruguay and Paraguay.

Coffee lovers will appreciate number five - the Espresso Martini (5.5million searches). It's made with vodka, espresso coffee, coffee liqueur, and sugar syrup – and reached the top spot in Australia and Iceland.

Combining vodka, tequila, light rum, triple sec, gin, and cola, the Long Island Ice Tea (4.4million searches), is the sixth most popular cocktail worldwide, though it doesn't achieve number one status in any country.

In the U.S, the preference for each state has been revealed - New Yorkers are keen on Negronis, while Texans drink Daiquiris

Top-rated in Brazil and Portugal and seventh overall, the Caipirinha (4.3million searches), is a refreshing combination of cachaca, sugar, and lime.

Next is the Daiquiri (3.8 million searches), beloved by Oman, Cuba and the Bahamas, and made with rum, citrus juice, and sugar.

Finally, in tenth place – and the most-desired in France and Japan - comes the summery Mojito (2.8million searches), blending white rum, sugar, lime juice, soda water, and spearmint with ice.

As well as a world map, Pour Moi has also drawn up maps with regional breakdowns of the search data.

Aperol Spritzes are commonly searched-for in Canada, while Pornstar Martinis are the most popular choice in the Caribbean islands

When it comes to Europe's most-searched-for tipples, Aperol Spritz is the clear favourite in Scandinavia, while countries along the Mediterranean are more divided - Italy and Malta fancy a glass of Sangria, but the Spanish plump for a Pina Colada.

In the United States of America, the preference for each state has been revealed, with Californians and New Yorkers opting for Negronis, while the Southern states of Texas and Louisiana are searching for Daiquiris the most.

The Canadians, meanwhile, search overwhelming for the Aperol Spritz, while Pornstar Martinis are the most popular choice in the Caribbean islands.

Sangria takes the lead in South America, claiming number one in the likes of Colombia and Peru

Espresso Martinis are the most-searched-for amongst Australians and New Zealanders, while Fijians savour the Pornstar Martini

Travelling down the map to South America, Sangria takes the lead, bagging number one in the likes of Colombia and Peru, while Chileans crave a Pina Colada.

Moving across the globe to Oceania, Espresso Martinis are not only the most-searched-for amongst Australians but also by New Zealanders, while Fijians savour the Pornstar Martini.

In Asia, the Pornstar Martini is also highly sought-after, taking the number one spot in India, Pakistan and Cambodia, while Negronis are Googled more than any other cocktail in China.

Pina Coladas are popular in Russia and Vietnam, whereas the Chinese favour Negronis

The Pornstar Martini is the most sought-after cocktail in Africa, with the Pina Colada unable to make any serious inroads

The Pornstar Martini is also the overwhelming victor in Africa, with fans in 23 countries racking up huge search volumes everywhere from Mali to Kenya.

Reflecting on the data, Pour Moi founder Michael said: 'For us Britons, this summer may be more about garden and park cocktails rather than poolside sips abroad – but that doesn't make creating your favourite summer tipple any less enjoyable.

'We were curious to discover the world's most popular drinks – from mouth-watering martinis to scrummy spritzes – and turned to Google search data to find out what cocktails the world is most obsessed with.'

To see the full report, click here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

I'm more of a pedalaholic than a petrolhead, but I've always secretly lusted after a certain quintessential English sports car, so when the chance came to spend a week with a Morgan I jumped at the chance.

I drove along the Great North Road, staying at old coaching inns — but there was a gravel stretch of this historic highway, and I needed a bicycle for that. A bicycle that could squeeze into a bootless two-seater.

There's another quintessentially English brand that fitted the bill: a Brompton folding bike. Wrapped in a protective plastic bag, my Brompton fitted neatly in the Morgan's passenger seat, pinned by the seatbelt.

Writer Carlton Reid spent a week giving a Morgan a whirl along the Great North Road. Pictured, the Morgan Plus Four in front of the impressive gatehouse of Burghley House, less than a mile from Stamford

The avid cyclist was pleased to find that his folding Brompton bike 'fitted neatly' in the passenger seat

Reid mixed-up cycling and driving throughout his journey along the main highway between England and Scotland

There was just about space behind the driver's seat to fit two overnight bags, one of them filled with electronic gadgets that I used to film my journey.

Despite being a new build, there's something undeniably nostalgic about Morgan's £65,000 Plus Four. Not only does it turn heads as it passes, purring, but it's also a conversation starter.

At one of my coaching inn stopovers, a fellow hotel guest told me of his joy at owning a Morgan when he was younger. Why did he sell it? 'I got married and had kids,' he said with a faint smile. 'Something had to go.' His pain was palpable.

And when, at a quiet junction, I asked for directions (there's a modern 2.0-litre BMW engine in the Plus Four, but no satnav), two women gushed over the beauty of this most curvaceous of cars.

Norman Cross junction, A1M, with Stilton in the background. The Great North Road - which was built atop Roman Ermine Street - can be seen dissecting Stilton

During his road trip, Reid checked into The Bell Inn in Stilton. The inn has a famously oversized sign (pictured) and the town a very wide high street because it used to be the Great North Road

The Morgan parked outside The Bell Inn. Reid said: 'Arriving in a Morgan at each glorious coaching inn was almost as appropriate as arriving in an 18th-century mail coach and, just like the travellers of the turnpike era, I had to shake road muck from my clothes before I entered'

The glassed-over entrance to The Bell at Stilton. The archway was originally the carriage entrance with the distances to different destinations etched on the stones

While in Stilton, Reid indulged in a platter of the town's famed cheese

The Morgan on the Great North Road beside the A1(M), near Stilton

A Morgan, you quickly start to realise, is no ordinary car. With its swooping wings and long louvred bonnet, it's a throwback to simpler times. Simpler, but not slower: the four-cylinder engine is capable of getting the Plus Four to 60mph in less than five seconds; useful, no doubt, for the race track but, perhaps strangely, this is a fast car that you don't feel the need to drive at speed.

Morgan has been making cars at the foot of the Malvern Hills since 1909 and the Plus Four is the new version of a classic car that Morgan first made 72 years ago. I thought it was the perfect car for driving along romantic stretches of the Great North Road that used to be the A1 - the road, which was born in July 1921, as it was in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s, before it was dualled or it morphed into a motorway.

There are lengthy, bypassed stretches of this old A1 made nondescript thanks to numerical downgrades. The B197 skirting Stevenage or the B1043 parallel to Stilton are parts of the old Great North Road, but you'd not know it from those boring B numbers.

The Morgan Plus Four seen through the trees of Rushey Inn wood, near Retford, part of Sherwood Forest. This is a former route of the Great North Road but diverted through Retford after an Act of Parliament in 1766

I flew my drone over these stretches, capturing the old next to the new, the forgotten next to the traffic-choked. I also launched my eye-in-the-sky to film bypassed parts of the Great North Road that now lie marooned, forgotten.

These asphalt orphans dotted my journey, but I had to seek them out because nature is steadily reclaiming them. There are cats' eyes skeletons in a rural pub car park near the motorway services at South Mimms, evidence that this quiet cul-de-sac was once the busy A1. A rickety wooden fence blocks the way, the surface of the old A1 now disappearing under moss.

Two hundred miles north, close to Leeming, there's an 18th-century bridge spanning a beck that lies sandwiched between the old A1 and the new A1(M). I filmed myself from above cycling on this truncated road wedge, imagining the fast-and-furious-for-the-day mail coaches that once trundled over it at the heady speed of 12mph.

An aerial view of Stamford at sunset with the church of St Michael the Greater on the right

The George of Stamford, including the 'gallows' over the Great North Road that has been advertising the coaching inn for hundreds of years. The view from St. Martin's church was the "finest twixt Edinburgh and London," wrote Sir Walter Scott in the early 1800s

The George at Stamford - pictured from above and one of the three coaching inns Reid lodged at on his road trip - started life as a hospital-cum-inn run by the medieval Knights Hospitaller

A period illustration of Great North Road highwayman John Nevison, who was probably the robber known as Swift Nicks, so named after a 200-mile dash in 1676 from Kent to York to establish an alibi for a robbery committed earlier that day. This ride was later, wrongly, ascribed to Dick Turpin in the early 19th-century novel Rookwood by Harrison Ainsworth

A portrait of Daniel Lambert in the entrance hall of The George of Stamford. Lambert (1770-1809) weighed 52 stone when he died at the age of 39. During his lifetime he was celebrated for his weight. He died at the George - beneath his portrait are his walking sticks

This forgotten, fenced-off crossing was once important. Important because the Grade 1 listed Healam Bridge, built in 1796, sits at the centre of what was once a one-kilometre-long Roman settlement along the then equivalent of the Great North Road. This civilian settlement provided mules for the Cursus Publicus, or Imperial mail service — the ancient version of a petrol filling station, then.

The £318million Dishforth to Leeming section of the A1(M) opened in March 2012 and was realigned not to obliterate either Healam Bridge or the extensive Roman settlement that lies beneath and on either side of the beck crossing.

Similar protection was afforded to a Roman site excavated near Welwyn Garden City. However, rather than being diverted, the A1(M) motorway was built over the top of Welwyn Roman baths, with the archaeology protected with a steel shell.

The baths — now a subterranean museum — are nine metres (29ft) beneath the thundering motorway. I was tickled by the fact that the museum's outside loos aren't as civilised as the far older Roman ones: they are compostable rather than flushed with running water.

Talking of civilised I very much enjoyed staying in coaching inns. They've been welcoming weary travellers for hundreds of years, long ago nailing the art of hospitality

Talking of civilised, I very much enjoyed staying in coaching inns. They've been welcoming weary travellers for hundreds of years, long ago nailing the art of hospitality.

Odd word that, hospitality; it's clearly related to the word 'hospital'. According to the dictionary definition, the English word 'hospital' — a place for treating sick or injured people — originally comes from the Latin noun 'hospes', which stands for a 'guest or visitor' and 'one who provides lodging or entertainment for a guest or visitor'.

The George at Stamford - one of the three charming coaching inns I lodged at on this road trip - started life as a hospital-cum-inn run by the medieval Knights Hospitaller.

Queen Elizabeth I might have stayed a night or two (visiting her key advisor, William Cecil, builder of glorious Burghley House, less than a mile from Stamford,) and Charles I definitely lodged here. Later, it was a favourite haunt of novelist Sir Walter Scott who, in the early 1800s, wrote that a view past the George was the 'finest betwixt Edinburgh and London'.

Today, the George offers a mix of the modern and the old: bedrooms include wall sockets with USB charging points, yet there are Elizabethan mullion windows, too.

The kind of second-floor windows that almost every inn along the Great North Road claims were once thrown open by highwayman Dick Turpin to make his escape on his faithful steed, Black Bess.

Poppycock: Turpin, a murderous thief, not a dashing hero, couldn't possibly have stayed — and escaped from — the number of inns that claim him, and a later author made up the name for his supposed horse.

The £318m Dishforth to Leeming section of the A1(M) opened in March 2012 and was realigned not to obliterate either Healam Bridge or the extensive Roman settlement that lies beneath and on either side of the beck crossing

Rather than being diverted, the A1(M) motorway was built over the top of Welwyn Roman baths, with the archaeology protected with a steel shell

The Roman baths - now a subterranean museum - are nine metres beneath the thundering motorway. Reid said of the museum: 'I was tickled by the fact that the museum's outside loos aren't as civilised as the far older Roman ones: they are compostable rather than flushed with running water'

The Bell in Stilton has a Dick Turpin story to tell — he's said to haunt the hotel, which would make him a busy ghost — but the verifiable history is far more interesting. The Bell, which dates to at least 1500 and was rebuilt in 1642 at the start of the English Civil War, was an important posting inn on the Great North Road.

It was also the first to sell — and popularise — what would become known as Stilton cheese. Writing in 1722, Robinson Crusoe author and inveterate traveller Daniel Defoe described how cheese was 'brought to the table [in Stilton] with mites or maggots round it, so thick that they bring a spoon with them for you to eat the mites as you do the cheese'.

I can report that the Stilton platter I ordered while staying at today's Bell didn't arrive with any wiggly protein bites.

Ye Olde Bell hotel in Barnby Moor, near Doncaster, was Reid's third port of call. The coaching inn's guestbook includes Princess Victoria, who stayed there two years before she was crowned Queen in 1837, and American crooner Bing Crosby

My third coaching inn of the trip has also welcomed famous guests down the years. Princess Victoria, two years before she was crowned Queen in 1837, stayed at Ye Olde Bell of Barnby Moor (you can now stay in the Victoria suite), and 131 years later, the horsey hotel was home away from home for the American crooner Bing Crosby visiting the nearby Doncaster racecourse.

Arriving in a Morgan at each of those glorious coaching inns was almost as appropriate as arriving in an 18th Century mail coach and, just like the travellers of the turnpike era, I had to shake road muck from my clothes before I entered. Driving an open-top car was lovely, but it was also undeniably dusty.

The following day I returned the car to Great Malvern via a bunch of fast roads. They may have been made for speed, but there's no romance in a modern motorway; not even in a Morgan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The owners of a little-known vegan bistro in Devon have spoken of their joy - and shock - at their restaurant being named the third best in the world for vegan food by Tripadvisor.

Cosmic Kitchen in Plymouth claimed the bronze medal in Tripadvisor's 2021 Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards for the world's best vegan restaurant and, of course, it was named the best in the UK. The awards are decided by an algorithm that analyses the millions of reviews and opinions collected in a single year from travellers around the world.

Twin sisters Gabriela and Lucia Evangelou, who run the restaurant, expressed how stunned they were on a Facebook post and thanked their staff, writing: 'We can't believe it. This is so amazing! As always a BIG thank you to all of our staff old and new as what makes Cosmic so special is the beautiful people front and back of house who cook and serve you all.'

Cosmic Kitchen in Plymouth claimed the bronze medal in Tripadvisor's 2021 Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards for the world's best vegan restaurant

Cosmic Kitchen (left) has an impressive five out of five rating on Tripadvisor with 246 'excellent' reviews out of 257. The eatery's 'amazing' Scotch eggs are very popular (right)

Twin sisters Gabriela and Lucia Evangelou, who run Cosmic Kitchen, expressed how stunned they were on a Facebook post and thanked their staff, writing: 'We can't believe it. This is so amazing! As always a BIG thank you to all of our staff old and new as what makes Cosmic so special is the beautiful people front and back of house who cook and serve you all'

They also thanked customers who had taken the time to write them a review.

The restaurant has an impressive five out of five rating on Tripadvisor with 246 'excellent' reviews out of 257.

The top-rated dishes include 'amazing' scotch eggs, 'delicious' moussaka and 'ridiculously good' jack fruit wraps.

On the dessert front, one reviewer raved: 'The upsidedown pineapple cake with ice cream is to die for.'

The overall winner in the global vegan category of Tripadvisor's awards was Vegan Beat in Athens.

One reviewer who visited the street food restaurant in January wrote: 'This is totally the type of vegan food to make you say WOW! Even my husband who is not vegan, and usually declines 'vegan' food, was impressed.

'He's already looking at recipes to recreate at home! I went twice during our trip which is something I don't often do. The second visit, I had the Space Gyros which was incredible.'

THE 2021 WINNERS OF TRIPADVISOR'S TRAVELLERS' CHOICE BEST VEGAN RESTAURANTS AWARDS: WORLD AND U.S Best Vegan Spots in the World 1. Vegan Beat, Athens, Greece 2. Blu Bar, Barcelona, Spain 3. Cosmic Kitchen, Plymouth, United Kingdom 4. Scoop 'n Dough, Lisbon, Portugal 5. Twelve Eatery, Bournemouth, United Kingdom 6. EFE Macrobiotic World, Rawai, Thailand 7. Alquimia, Campos Do Jordão, Brazil 8. Arte Sano, Holbox Island, Mexico 9. Kunda Vegan Vegetarian Chiang Rai, Chiang Rai, Thailand 10. Hum Vegetarian, Cafe & Restaurant, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Best Vegan Spots in the US 1. Full Bloom Vegan, Miami, Florida 2. City O City, Denver, Colorado 3. The Land of Kush, Baltimore, Maryland 4. Planta South Beach, Miami Beach, Florida 5. Green Elephant, Portsmouth, New Hampshire 6. Laughing Seed Cafe, Asheville, North Carolina 7. VegeNation, Las Vegas, Nevada 8. Vedge, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 9. Bouldin Creek Cafe, Austin, Texas 10. Fox & Fig Cafe, Savannah, Georgia Advertisement

The overall winner in the global vegan category of Tripadvisor's awards was Vegan Beat in Athens

One reviewer who visited Vegan Beat in January wrote: 'This is totally the type of vegan food to make you say WOW! Even my husband who is not vegan, and usually declines 'vegan' food, was impressed'

In second place on the global ranking was the surf-themed Blu Bar in Barcelona, which is popular for its plant-based tacos, pizzas and sandwiches

A selection of dishes from Scoop 'n Dough in Lisbon, which came fourth in the global vegan restaurant ranking

In second place was the surf-themed Blu Bar in Barcelona, which is popular for its plant-based tacos, pizzas and sandwiches.

The rest of the global ranking for vegan restaurants comprises Scoop 'n Dough in Lisbon (fourth), Twelve Eatery in Bournemouth, UK (fifth), EFE Macrobiotic World in Thailand (sixth), Alquimia in Campos Do Jordao, Brazil (seventh), Arte Sano on Holbox Island, Mexico (eighth), Kunda Vegan Vegetarian Chiang Rai, Thailand (ninth), and Hum Vegetarian Cafe & Restaurant in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (tenth).

Tripadvisor notes that the UK's No2 vegan restaurant, Twelve Eatery, claims to be the only organic plant-based restaurant in Dorset and the UK's first organic bar to make cocktails with fresh cold-pressed juices.

In third place in the UK ranking was Offbeet New Forest in Southampton, which also serves as a vegan cooking school. Diners here can find 'delicious dishes' such as freshly made gnocchi with sage and pistachio pesto and cauliflower steaks.

THE 2021 WINNERS OF TRIPADVISOR'S TRAVELLERS' CHOICE BEST VEGAN RESTAURANTS AWARDS: UK 1. Cosmic Kitchen, Plymouth A family-run, vegan bistro in Plymouth pioneered by twin sisters Gabriela and Lucia Evangelou. Menus here are 100 per cent plant-based and there is a fully vegan bar. The signature snack is a vegan Scotch egg. 2. Twelve Eatery, Bournemouth This eatery claims to be the only organic plant-based restaurant in Dorset and the UK's first organic bar to make cocktails with fresh cold-pressed juices. One item on the menu is feijoada - a rich and smoky blackbean stew. 3. Offbeet New Forest, Southampton This New Forest restaurant and cookery school serves 'delicious dishes' such as freshly made gnocchi with sage and pistachio pesto, and butternut squash croquettes filled with vegan mozzarella. 4. Indigo Greens, Liverpool Dine in, takeaway or enjoy a delivery of food from this plant-based eatery. There is an 'extensive menu' of breakfasts, light bites, mains and desserts to choose from. The Tripadvisor team said they were 'intrigued by the delicious sounding Kung Po Cauli wings'. 5. Tansy's Pantry, Godshill, Isle of Wight At Tansy's Pantry the menu is 100 per cent plant-based with the majority gluten-free and all other dietary requirements catered for. They also have a range of vegan drinks, wines, beers and spirits from local producers. 6. The Tipsy Vegan, Norwich Located in the heart of Norwich lanes, The Tipsy Vegan focuses on small plates and sharing boards. Chinese lettuce wraps with satay sauce and shredded mushroom tacos with guacamole are among the signature dishes. 7. Amrutha Lounge, London This restaurant serves up a vegan take on comfort food including Thai green curry and lentil falafels. It also offers 'Amrutha selections', a variety of dishes served tapas style with unlimited refills. Another novel concept is that if you cannot afford to pay for your meal, you can simply volunteer some of your time in exchange for your dinner. 8. Cafe Van Gogh, London Cafe Van Gogh is a not-for-profit social enterprise and works with a leading learning disability employment charity to run a programme of on-the-job training for people with additional challenges in life. On the food front, the menus change every couple of months, but examples of dishes include spiced mince stuffed aubergine, 'gigantes plaki' with fried feta, maroulosalata salad and tzatziki and brownie with stracciatella gelato and boozy cherries. 9. Corarima, Wakefield This restaurant showcases Abyssinian cuisine, 'lovingly prepared' by Ethiopian and Eritrean chefs. Instead of a plate, the food is served on a 'tangy' gluten and sugar free leavened pancake, or 'injera'. This is then used instead of cutlery to mop up the stews. 10. Ba-Ha, Birmingham Ba-Ha serves 'delicious' and 'insta-worthy' plant-based vegan food including bish and chips - beer-battered banana blossom served with hand-cut chips, minty mushy peas and homemade tartar sauce. Advertisement

The UK's No2 vegan restaurant, Twelve Eatery in Bournemouth (pictured), came fifth in the global ranking. It claims to be the only organic plant-based restaurant in Dorset and the UK's first organic bar to make cocktails with fresh cold-pressed juices

LEFT: In third place in the UK ranking was Offbeet New Forest in Southampton, which also serves as a vegan cooking school. RIGHT: Indigo Greens in Liverpool claimed fourth spot, with an 'extensive menu of breakfasts, light bites, mains and desserts to choose from'

At Tansy's Pantry on the Isle of Wight (fifth in the UK ranking) the menu is 100 per cent plant-based with the majority gluten-free

Indigo Greens in Liverpool claimed the fourth spot, with an 'extensive menu of breakfasts, light bites, mains and desserts to choose from', while Tansy's Pantry on the Isle of Wight came fifth.

The menu at this restaurant is 100 per cent plant-based, with the majority of dishes gluten-free.

In sixth place was The Tipsy Vegan in Norwich, which specialises in small sharing dishes, followed by the Amrutha Lounge in London, which offers a vegan take on comfort food.

The eighth spot was claimed by Cafe Van Gogh in London, while Corarima in Wakefield, where Abyssinian cuisine is the speciality, came ninth.

Rounding out the UK's top ten was Ba-Ha in Birmingham, which serves 'delicious' and 'insta-worthy' plant-based vegan food including bish and chips - beer-battered banana blossom served with hand-cut chips, minty mushy peas and homemade tartar sauce.

A spokesperson for Tripadvisor said: 'Unless you’ve been living under a rock, you’ll know that veganism has gone from a niche hipster trend to a mainstream lifestyle craze in recent years.

'More plant-based food availability, dining options, and education on its benefits have put vegan food at the heart of the dining industry, particularly for younger generations.

'But you don’t have to declare yourself 100 per cent vegan to enjoy a delicious plant-based meal.'

To view the full winners lists for the 2021 Tripadvisor Travellers' Choice 'Best of the Best' Restaurants Awards, visit www.tripadvisor.co.uk/TravelersChoice-Restaurants.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

When school’s out in our house, it usually means a scavenge for rucksacks and jumping on a plane to a country that wouldn’t top anyone’s list of family- friendly destinations.

In recent years we’ve zig-zagged across the Carpathian Mountains on Romania’s Transfagarasan Highway (which featured in a legendary Top Gear episode), road-tripped Bosnia then Serbia, picked leeches from our socks in Borneo and sailed around Indonesia, dusting off the ash from active volcanoes.

This summer, like most families, we are hunting for adventure closer to home. Much closer. So close, in fact, there’s not even enough time to watch a movie between setting off from our home in south Suffolk and arriving at our destination.

This picture shows the stunning two-mile-long Fritton Lake, which straddles Suffolk and Norfolk, in all its glory

My husband and I, with our sons aged 15 and 11, are at Fritton Lake, in the heart of a 1,000-acre rewilding project which straddles Suffolk’s boundary with Norfolk.

There’s no amber gamble, no price-hikes and no question of quarantine, yet we are on holiday somewhere magical – and would still be if it were half a world away.

Fritton Lake is two miles of water fringed by dense woodland where blue-green Scots pines meld with alders ‘keeping their feet wet’ (as the saying goes), ancient oaks, sweet chestnuts and ghostly silver birch. The lake is alive with fish and birds and dragonflies, deer come here to drink and there are otters too. Whether you are in it or on it, you can feel the throb of nature at full throttle.

'Fritton Lake is two miles of water fringed by dense woodland,' reveals Sarah

Wherever we are in the world, as the mother of sons it’s my job to have a go at everything, fall off things and come last in family tournaments. At Fritton Lake this was achieved across a wide range of activities, including trail running, canoeing, paddle-boarding and wild swimming.

Our favourite ever paddle was in a volcanic caldera 7,500 miles away, across a lake of tsunami water that had been trapped. There was a moment at Fritton Lake to rival it: drifting through a patch of water lilies dotted with the fallen purple petals of lakeside rhododendrons –an East Anglian pastiche of Monet.

I took the plunge and went for my first proper wild swim in the UK – so far I have sat out the biggest lockdown wellness craze as I like my water warm. The Danube in August, for example, is dark and weedy but bathtub-hot. But there is a floating sauna at Fritton Lake – a timber hut with a giant picture window gazing out over lime-bright reed beds – and it would have been criminal not to use it properly.

The combination of that meditative view followed by the endorphin high of a dunk in the brisk water was the revelation of my summer. I just kept on swimming and swimming, no wetsuit needed. My shortie wetsuit did come out for the paddle-boarding. When you referee boys on boards, it’s a given that you are going in the water and will surface to a running commentary on your ambition versus talent. ‘Mother-not-so-Superior,’ one says lovingly (I think) as I clamber back on to the board.

Fritton Lake also has a 22-metre heated pool that is bookended by brand new pool houses with comfy sunloungers. On one side, a formal garden runs down to the lake, on the other are tennis courts, a beach volleyball area, boules and croquet pitches and adventure playgrounds for younger children. It’s all part of a sustainable private holiday club belonging to Hugh Somerleyton (Lord Somerleyton), a farmer and environmentalist who owns 5,000 acres of East Anglia. He is the co-founder of WildEast, a rewilding initiative which is aiming to return 20 per cent of the region’s land to nature within a generation.

There is a 22-metre heated pool with sunloungers and new pool houses near the lakeshore

Beyond the lake, what was once farmland is now restored to wildflower meadows filled with oxeye daisies, yarrow, hickory and clover. In the woods, Large Black pigs, a breed native to Suffolk, truffle freely through the soil to create the bare ground which skylarks need for nesting.

Welsh Black cows, Exmoor ponies and water buffalo also roam.

You can book a nature safari to learn about the Somerleyton Estate’s pioneering work, or even volunteer to help.

‘I feel like I know more about our own area now,’ said Rufus, my eldest, afterwards, an unexpected bonus of our Suffolk staycation.

Some of what you see – animal and plant – appears on your plate at the 16th Century Fritton Arms, the lake’s boutique-hotel style Clubhouse which has Chris Bartlett, formerly of Heston Blumenthal’s Fat Duck, as head chef.

Chris Bartlett, formerly of Heston Blumenthal’s Fat Duck, is the head chef at the Clubhouse, pictured

Swanky: Guests can check into rooms, known as 'Clubrooms', in the boutique-style Clubhouse

There’s a menu of gastro pub favourites – steak, burgers, sea bass, macaroni cheese, a slow-cooked lamb curry – to be enjoyed on a sunny terrace fringed with bay, rosemary, sage and lavender.

We stayed in the Clubhouse, though you can also self-cater – renting an estate cottage or one of the lodges that dot the woods. Dogs are welcome.

Some of the lodges are known as Shedrooms, but they’re so smart the only thing likely to be potted in there would be shrimps from Suffolk’s Heritage Coast.

The land fringing Lake Fritton is dotted by 'ancient oaks, sweet chestnuts and ghostly silver birch'

That coast (you might have seen it in the recent Netflix hit film The Dig) and many of the area’s other attractions such as Norwich and the Norfolk Broads, the kiss-me-quick delights of Great Yarmouth and stylish Southwold, are all close by.

We’d expected to head off to enjoy one or two of them, but that mesmerising lake made our car keys redundant.

We left after a late lunch and were back home before tea. We still didn’t have time to watch a film, but we did prove you don’t have to go far to be on holiday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The BBC's World Affairs Editor John Simpson checks into our travel Q&A

The BBC's World Affairs Editor John Simpson checks into our travel Q&A.

He talks about his earliest travel memory, the times he has been most afraid, his worst setback - and more.

YOUR EARLIEST TRAVEL MEMORY?

I travelled only between London and Suffolk until I was 19. Then, in 1962, my father said he would take me to Casablanca — he was a film buff and wanted to see the real place. Since then I've visited at least 154 countries.

WHAT GAVE YOU THE TRAVEL BUG?

My father's stories about the Suez Canal, India and Australia. He had been around the world several times because he ran away to sea at 15 and became a steward on a P&O liner.

EVER BEEN AFRAID?

Lots of times. On an internal flight in Colombia I fell asleep and a huge thug in front of me jammed his seat back into my face. I was so cross I pushed it forward and my cameraman said: 'I really don't think that is a good move.' I think the thug worked for a cartel.

ESSENTIAL ITEM?

Music on my phone. I listen to everything from Shostakovich to Ed Sheeran.

WORST SETBACK?

I was trying to cross a bridge in Angola during the war there, and a drunken soldier threw my passport in the river. I had to stay for another two months.

Simpson says Iran is his favourite destination - but he is banned 'for now'. Pictured, a sunrise shot of the city of Kashan

TOP RESTAURANT?

La Fontaine de Mars, in Paris.

BEST HOTEL?

The Negresco, in Nice.

YOUR FAVOURITE DESTINATION?

Iran. It's delightful — but I'm banned for now.

WHERE NEXT?

I'd like to visit Chad to see its brilliant mud-brick buildings. And my new novel is set in China, which I've been going to since the Tiananmen Square demos [in 1989].

I don't like the way the government works, but the people and culture of China, I love.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The former Meridien Hotel on London’s Piccadilly —almost opposite Fortnum & Mason and a short hop from the Royal Academy — has languished for at least a couple of decades, unloved and, despite its superb location, largely ignored.

Some will remember that Marco Pierre White’s name was once above the door of what was the hotel’s Oak Room restaurant, but that didn’t work.

The huge, windowless room was never able to shake off its corporate vibe, even though it was the scene of raucous parties in the 1920s — so it’s especially pleasing that the newly named and newly owned The Dilly has invited Madhu’s to create an Indian restaurant in the Oak Room.

The former Meridien Hotel on London’s Piccadilly is now The Dilly, with doubles from £223

'You either like big, grand hotels that have been around for 100 years or more, or you don’t,' writes the Inspector. 'I do - and this is confirmed when I go for a swim in the pool, look in on the gym and note that there is even a squash court'

It is now a buzzy space, with a terrific Raj-style bar next to it. On my visit, it’s as if half Bollywood has moved in for the night, with napkins for skirts and a riot of sparkly tops.

Full marks, too, for the revamped lobby, with huge vases of flowers, a specially commissioned rug and lots of moody, dark panelling.

There are no fewer than 208 rooms and suites in this venerable building, which first opened as the Piccadilly Hotel in 1908 and had its heyday in the 1920s and 30s when an outdoor pool was a glamorous, revolutionary attraction. I am billeted on the eighth floor in one of the cheapest rooms (£177 for a five-star hotel in the centre of the capital is a deal).

It has neutral colours, Scandi-style furniture, great views (I can see Big Ben) and, for some reason, the smallest of bath towels.

The Dilly's 'terrific' Raj-style bar, which was populated with a 'riot of sparkly tops' during the Inspector's visit

There are 208 rooms and suites in the building, which first opened as the Piccadilly Hotel in 1908

The Dilly deserves to succeed, the Inspector declares. But he warns: 'This won’t be easy, given the stiff five-star competition in the capital'

You either like big, grand hotels that have been around for 100 years or more, or you don’t. I do — and this is confirmed when I go for a swim in the pool, look in on the gym and note that there is even a squash court.

In addition to Madhu’s, The Terrace restaurant is open all day and this is where breakfast is served. It’s not a cosy space but various palms do their best to create some atmosphere, despite the intrusion of awful muzak.

The Dilly deserves to succeed. This won’t be easy, given the stiff five-star competition in the capital. But for anyone visiting London and wanting to be in the thick of the action, there can be few better spots.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she is seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie.

In The Fabelmans - which is about the life of the Jaws and ET director - Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah.

The latest images feature the movie star with a blonde crop, a white-collared blue dress, and a matching blue shawl.

In character: Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she's seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie

Side by side: In The Fabelmans, Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah. On the right Leah is with her husband Arnold as well as a young Steven

The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s.

Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39.

Rogen plays the director's favorite uncle. In the photos he is seen wearing black-rimmed eyeglasses, slacks, and a sports coat.

Going back in time: The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s

Action: Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39

On Monday the 74-year-old Hollywood heavyweight shot a few scenes for the upcoming film on the beach in Malibu, California with cast members Gabriel LaBelle (who plays Steven), Sam Rechner (Ruby's Choice), and Chloe East (Genera+ion) among others.

Steven also has three sisters Nancy, Anne, and Sue but casting for those parts have yet to be revealed.

The Schindler's List director had a very colorful childhood. He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio but was raised between Haddon Township, New Jersey and Scottsdale, Arizona.

He spent three years attending Arcadia High School before moving to California with his dad after his parents divorced and he graduated from Saratoga High School.

The film is slated for a 2022 release.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The man who played Ezra Fitz on Pretty Little Liars certainly can keep a secret.

Ian Harding quietly married photographer Sophie Hart nearly two years ago in October 2019 according to a source for E! News on Thursday.

The news comes nearly a week after eagle-eyed fans noticed that the 34-year-old actor was wearing a band around his ring finger in an Instagram post.

Secret: Ian Harding quietly married photographer Sophie Hart nearly two years ago in October 2019 according to a source for E! News on Thursday, as they are seen together in November 2015

The image featured him laying in a net attached to a tree as he captioned it: 'Back in LA and living the good life (as in napping in trees and baskets).'

Several fans noticed the ring and commented with hearts as one even wrote: 'proposed.'

The Pretty Little Liars star and photographer have been romantically linked since 2011.

'Back in LA and living the good life (as in napping in trees and baskets)': The news comes nearly a week after eagle-eyed fans noticed that the 34-year-old actor was wearing a band around his ring finger in an Instagram post

Both are relatively private about their personal lives as they don't often appear in each other's social media.

Ian is best known for playing Rosewood High School English teacher Ezra Fitz (born Fitzgerald), who comes from a wealthy family, in the Freeform show.

He starred in all seven seasons of Pretty Little Liars which centered around four high school girls whose click falls apart after the disappearance of their leader.

Big role: Ian is best known for playing Rosewood High School English teacher Ezra Fitz (born Fitzgerald), who comes from a wealthy family, in the Freeform show, he is seen with Lucy Hale on the series in 2016

Hit: He starred in all seven seasons of Pretty Little Liars which centered around four high school girls whose click falls apart after the disappearance of their leader

More recently he has had steady television work on programs including Chicago Med, Kipo And The Age Of Wonderbeasts, and Long Slow Exhale.

His wife Sophie is a Los Angeles based photographer and set designer.

Back in June, Ian proudly shared a shirtless selfie as he revealed that he was fully vaccinated from COVID-19.

He showed off his impressive abs in the snap which he captioned: 'Waxed, vaxxed, and ready to PARTY [three fire emojis]'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vincent Kartheiser was reportedly the subject of two internal investigations after he joined the DC series Titans for its third season.

The 42-year-old Mad Men star isn't actively involved in any of the promotion for the series' third season after at least two complaints were made about his conduct on set, Deadline reported on Friday.

A representative for Kartheiser 'vehemently' denied the accusations made in the complaints in a statement shared with the publication on the same day.

On-set troubles: Vincent Kartheiser, 42, was twice investigated on the set of DC's Titans series for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and offensive comments,' Deadline reported on Friday; seen in 2018 in NYC

Kartheiser first joined Titans for its third season, which began airing on WarnerMedia's HBO Max streaming service on Thursday.

He plays the villain Scarecrow, who is usually paired up against Batman and was played by Cillian Murphy in Christopher Nolan's Batman trilogy.

The complaints made against him were allegedly for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and inappropriate comments' and were investigated by WBTV's Labor Relations department.

The series is filmed in Toronto, but due to Covid-19 protocols, the Burbank-based investigators were forced to speak to people on set virtually.

Kartheiser joined Titans' third season as a series regular to play the Batman villain Scarecrow (pictured). At least two complaints were allegedly made against him and led to investigations

Not in person: Burbank-based investigators looked into the allegations virtually, as Covid protocols prevented them from visiting the Toronto set; a publicity image for Titans is pictured that excludes Kartheiser

Sources on set claimed that the first complaint was filed in response to 'verbal comments and outbursts' from Kartheiser, but investigators determined that the complaints weren't severe enough to lead to his firing.

Instead, he was given a verbal warning for the alleged behavior.

A second complaint was reportedly filed weeks later, just as production was nearing the send for the season.

Sources said that Kartheiser was assigned an on-set monitor to document his behavior as a result.

Deadline also reports that sources claimed other misconduct allegations were made against the actor that were looked into, but investigators weren't able to corroborate the claims.

'Vincent Kartheiser vehemently denies the allegations,' his spokesperson said in a statement to the publication that was sent Friday. 'Warner Bros investigated this matter and made clear to Mr. Kartheiser its expectations for behavior on the set, and he agreed to comply with their directives.'

Escalation: Sources said Kartheiser was given a verbal warning after the first investigation and assigned an on-set monitor after the second investigation. He reportedly won't return for season four; seen in 2019 in Monte-Carlo

It was announced in April that Kartheiser was joining the series as a main cast member to play Jonathan Crane, better known by his villainous alias Scarecrow.

He reportedly won't be back for the fourth season, though it's unclear if that was always intended to be a one-season stint.

Kartheiser is best known for appearing as one of the leads on AMC's acclaimed period drama Mad Men throughout its seven-season run from 2007 to 2015.

He played Pete Campbell, an advertising executive at the fictional firm Sterling Cooper.

The actor was also featured in the Buffy The Vampire Slayer spinoff Angel and in the German television adaptation of Das Boot.

He has been married to Gilmore Girls star Alexis Bledel since 2014.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Artist Jason deCaires Taylor has made a big splash in the art world once more - this time with an underwater forest off the coast of party hotspot Ayia Napa in Cyprus.

The Briton is known for creating underwater museums that feature striking sculpture collections. He's created aquatic sculpture gardens everywhere from Cannes, Mexico, Grenada, the Bahamas, Lanzarote, Norway, Australia, and the Maldives - though this one was partially destroyed after it was deemed offensive.

Titled Museum of Underwater Sculpture Ayia Napa (Musan), his latest submerged endeavour is 200 metres (656ft) off the coast of Pernera Beach and features 93 sculptures on the seabed between eight and 10 metres (26 to 33ft) below the surface.

The Museum of Underwater Sculpture Ayia Napa (Musan) opened in Cyprus last month

Artist Jason deCaires Taylor designed 93 sculptures for divers and snorkellers to swim among

The artworks, lowered into the sea using a crane, allude to the relationship between man and nature, with life-size sculptures of children pointing cameras and playing amid 13-tonne blue-tinged trees

The exhibition, made with a budget of £846,685 (€1million), opened last month, with divers and snorkelers invited to explore what lies beneath.

The artworks, lowered into the sea using a crane, allude to the relationship between man and nature, with life-size sculptures of children pointing cameras and playing amid 13-tonne blue-tinged trees that catch the light as swimmers paddle overhead.

Made in conjunction with the government of Cyprus, the artworks are intended to resemble a path through the forest floor.

DeCaires Taylor made the works using inert pH-neutral materials in order to protect the nearby reefs and sea creatures

DeCaires Taylor describes the sculptures as 'active catalysts' in nurturing aquatic life and reefs, meaning Musan will become an evolving and growing underwater forest

Ayia Napa’s Mayor, Christos Zannettou, said: ‘We believe that with this unique diving museum visitors will be able to enjoy an underwater oasis’

And it's hoped that the materials will be a haven for sea life.

A launch statement said: 'The sculptures have been designed and made with materials that attract marine life, and are placed at different depths, thus creating a suitable substrate for marine life at all levels.

'The sculptures are made of inert materials, with neutral pH, so as not to affect the area adversely. It's a sandy area and it is expected that over time the biodiversity of the area will be enriched, thanks to the museum.'

The artist describes the sculptures as 'active catalysts' in nurturing aquatic life and reefs, meaning Musan will become an evolving and growing underwater forest.

Ayia Napa's Mayor, Christos Zannettou, said: 'We believe that with this unique diving museum visitors will be able to enjoy an underwater oasis.'

The past 20 years have seen maritime ecosystems in the Mediterranean deplete radically, with eco-artists like deCaires Taylor determined to make a change.

Former diving instructor deCaires Taylor is preoccupied with biodiversity and marine life in his work

A crane, positioned 200 metres from the coast, helped to lower the weighty sculptures to the seabed

Holidaymakers diving off the coast of Pernera Beach can explore the underwater museum

The truly immersive exhibition was created with a budget of £846,685 (€1million)

The qualified diving instructor is preoccupied with man's impact on the earth in his work, which has a focus on biodiversity.

Musan is his second project to open in the Mediterranean this year. In March, he unveiled a series of six huge portrait sculptures off the coast of Cannes.

The site took four years to develop, and each artwork was inspired by a member of the community in the glamorous French resort, both old and young.

DeCaires Taylor has designed aquatic sculpture gardens across the world, everywhere from Mexico to Cannes

Marine life in the Mediterranean Sea has diminished over the past 20 years, and the artist hopes the installation will become an important area for biodiversity

The haunting sunken forest will attract marine life in years to come, nurturing the Mediterranean's ecosystem

Musan is the artist's second Mediterranean project this year

The artist's first underwater museum was created off the Caribbean island of Grenada in 2006 and consists of 75 sculptures covering an area of 800 square metres (8,611 square feet).

His underwater museum in the Isla Mujeres National Marine Park in Mexico features over 500 permanent life-size sculptures, which are around 10 metres (32ft) below the water's surface.

In 2014, deCaires Taylor unveiled an 18-foot-tall female Atlas sculpture kneeling on the ocean floor off the coast of the Bahamas and in 2017, he revealed Europe's first underwater sculpture museum, featuring over 300 life-sized figures off the coast of Bahia de Las Coloradas in Lanzarote.

In 2018, a wave of controversy washed over deCaires Taylor. He created a tidal gallery called Coralarium at the Fairmont Maldives Sirru Fen Fushi, but it ended up being partly taken down by police after Abdulla Yameen, the former president of the island nation, ordered the sculptures in the installation to be demolished.

The underwater forest is based off the coast of party hotspot Ayia Napa, near the shores of Pernera Beach, pictured

In March, Jason deCaires Taylor unveiled a series of six huge portrait sculptures off the coast of Cannes

Islam, the official religion in the Maldives, bans the depiction of idols, and the work provoked criticism from clerics even though the statues that were part of the gallery had no religious symbols or meaning.

Speaking at the time, deCaires Taylor said: 'The Coralarium was conceived to connect humans to the environment and a nurturing space for marine life to thrive. Nothing else!'

The gallery still exists at the resort, but it now features new sculptures 'constructed of more than 500 ceramic "starfish" that have been specifically designed to attract a variety of fish and crustaceans'. Click here to see what it looks like now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you're a keen photographer and fancy a free trip to Iceland - this offer is worth a shot.

The country's Hotel Ranga is searching for its first official 'Northern Lights catcher', who will be tasked with capturing breathtaking shots of the Aurora Borealis's vibrant colours for a month.

In return, the luxury resort will provide room and board and flights to and from Iceland will be covered.

Hotel Ranga, pictured above, is on the hunt for a resident 'Northern Lights catcher,' who will be tasked with capturing breathtaking shots of the Aurora Borealis's vibrant colours for a month

A haven for those hoping to catch sight of the Aurora, Hotel Ranga (above) has 50 bedrooms

To be in with a chance of snapping up the role, candidates must have a strong social media presence and a good deal of photography experience.

The winning photographer will be granted access to the Ranga Observatory each night, which features a roof that rolls down to showcase views of the Milky Way.

The 50-bedroom hotel is in South Iceland and faces out on the East Ranga River, known for its abundance of salmon. And the Mount Hekla volcano is visible in the distance.

Rooms at the luxury resort start at £271 (€320) per night

Miles away from the light pollution of the cities, Hotel Ranga is frequented by those who are keen to catch a glimpse of the legendary Aurora Borealis.

Rooms at the hotel start at £271 (€320) per night.

The Northern Lights are created by disturbances in Earth's magnetosphere, caused by a flow of particles from the Sun, and are usually concentrated around the Earth's magnetic poles.

A phenomenon of science and nature, the Northern Lights are created by disturbances in Earth's magnetosphere, caused by a flow of particles from the Sun

Though the phenomenon can occur all year round, the Northern Lights typically appear between August and April, lighting up the skies anytime between sunset and sunrise.

The aurora can be seen near the poles of both the northern and southern hemispheres.

In the north, the display is known as the Aurora Borealis, and in the south, the Aurora Australis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England were handed a blow on Tuesday when Stuart Broad injured his right calf ahead of practice at Lord's and looks certain to miss Wednesday's second Test.

Broad is set for a scan on Tuesday to determine the extent of the problem and assess whether he can play.

The 35-year-old could even be out of the rest of the five-Test series against India if he has torn his muscle or if the issue proves to be with his achilles tendon.

Stuart Broad (right) is now a major injury doubt for England's second Test match against India

The fast bowler was unable to train with the rest of the squad after seemingly twisting his ankle during a jog on the Lord's outfield and fears the problem could be serious.

England's medical staff later said the problem was with the calf rather than ankle but Broad still looks sure to miss what would have been his 150th Test.

England have plenty of options if Broad, who had a quiet first Test and was overshadowed by the emergence of Ollie Robinson, cannot make it, with Mark Wood the likeliest replacement.

Durham paceman Mark Wood is the likeliest replacement for Broad if he misses out

Or there could be a reprieve for Sam Curran, whose place is under threat from the promotion to the squad of Moeen Ali.

India, meanwhile, have an injury concern over seamer Shardul Thakur, who has a hamstring problem.

His possible absence could pave the way for a return for off-spinner Ravichandran Ashwin, surprisingly left out of the drawn first Test at Trent Bridge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@French runner Morhad Amdouni was the subject of fierce debate on social media after he appeared to deliberately knock over an entire row of water bottles during the men's Olympic marathon.

Amdouni finished 14th in the 26-mile race in sweltering conditions in Sapporo, just under six minutes behind winner Eliud Kipchoge.

But his actions were being analysed long after the race for an incident in the latter stages of the race.

Morhad Amdouni appeared to deliberately knock over a row of bottles during the marathon

Eliud Kipchoge of Kenya (left) won the men's Olympic marathon in Sapporo on Sunday

Middle-distance runner Amdouni, 33, joined his fellow competitors in reaching for a water bottle but while the other runners cleanly picked up a bottle, he ended up knocking over many bottles before grabbing the last one and continuing with the race.

His actions, deliberate or not, left the group of runners without any water to drink as they battled through the heat towards the finish.

Thoughts on Amdouni knocking over an entire row of water before taking the last one? pic.twitter.com/qrPaSzxLBW — Ben St Lawrence (@bennysaint) August 8, 2021

Australian long-distance runner noticed the incident and pointed it out on social media.

'Piers Morgan also waded in on Twitter, claiming the French runner is the 'biggest d***head of the Olympics'.

BREAKING: The Gold medal for biggest d*ckhead of the Tokyo Olympics goes to French marathon runner Morhad Amdouni who deliberately knocks over all the water for his fellow competitors…Unbelievable! pic.twitter.com/D4IwmlAHlL — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) August 8, 2021

But other users claimed that Amdouni had knocked the bottles over by accident, also pointing out that there was another table of water bottles just ahead where the runners behind the Frenchman could still grab a refreshment to stay hydrated.

Kipchoge became only the third man to win back-to-back Olympic golds in the marathon

Kenyan Kipchoge finished first with a commanding performance, winning his second straight gold medal and cementing his place among the all-time greats of the sport.

Abdi Nageeye of the Netherlands took silver and Belgium's Bashir Abdi won bronze.

Kipchoge, 36, joins Ethiopia's Abebe Bikila (1960 and 1964) and East Germany's Waldemar Cierpinski (1976 and 1980) as the only runners to win back-to-back gold medals on the Olympic stage.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ed Sheeran has been included in Ipswich Town's squad list for the forthcoming League One season and given the No 17 shirt after agreeing to sponsor the club for the current campaign.

The popular British pop artist, 30, is a life-long fan of the club and the sponsorship deal announced in May will see his album covers appear on the Tractor Boys' shirts for the entire season.

'This is bonkers really, isn't it!' said Sheeran to the club's official website. 'When Ipswich told me I thought they were joking but I love the idea.

Ed Sheeran has been named in Ipswich Town's squad for this season, taking the No 17 shirt

The British pop star (right) is a die-hard fan of the club and still lives near the club's ground

'I think this is going be a great season and I'm honoured to be a part of it. I just hope this squad number is only ceremonial because I want to see us promoted and that's not going to happen if I'm playing!'

The four-time Grammy winner still lives in Suffolk despite his global success and is a regular at the club's Portman Road ground for home matches.

Sheeran will be now eligible to play for Ipswich in the League One season, with the Suffolk side one of the contenders for promotion to the Championship. The club were taken over by an American consortium recently as they look to rise back up the leagues.

Sheeran will now be eligible to play for Ipswich ahead of the 2021-22 League One campaign

Sheeran has a squad number like the rest of the Ipswich first-team players

The Tractor Boys begin their new League One season at home to Morecambe on Saturday, which is a 3pm kick-off at Portman Road.

Ipswich chief executive Mark Ashton added: 'Having Ed involved is fantastic for the football club.

'We saw pictures of him wearing the 17 shirt when he was at the club to perform his Euro 2020 TikTok concert so Paul and I spoke about it and we agreed to offer Ed the chance of that squad number.

'It's our way of thanking him for his support and we look forward to welcoming him to Portman Road this season.'

It was announced in May that Sheeran would be the title shirt sponsor for the League One side for the 2021-22 campaign.

The logo which will be seen on the front of both the men's and women's shirts next season compromises of +, x and ÷, which are the titles of Sheeran's first three albums, as well as a minus sign and an equals sign.

Sheeran has agreed to sponsor the club's shirts for the forthcoming League One campaign

After the sponsorship deal was announced he said: 'The Football Club is a big part of the local community and this is my way of showing my support. I have always enjoyed my trips to Portman Road.

'I'm looking forward to going back there as soon as supporters are allowed into stadiums again.

'With the new owners from the US coming in, there are sure to be exciting times ahead for Ipswich fans, including myself. Hopefully we can stop being slightly on the huh!'

The singer also shared a photo of himself wearing an Ipswich kit as a youngster alongside the caption: 'This bloke is the news sponsor of @ipswichtown football club. Do well'.

Sheeran has supported to club ever since he was a child after growing up in the Suffolk area

Sheeran (middle row, second left) also performed for the England squad in the Euro 2020 bid

The sponsorship of his boyhood club is not the only impact Sheeran has had on English football this summer.

On June 23, the artist put on a special concert for the England squad during their Euro 2020 campaign to calm the nerves before their last-16 tie with Germany in June, which the Three Lions won 2-0.

Sheeran is a friend of England captain Harry Kane, who asked the pop artist in April of this year to come into the Three Lions camp to perform a concert on the squad's day off from training.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's boyhood club Newell's Old Boys poked fun at the Argentina star's Barcelona exit by joking they want him back - posting a meme of them 'praying' to god for his return.

Messi's 21-year spell at the Nou Camp is over after the Catalan outfit confirmed he would not be continuing with them after talks over a new deal were scrapped - with the player reportedly making a dramatic U-turn on his decision to sign new terms.

Barcelona blamed LaLiga over 'economic obstacles' as they struggled to accommodate the Argentine wizard and his astronomical wages on their books amid financial uncertainty at the club.

Barcelona have confirmed Lionel Messi will not be continuing with the club next season

His old side Newell's Old Boys posted a hilarious meme joking that Messi could return to them

Messi - who was said to be unhappy about taking a pay cut and the current state of the Barcelona squad - is now plotting his next move, with PSG and Manchester City said to be leading the race for his signature, but Newell's have jokingly thrown their hat into the ring.

The club - which Messi joined as a six-year-old - jumped on the bandwagon following news he would be leaving Barcelona this summer but quote tweeting the Spanish club's announcement and attaching a meme of a dog wearing a hat.

The caption underneath it reads: 'Hola Dios, soy yo de nuevo', which translates to 'Hi God, its me again.'

Newell's will need more than just the power of prayer if they hope to land Messi - with the player earning around £437,000-a-week during his last contract in LaLiga - a price only PSG and City would be able to afford.

Messi is on the lookout for a new club after his 21-year spell with Barcelona came to an end

Messi (front row, third from right) signed for Newell's Old Boys when he was just six years old

But the club ramped up the possibility of Messi ending his playing days with them last year when vice-president Cristian D'Amico said it wasn't 'impossible'

'It's a decision exclusively made by him and his family,' he said. 'We have to have the best possible context to help make a decision.

'When Maradona came to Newell's, nobody thought that he would come either. I hope to do something similar with Leo.'

D'Amico added: 'Obviously, that's not to be selling smoke. It's a difficult topic.

'What Newell's fan would not dream to see the best player in the world with the jersey of their team on? Time might allow such things, you have to be calm.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@American BMX racer Connor Fields is set to be released from hospital on Thursday, less than a week after a horror crash in the Olympic semi-finals left him with a brain bleed.

Jonathan Finnoff, chief medical officer for the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee, said in a statement that Fields would be able to return to his home in Henderson, Nevada, and start his rehabilitation.

Shortly after the medical update, Fields posted on Twitter: "I'm back. Ish. Still can only stand for 5-10 min at a time but we're working!"

American racer Connor Fields suffered a brain haemorrhage during a horror crash last week

Fields issued an update on Thursday after it was announced he was set to leave hospital

Fields was carried away to hospital after the crash, which took out two competitors

Fields, the Rio 2016 champion, went down hard in a first-corner crash during Friday's semi-final runs and was treated by the side of the circuit before being taken to Tokyo's St. Luke's International Hospital.

The 28-year-old was favourite to defend his title but went over this handlebars and fell face-first into the asphalt, taking two other competitors down with him.

Fields had to be carried away from the course on a stretcher and in a neck brace after receiving medical attention for several minutes.

He also suffered a broken rib and bruised lung in the crash and underwent CT scans on his brain, spine and abdomen while in hospital.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Italy's Gianmarco Tamberi and Qatar's Mutaz Essa Barshim both won the gold medal in the Olympic men's high jump after being offered the chance to share the top prize by the official.

After three failures each at 2.39, they ended up tied and entered a conversation with an Olympic official, who first offered them a 'jump-off' to decide the matter.

The Qatari then asked: 'Can we not have two golds?'

Gianmarco Tamberi won the gold medal in the men's high jump along with Mutaz Essa Barshim

Barshim tied with Tamberi and the pair agreed to both take the gold medal when offered it

The official responded, 'It's possible if you both decide' and before he had finished speaking Barshim offered Tamberi his hand to agree to sharing the gold and the pair shared an emotional hug before Tamberi wheeled away in celebration.

Both men were clean at every attempt to 2.37 meters and both missed all three attempts at the Olympic record of 2.39.

The 30-year-old Barshim was the silver medallist at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Games and was also on the podium at the 2012 London Games. He won the world championship gold medal at home in Qatar in 2019.

Tamberi is a former world indoor champion.

Maksim Nedasekau of Belarus won the bronze medal. He also cleared 2.37 for a national record.

Barshim added a coveted Olympic gold to his list of accolades.

At the 2012 London Games Barshim won a bronze, which was later upgraded to silver. He picked up another silver in Rio de Janeiro four years later and then won two successive world titles in 2017 and 2019.

His personal best of 2.43m is the second-highest jump of all time and is only behind Javier Sotomayor's world record mark of 2.45 set in 1993.

South Korean Woo Sang-hyeok and Australian Brandon Starc, the younger brother of cricketer Mitchell, both cleared 2.35 to finish fourth and fifth respectively.

Both men were clean at every attempt to 2.37 meters and missed all three attempts at 2.39.

The pair looked more than happy to share the glory, with Tamberi howling in delight and rolling around the track, having missed out on competing in Rio five years ago due to injury.

The decision to share the medal was overwhelmingly well received on social media.

Team GB athlete Eilish McColgan tweeted: 'Such an incredible moment. Two of the nicest people in our sport sharing gold.'

British high jumper Emily Borthwick added: 'I'm not crying, you're crying.'

Athletics performance coach Steve Magness said on his Twitter account: 'The sharing of the Olympic gold from Barshim and Tamberi and emotional outlet right after from both is what it's all about. What a moment in the high jump.'

USA Track and Field tweeted: 'Love the sportsmanship from Italy and Qatar in the men's high jump final!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@South Africa produced a dominant, physically imposing performance to outpower the British and Irish Lions in the second Test in Cape Town.

The Springboks secured a 27-9 victory after last week's 22-17 Lions win, setting up a mouth-watering series decider in the third match.

Makazole Mapimpi and Lukhanyo Am scored the tries before fly-half Handre Pollard kicked them out of sight, with Eben Etzebeth and Pollard coming to the fore as Duhan van der Merwe and Stuart Hogg wilted under the Boks' aerial bombardment.

Here, Sportsmail's Mike Brown rated the players on a sobering day for Warren Gatland's side.

LIONS

WARREN GATLAND - 6

Not selecting Liam Williams in the 23-man squad was a mistake. The Lions lost the aerial battle, which was always going to be a threat from South Africa.

Gatland had nothing to fall back on the bench to win the game in the air. His game-plan had too much kicking, and was too slow, which played into South Africa's hands.

15 STUART HOGG - 4

Aerially was awful under the high-balls South Africa put up all night – look uncertain from the start – which the Boks picked all their scraps off. Liam Williams must play the decider so the Lions can win the aerial battle.

14 ANTHONY WATSON - 5

Threw his only first-half carry out of play and poor in the air like the rest of the back-three. Only touched the ball twice in the whole 80 minutes – the second of which was right at the end of the game.

Scottish pair Stuart Hogg (left) and Duhan van der Merwe (right) were poor for the Lions

13 CHRIS HARRIS - 6.5

Does the basics so well every time – hit opposite number Am brilliantly first up to set the tone – and was far more solid than Daly was last week, so should stay for the 3rd Test next week. Quiet but did his job.

12 ROBBIE HENSHAW - 6.5

Should have scored his first-half try, but denied incredibly by Kolisi's tackle. Tried to carry hard in the midfield – with 27 metres made from six attempts, and completed eleven tackles without missing a single one.

11 DUHAN VAN DER MERWE - 4

Silly yellow card for the trip on Kolbe in the first-half. The back-three was the Lions' weakest point, where Gatland must make changes. Only touched the ball once. I would bring in Josh Adams for him.

10 DAN BIGGAR - 6.5

Array of varied kicks – high and low - had South Africa under pressure, executing the Lions' gameplan. Missed one penalty before Farrell replaced him, which he'd usually get and would have kept the pressure on South Africa.

British and Irish Lions fly-half Dan Biggar (third right) had a mixed game, missing a key kick

9 CONOR MURRAY - 6.5

Did exactly what he was brought in to do – kick well, control the tempo. Nearly set up Henshaw try with a lovely chip. Needs to increase the tempo at times and vary the Lions' attacking game, which Ali Price could have brought.

1 MAKO VUNIPOLA - 8

Solid in the scrum against Malherbe, and was the Lions' main carrier to get them over the gainline on eight occasions, making inroads every time in the loose. Seven tackles and none missed in defence.

2 LUKE COWAN-DICKIE - 7.5

Far better throwing in the lineout and nine physical carries as we've come to expect from the Cornishman. The main focal-point for the Lions' forward carrying game in the first half with nine charges.

Alun Wyn Jones (left) and Maro Itoje (right) did well at first but were outgunned after the break

3 TADHG FURLONG - 7

Kept the scrum solid until Sinckler came on before the hour mark, against Steven Kitshoff, and defended well, making all six of his tackles. The South African bench props did well after Furlong went off.

4 MARO ITOJE - 7.5

The Lions' talisman led from the front in every respect – exactly as he did last week. Two first-half lineout steals in the first half but struggled to make an impact once the Bok pack took over the game with their replacements.

5 ALUN WYN JONES - 7

Nuisance all over the field, riling up the Boks, but like Itoje was overpowered when the 'Bomb squad' came on to beat the Lions up. His leadership will be key this week for the decider in the third Test. He has done it before in 2013, though.

The Lions' hopes of sealing a famous Test series triumph were buried under an aerial onslaught

6 COURTNEY LAWES - 6.5

Banged the Boks in defence and carried so physically. He's a great lineout option too, but was quiet in the second-half like the rest of the Lions' front-five as de Jager dominated off the bench. Nine tackles from the back-row.

7 TOM CURRY - 7

Smashed South Africans in defence in the first-half, putting pressure on South Africa with quick line-speed. But the breakdown became a mess in the second half, which is a concern for the Lions going into next week.

8 JACK CONAN - 6

Needs to have more impact on a big Test match from No 8. He made just three metres from seven carries. I'd be tempted to go with the experience of Faletau in the 3rd and final Test next Saturday.

SOUTH AFRICA

JACQUES NIENABER - 8

His game-plan was spot on. The Springboks had far more variations in attack than last week and they exposed the Lions back-three so well. He didn't make the same mistake of changing the front-row too early like last week either.

15 Willie Le Roux - 7.5

Full-back pulled the strings in attack to add variation and width. Covered the back-field well and was right at the heart of a number of scraps between the teams too. His relationship with Pollard is key for the Boks.

Cheslin Kolbe (No 14) was lucky to escape a red for taking out Conor Murray (top) in the air

14 Cheslin Kolbe - 6

Lucky to get away with just a yellow for taking out Murray in the air, and was not penalised for a head-clash with Curry. Still yet to see his dazzling feet in this Test series where he's touched the ball only five times.

13 Lukhanyo Am - 6.5

Very quiet, in my opinion, apart from finishing the key try, collecting a wonderful kick from de Klerk. He made only three carries and did not gain a single metre with ball-in-hand, but was the Boks' top defender in the backs with nine tackles.

12 Damian de Allende - 7.5

Eleven strong carries to give South Africa go-forward all evening. The big centre cleaned up a lot of loose balls and defended well with Am, in what is a great partnership. Beat three defenders in his 80 minutes too.

Handre Pollard floated a fine chip over the top for wing Makazole Mapimpi, who finished well

11 Makazole Mapimpi - 7

Finished his try after half-time well, taking the cross-kick from Pollard. Gave away three penalties on his own in the first half though, but was good in the air and chased kicks well to pressurise the Lions back-three.

10 Handre Pollard - 8

Couple of dodgy kicks for goal, missing five points from the tee, but provided a world-class assist for Mapimpi's try. Strong in defence and so solid under the high ball, many of which he launched from his massive boot.

9 Faf De Klerk - 8

Busy all game as ever, and was a nuisance, although may have been lucky when hitting Murray high in the second half. Super kick into the dead-ball area for Am's try which sunk the Lions, pushing the Boks into a nine-point lead.

1 Steven Kitshoff - 8

Kept the scrum strong for the South Africans during his hour on the field as he won his 50th Springbok cap. Nyakane was incredible off the bench as his replacement, playing on the loose-head side when usually a tight-head.

Outside centre Lukhanyo Am then extended the lead with a controversial second try (pictured)

2 Bongi Mbonambi - 8

Itoje stole a couple of his lineouts in the first half, but he was perfect after that. The best scrummaging hooker the Boks have. His replacement Marx was part of the epic second half from the 'bomb squad'.

3 Frans Malherbe - 7.5

The 20st tight-head was a rock in the set-piece to give South Africa a good platform to play off. When Koch came on for him the Lions scrum dismantled with Sutherland in it.

4 Eben Etzebeth - 8.5

An absolute beast who smashed the Lions in defence, making 12 massive tackles. He is the talisman for South Africa and enjoys his battles with Itoje so much. It will be another epic battle between them next week.

Pollard kicked three late penalties to rub salt in the Lions wounds as the match finished 27-9

5 Franco Mostert - 7

Great partner for Etzebeth, a physical presence both in defence and in attack, which is exactly what you'd expect from a South African lock. De Jager added even more off the bench as the Boks physically turned the screw.

6 Siya Kolisi - 8

Said he thought he was disrespected in the first Test and this week worked tirelessly all game with carries, breakdown contests and tackling everything he could.

Top Bok tackler with 14 hits, including an unbelievable try-saver on Henshaw, and made 22 metres.

7 Pieter-Steph Du Toit - 5

Unfortunately injured by van der Merwe and went off early having hurt his shoulder which could rule him out of next week. If he is out of the final Test it could be a huge loss for South Africa, who will hope Duane Vermuelen can come back.

8 Jasper Wiese - 6

A few errors, like dropped catches, but carried and tackled hard – the joint most hits with Kolisi on 14. In the back-field he improved in the second-half catching a lot of Murray's box-kicks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nuno Espirito Santo has left the door open for Harry Kane to feature in Tottenham’s season opener against Manchester City on Sunday.

Spurs boss Nuno was due to speak to star striker Kane for the first time in person yesterday after his delayed return to training following the Euros and his summer break — a wait which has coincided with his attempts to force a move away from Tottenham this summer.

The chances of Kane being involved against City — his main suitors and the club the England captain wants to join — are in doubt with his future up in the air.

Tottenham expect all first team players to be available for the opening day, including Kane

Nuno, though, has put the ball in Kane’s court by insisting that all the players in regular training will be in contention for a place in his squad for City’s visit.

Nuno said: ‘All the players who work on a daily basis will be options for us, then it’s up to us to decide.’

Kane was originally expected back at Spurs at the beginning of last week but only returned on Saturday to begin his preparations for the new campaign.

He is currently isolating having holidayed in the Bahamas and Florida — which has so far prevented him from being part of Nuno’s pre-season plans.

New boss Nuno Espirito Santo has stressed that all first team players will remain available

Kane is staying at The Lodge, the hotel at Spurs’ training ground. He has been able to begin preparing for the season by training alone but is not due to join Nuno’s first-team group until Thursday.

He could then have up to three days of full training before Spurs host champions City. Although a week may seem insufficient, Kane has shown previously that he is capable of starting a season despite minimal build-up.

Following the 2018 World Cup in Russia, Kane started Spurs’ opener at Newcastle, playing the full 90 minutes only five days after returning to training.

Kane made clear his desire to leave Tottenham before heading off with England for Euro 2020

City remain determined to land Kane despite signing Jack Grealish for a British record £100m

Whether he is now willing to be involved against City given the backdrop to his pre-season and desire to move remains to be seen.

On his discussions with Kane, Nuno said: ‘We hope to solve all the situations. It’s not about that (Kane’s late return), it’s about what we have to do to solve the situation — this is important.

‘We have to solve it together, everybody involved has to solve it together — speaking, having a nice conversation and putting our opinions, but everybody together.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Aston Villa have lost a second member of their coaching team in less than three weeks with Richard O’Kelly announcing his departure less than 48 hours before their opening game of the season.

After former England captain John Terry left his role on manager Dean Smith’s staff on July 26, to pursue a career in management, Smith’s long-time assistant O’Kelly has followed him out of the door.

Villa’s official statement gave no explanation for O’Kelly’s choice, saying simply that he had ‘decided to leave’.

Aston Villa have not given a reason why Dean Smith's assistant, Richard O'Kelly, has departed

Sportsmail understands that with O’Kelly and Terry now gone, Smith will look to add to his coaching team, with candidates who have experience of overseas football – rather than the traditional English No 2 – of particular interest. O’Kelly had moved from Brentford with Smith when he took the Villa Park post in October 2019.

The club had always expected Terry to go at some stage as they knew his desire to follow his former Chelsea and England team-mate Frank Lampard into management, and never planned to stand in his way when the time came.

Yet O’Kelly’s move comes with Smith in the final stages of preparation for Saturday’s Premier League meeting at Watford, with Villa having sold captain Jack Grealish to Manchester City for £100million and spent the money on playmaker Emiliano Buendia and forwards Leon Bailey and Danny Ings.

O'Kelly was also with Smith (centre), who recently lost coach John Terry (right), at Brentford

It is thought that while O’Kelly played a valuable role for Smith, he was not as prominent as he had been when the club won promotion in 2019, and in their first campaign back in the top flight.

In a statement posted on Villa’s website, Smith said: ‘Richard has worked with me for the best part of a decade and we have always had a really close relationship. We are friends as well as colleagues and I will miss him.’

Smith brought Craig Shakespeare, who worked with Claudio Ranieri when Leicester won the title in 2016, as he wanted more Premier League experience on his staff. Earlier this month, Smith also added Austin MacPhee as a specialist set piece coach.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Everton manager Rafael Benitez has promised there is more to come from his side after a confidence-boosting victory over Southampton in his first match in charge.

The Spaniard, a controversial appointment as a former Liverpool boss, managed at the first attempt what predecessors Carlo Ancelotti and Marco Silva struggled to achieve in their combined three years in charge in getting the players to successfully respond to adversity.

Silva famously failed to win any of the 28 Premier League matches in which his Toffees side went behind, and took only five points from those games.

Rafa Benitez has stressed there's more to come from Everton after they beat Southampton

Ancelotti lost nine home league matches last season - admittedly without the presence of fans - and won just one fixture at Goodison after March 1.

Because of his association with the red half of the city Benitez still has to win over sceptical fans, but he has at least got off on the right foot.

'We need to understand it is too early, we have just arrived after six weeks and you cannot expect the players will understand everything we are trying to do,' said the 61-year-old, who was without six first-team players for his opening fixture.

'After time they will improve but overall the reaction of the players, everyone on the pitch, everyone in the stadium, has been so positive I will take that.

'The way we were fighting for every ball, this is what the fans were expecting.

Benitez had no hesitation about calling upon Richarlison following his return from Tokyo

'There were a lot of positives from the first game of the season but don't forget that we have some players coming back late but it is good to start with three points.

'In the end the players understood what we are trying to do. Hopefully in the future we won't see them suffering so much.'

Benitez was fortunate he was able to call on Richarlison, an Olympic gold medal winner with Brazil just a week ago, who scored the crucial equaliser and set up Dominic Calvert-Lewin's diving header either side of Abdoulaye Doucoure's fierce strike.

Prior to Tokyo the forward had been a Copa America finalist so is deserving of a break, but an agreement between player and club means he was back in action after just a couple of days.

'It wasn't a gamble to play him. He told us he wanted to play, I told him he had to score, he did it and everybody is happy,' said the Toffees boss.

Southampton boss Ralph Hasenhuttl was pleased with the performance of Tino Livramento

'We knew people would say he could be tired. The reality is that his match fitness is good. We gave him one day off to be sure he was fine.

'We will try to bring the best from him in the next couple of weeks and after give him some time to recover fully for the rest of the season.'

Saints boss Ralph Hasenhuttl looked for the positives after a ninth defeat in 14 matches and aside from new £15million signing Adam Armstrong scoring the opener on his debut, fellow new arrival Tino Livramento - a £5m buy from Chelsea - impressed.

'It wasn't an easy decision for me but I was looking for his physical one-against-one qualities and I think he did fantastic against Richarlison,' he said.

'Immediately he is a player who can play in the Premier League and that is a positive for us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Former Manchester United director Maurice Watkins CBE, who brought Sir Alex Ferguson to the Premier League club in 1986, has passed away aged 79.

Watkins spent 28 years at Old Trafford before retiring in 2012 and was involved in some of the biggest decisions the club made in that period.

Not only was Watkins crucial in appointing Ferguson, who went on to become the most successful manager in United's history, to the club - but he also convinced the Scot to stay on as manager when he threatened to retire after the 2001-02 season.

His final role in sport saw him take up the role of British Swimming chairman, with Team GB enjoying their most successful Olympic Games campaign in Tokyo this summer, just before his passing.

Former Manchester United director Maurice Watkins has passed away aged 79

Watkins (second right) helped to hire Sir Alex Ferguson (left) to Manchester United in 1986

Educated at Manchester Grammar School, Watkins became a director at United in 1984 - on the day Sir Bobby Charlton was appointed to the same role - and also held the position of club solicitor.

He represented former United and England defender Rio Ferdinand at the hearing which saw the defender banned from playing for eight months and fined £50,000 for failing to take a drugs test, as well as Eric Cantona at his assault trial when the striker performed a 'kung fu' kick on Crystal Palace fan Matthew Simmons in January 1995.

But his most important role with the Red Devils was helping to keep Ferguson at the club when the Scot revealed in the summer of 2001 that he wanted to quit the club after the upcoming season due to personal reasons, against the board's wishes.

Watkins (right) represented Rio Ferdinand (left) when the defender was handed a drugs ban

He also represented Eric Cantona at his assault trial over his 1995 kung fu kick at Crystal Palace

Watkins worked with the United hierarchy to try and convince Ferguson to stay longer, with the manager deciding in February 2002 that he had reversed his decision. He would go lead United to six more Premier League titles and one more Champions League crown before he eventually retired from management in 2013.

Current United owner Malcolm Glazer tried to remove Watkins from the club's board at a 2005 AGM, but he remained in his board and lawyer roles after the attempt.

The Premier League club posted a statement on Twitter, saying: 'All at Manchester United are deeply saddened by the loss of our former Director, Maurice Watkins, who served the club with such distinction for over a quarter of a century. We send our heartfelt condolences to his loved ones at this time.'

In 2002, Watkins convinced Ferguson to remain at United for over a decade longer as manager

Ferguson decided to quit after the 2001-02 season but Watkins changed the manager's mind

Around the time of Watkins' resignation from Manchester United, he took up roles as interim Rugby League Football chairman, Barnsley FC chairman and director of Lancashire County Cricket Club.

He was appointed as British Swimming chairman in December 2012 and oversaw Team GB's Olympic and Paralympic cycles for Rio 2016 and Tokyo 2020.

UK Sport chief executive Sally Munday said in a statement: 'I was so saddened to hear about Maurice. My thoughts are with his family and friends.

'Maurice was so well known in the sporting community and the sheer variety of sports that he was involved in throughout his life goes some way to showing the impact he had on the British sporting landscape.

Watkins' final role was chairman of Briitsh Swimming, while he also was chairman at Barnsley

'As Chair of British Swimming, he must have been immensely proud of the success that Britain's aquatics athletes had in Tokyo in the recent weeks. He will be sorely missed.'

British Swimming CEO Jack Buckner added: 'I have been fortunate to experience Maurice's personal dignity and humility. He has been a leader of deep wisdom and patient intelligence, the wise steward at the heart of the sport.

'Even in his last days, his total focus was on Tokyo and the great events which unfolded there. Maurice, a piece of these medals belong to you.

'Thanks for your massive contribution to British Swimming and everything you have done for British sport.'

Watkins was also known for his charity work, helping the NHS Royal Manchester Children's Hospital Charity for a decade-and-a-half and led the group's campaign to raise £20million for equipment and family accommodation during that time.

He was then appointed a CBE on the Queen's Birthday Honours list in 2011 for his services to charity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester United captain Harry Maguire has hailed Raphael Varane's 'winning mentality', claiming his arrival will lift the squad - but warned that every player needs to be ready to fight for their place.

The Frenchman was officially unveiled on the pitch to a standing ovation before United got Old Trafford rocking with a 5-1 opening day thriller against Leeds on Saturday.

The defender's £42million arrival means United find themselves with a surplus of centre-back options - including Maguire, Victor Lindelof, Eric Bailly and Phil Jones - and will force players to improve.

Harry Maguire claimed Raphael Varane's arrival at United brings a 'winning mentality'

The 28-year-old is expected to partner Maguire at the heart of United's defence, bumping Lindelof, who started against Leeds, to the bench.

Axel Tuanzebe and teenager Teden Mengi are expected to play their football away from Manchester this season, while Jones has not played in almost 18 months but is still contracted to the club until 2023.

Speaking after the 5-1 win, Maguire said: 'To bring players into this club, obviously of his calibre as well, it's going to be really, really exciting.

Harry Maguire claimed Varane's arrival at United is 'great for the competition for the squad'

'Everyone in the squad is obviously looking forward to working with him. I think one thing that it does is it boosts our defensive options.

'We've got an amazing number of centre-backs now at this club, all international players who are all proven in the Premier League. You've seen again how well Victor played [against Leeds].'

With six first-team centre-backs on offer for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer to select, tensions are already said to be running high amongst the squad.

Varane held up his No 19 shirt to the expectant Red Devils fans on Saturday but he reportedly had been targeting the No 4.

Varane held up his No 19 shirt to the expectant Red Devils fans at Old Trafford on Saturday

The centre-back had been targeting the number four but Phil Jones retained the number

However, according to the Manchester Evening News, Jones refused to relinquish the number, despite not making an appearance for United since January 2020.

The World Cup winner also wore 19 on his back during his first season with Real Madrid before switching to No 2 and then settling on five

No 4 had been reserved for Sergio Ramos at the Bernabeu and Varane had hoped to finally wear it in England.

Solskjaer has failed to bring any silverware to Old Trafford so far during his three-season tenure but the United boss will be hoping the four-time Champions League and World Cup winner could help his side clinch a trophy this season.

The defender has won the Champions League four times and the 2018 World Cup with France

'I think you've seen what he's won over his career. He's played in some of the top teams about - the French squad and the Real Madrid team - and he's won absolutely everything,' Maguire added.

'I think he'll bring that winning mentality to the club and he'll also bring his footballing ability to the club. Like I said, bringing players in is great for the squad. It lifts the squad, it's great for the competition for the squad - not just as a centre-back but just in any position.

'We thrive off it, that's how we play. At one of the biggest clubs in the world you don't expect to have an easy ride and have no competition for places.'

Victor Lindelof produced an assist for Bruno Fernandes to secure his opening day hat-trick

Lindelof was named captain of the Sweden national team this week but Varane's arrival is likely to spell the end of the his time as a regular starter.

However, Lindelof made a strong case to retain his spot as he provided an assist for Bruno Fernandes to seal his opening day hat-trick.

'Victor has not just shown today [how good he is], but he's shown over the last two seasons while I've played with him,' Maguire said.

'He's an excellent footballer so, like I say, to have this amount of top centre-backs is great for the competition for places. It'll make people push further, push harder and it's exciting.'

Varane will have been impressed by his new club on Saturday, as he watched a searing victory inspired by Fernandes and Paul Pogba, who notched four assists, from the stands but could make his debut when United lock horns with Southampton on Sunday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal defender Hector Bellerin is eager to leave the club before the closure of the transfer window.

Bellerin has grown frustrated with what he sees as a reluctance from Arsenal to let him leave and is willing to take a pay cut to secure a move away, as reported by The Athletic.

The right-back was the subject of interest from Inter Milan but the move failed to materialise, with Arsenal having only been open to a sale or a loan with an obligation to buy.

Arsenal defender Hector Bellerin is eager to secure a move away from the club this month

Bellerin has made it clear to Mikel Arteta he wants to leave but nothing has materialised so far

The report indicates that Bellerin, who has two years remaining on his contract, has made it clear to Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta and technical director Edu that he wishes to depart.

Bellerin was an unused substitute for Arsenal's defeat to Brentford in the opening Premier League game of the season, and Arteta has other right-back options to call upon including Calum Chambers and Cedric Soares.

Bellerin was an unused substitute versus Brentford and wants to get back into the Spain squad

Ainsley Maitland-Niles is also capable of playing at right-back, while against Brentford Arteta brought on Nuno Tavares in that position despite the new signing being a left-back.

Capped by Spain at senior level on four occasions, Bellerin is determined to break back into his country's squad in time for the 2022 World Cup.

There have been suggestions that Bellerin could be involved in a swap deal with Barcelona's Emerson or Atletico Madrid's Kieran Trippier but at present nothing is advanced.

Bellerin joined Arsenal ten years ago and has proceeded to make 239 senior appearances for the club but is now eager for a fresh challenge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday.

The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist - turning 47 on August 17 - donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels.

Giuliana - a self-described 'ultimate passionista' - founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago.

On the mic again! Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday

'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall,' Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried.

'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

The trade show runs through Wednesday at the Las Vegas Convention Center's West Hall.

Speaking of Las Vegas, the breast cancer survivor and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022.

Turning 47 on August 17! The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels

Self-described 'ultimate passionista': Giuliana founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago

Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried: 'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall'

The breast cancer survivor continued: 'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

It will mark the RPM restaurant partners' sixth restaurant after opening franchises in Chicago and Washington, D.C.

Giuliana and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1.

Rancic (born DePandi) originally met Bill when she interviewed him on the E! Network in 2005 after he won NBC's The Apprentice in 2004.

'Vegas, baby!' Speaking of Las Vegas, Giuliana and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian restaurant franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022

July 4 family portrait: Rancic and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1

That was quick! The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox (R) just three days after she resigned from the cable network

The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox just three days after she resigned from the cable network.

Giuliana inked a new development deal with E!'s parent company NBCUniversal where she will 'produce and bring stories to life.'

Rancic famously got into trouble on the job in 2015 when she made racist comments about Emmy winner Zendaya's dreadlocks, for which she apologized.

Little guy! Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer

Werrrk! The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants

Glam: Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event

Outfit change! McCord (pictured Tuesday) hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer

Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer.

The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants.

Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event.

McCord hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears and her boyfriend Sam Asghari were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines.

In the clip, the 27-year-old actor and fitness professional was seated in front of a chocolate shake while the 39-year-old Lucky singer encouraged him to ditch his strict dietary regimen for a sweet treat.

'You know, to be or not to be, that is the question I ask myself everyday - to eat or not to eat, that is the question,' he said, as Spears was heard laughing in the background.

The latest: Britney Spears, 39, and her boyfriend Sam Asghari, 27, were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines

'Should I do it, should I not?' Asghari said, mentioning he want to stay in great shape for any potential jobs - to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

Asghari donned a yellow T-shirt and had his hair combed to the side and a beard in the cozy exchange with the Grammy-winning pop star.

Asghari, who's been seen on the BET+ show Family Business, initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter.

The lighthearted clip came after Los Angeles Superior Judge Brenda Penny denied a request from Spears' legal team to expedite a hearing in the conservatorship case ahead against her father Jamie Spears.

Back and forth: Asghari said he didn't want to drink the shake to stay in great shape for any potential jobs, to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

History: Asghari initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter

Spears' lawyer Mathew Rosengart also requested that Jamie Spears' power in the conservatorship be suspended after the institution Bessemer Trust resigned from involvement in the case, NBC News reported.

Rosengart also requested a probe into how Jamie Spears is dispersing the funds in the conservatorship.

In legal filings, Spears' legal team said the Toxic singer 'continues to suffer ongoing harm each day that Mr. Spears remains in place as the Conservator of the Estate - emotionally, psychologically, and financially.'

Happy couple: The pair were seen kissing at the Once Upon A Time...In Hollywood premiere in LA in 2019

Hot topic: Fans congregated in Miami Beach, Florida last week to show their support for the singer in her legal battle

In his retort, Jamie Spears said in court docs that the singer is 'mentally sick' and that he sensed she 'was spiraling out of control.'

She spoke in a June 23 hearing about her hopes to end the arrangement, which was initially implemented amid a pileup of personal problems.

'I just want my life back,' she said. 'And it’s been 13 years. And it’s enough. It’s been a long time since I’ve owned my money. And it’s my wish and my dream for all of this to end without being tested.'

The issue is set to come before the court in a September 29 hearing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The family of Spider-Man actor Alfred Molina, 68, have described his marriage to Oscar-winning Frozen director Jennifer Lee as being like a 'fairy tale ending to a film.'

The couple tied the knot last week a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020.

His new bride Jennifer, 49, posted a gallery of photos from their sunlit garden ceremony to Instagram on Monday with the sweet caption: 'We did. We do.'

'It's a fairy tale ending': Alfred Molina's family share their joy as Spider-Man star, 68, marries Frozen director Jennifer Lee, 49... 16 months after wife Jill Gascoine died aged 83

In one snap, Alfred was seen overcome with emotion and holding his hands to his face as he watched his bride walk down the aisle.

His sister-in-law, Lyn Molina told MailOnline: 'Alfred has gone through a lot over the past few years and this is like a fairy tale ending to one of his films.

'It's absolutely lovely and we are delighted for them. They are a wonderful couple who are really in love.'

First marriage: The couple tied the knot last week a little more than one year after Alfred's first wife, English actress Jill Gascoine, died of Alzheimer's disease at the age of 83 in April 2020 (pictured in 1994)

Lynn, who lives in in Surrey and is married to Alfred's brother Roberto revealed that he and Jennifer had been together for around five years.

During this time, Alfred remained legally married to wife Jill, but shared in 2016 that the actress was in the 'final stages' of the debilitating disease.

He went public with his romance with Jennifer in November 2019.

Lynn added: 'We met Jennifer about three years ago when she came to London with Alfred. She's lovely and is very down to earth, with no airs and graces.'

Loving family: Alfred's sister-in-law, Lyn Molina (pictured) told MailOnline, Alfred has gone through a lot over the past few years and this is like a fairy tale ending to one of his films'

Sweet: In the wedding pictures, Alfred was seen overcome with emotion and holding his hands to his face as he watched his bride walk down the aisle

She added that she and her husband had been invited to the wedding in the States but decided not to travel because of COVID.

Lynn revealed: 'Of course we were invited but unfortunately, because of all the restrictions around travel at this time, we decided not to go. We would have loved to have been there to enjoy their beautiful day with them.

'We look forward to seeing them soon but don't know when that's going to be.'

Wow: Jennifer, who is the Chief Creative Officer at Walt Disney Animation Studios, looked sensational in a tulle dress with an A-line skirt and sequins dotted throughout

Jennifer, who is the Chief Creative Officer at Walt Disney Animation Studios, looked sensational in a tulle dress with an A-line skirt and sequins dotted throughout.

Her groom donned a grey suit, light pink shirt and sunglasses with a white rose placed in the lapel of his smart ensemble.

Also present at the ceremony as officiator was actor Jonathan Groff, 36, who famously voiced Kristoff in the Frozen films.

Sweet: Also present at the ceremony as officiator was actor Jonathan Groff, 36, who famously voiced Kristoff in the Frozen films

In a subsequent post from Jennifer, she shared further details of how Jonathan was involved in her nuptials to Alfred.

Captioning a photo of herself and Jonathan talking at the reception, she wrote: 'This beautiful, generous soul is the reason Fred and I met. We owe him the world.'

Jennifer and Jonathan worked on Frozen together and he also worked with Alfred on a 2012 production of John Logan's play Red.

Both Alfred and Jonathan starred in 2019's animated Frozen II — with Alfred as the voice of Agnarr, Elsa and Anna's father, and Jonathan reprising his role of Kristoff.

Going public: Roberto andJennifer have been together for five years, during which time he was legally married to Jill, and went public with his romance with Jennifer in November 2019

Alfred was first married to Z-Cars star Jill who he met when they were both working in the same theatre production.

They married in Tower Hamlets, London, in 1986 when she was 49 and he was 33. He had a daughter, Rachel, now 41, from a previous relationship.

Jill was first married to Dundee hotelier Bill Keith - tying the knot in 1965 and divorcing in 1972 - during which time they had two sons Adam and Sean, but they did not stay in contact with Bill after the divorce and Jill raised them as a single mother.

One to watch: Jennifer and Jonathan worked on the animated film Frozen together (pictured: an image from the film)

The actress rose to fame as Detective Inspector Maggie Forbes in The Gentle Touch and appeared in the spin-off series, C.A.T.S Eyes, before building a career in America.

While Jill lived until 2020, four years prior in 2016, Alfred shared that Jill was already in the 'final stages' of the debilitating disease.

He told The Radio Times: 'Alzheimer's is a cowardly disease. It creeps up on you from behind and by the time you realise you've got it you're probably not realising much else. It's a stinker'.

In other interviews, he also admitted to undergoing counselling to deal with her illness and joining an Alzheimer's support group.

Friends had previously revealed how Jill started noticing problems with her memory in 2010. She was diagnosed in 2012 after her memory loss became more significant.

Jennifer, meanwhile, was previously married to Robert Joseph Monn, with whom she shares daughter Agatha. Agatha, 18, was the voice of nine-year-old Anna in the first Frozen film, from 2013.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Drake's three-year-old son looked cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, which was shared to Instagram on Friday.

In the sweet photo the mom-of-one lovingly wrapped her arm around her son as they both smiled softly.

The brunette beauty captioned the picture, 'My most precious,' adding three blue emoji hearts, and tagging her baby daddy's handle, @champagnepapi.

Time with mom: Drake's three-year-old son looks super cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, shared to Instagram Friday

She wore pearl earrings and a white tank top, while her tot had on a navy blue Tommy Hilfiger shirt with graphics of athletes. A clear, blue sky was their backdrop.

It's the first image of her son she has posted on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message.

'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Flashback: She hadn't posted her son on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message

Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017.

The French native, 31, is fairly private about her young son with the famous rapper, only selectively posting about their bundle of joy.

Brussaux, a visual artist, has made a name for herself in the art world, and has been featured in some major exhibitions by blending surrealism, symbolism and pop art.

Mom life: 'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Just hangin': Drake and Sophie share three-year-old son, Adonis

The pair reportedly met when they were among a group of friends dining at a Japanese restaurant in Amsterdam in January 2017, according to The Sun.

This was around the time the singer-rapper, born Aubrey Drake Graham, was alleged to have been spending time with Jennifer Lopez.

By May, about four months later, Brussaux went public and claimed she was carrying Drake's baby.

Sharp: Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017; Drake appears at the 2013 GRAMMY Awards in LA

He did not acknowledge the existence of his child until the release of his album Scorpion in June 2018.

Since Adonis became public knowledge, Drake has talked about wanting to be on good terms with Sophie, who he claimed to have only met twice before they conceived the child.

Despite initially keeping him out of the public eye, the superstar father has warmed up to regularly sharing outtakes of his life with young Adonis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He hasn't eased up on his intense fitness regime, despite retiring from football in 2013.

And a shirtless David Beckham showcased his eclectic selection of tattoos and athletic prowess to Instagram on Saturday as he performed ab wheel rollouts at the gym for Inter Miami CF.

The athlete, 45, displayed his washboard stomach as he utilised his impressive core strength to extend his body above the workout room's floor.

Wow: A shirtless David Beckham showcased his selection of tattoos and athletic prowess to Instagram on Saturday as he performed ab wheel rollouts at the gym for Inter Miami CF

David was seen sporting Adidas shorts with pink stripes, perfectly matching his pink trainers.

He skillfully balanced on his knees while leaning forward and maintaining control through the use of an ab roller.

His silver locks were styled in a short hairdo as he rocked a rugged stubble.

David captioned the upload: 'When I'm not doing F45 on my day off I'm here [laughing emoji]' referencing the functional full-body workout franchise which he is now an ambassador for.

Sportsman: The athlete, 45, displayed his washboard stomach as he utilised his impressive core strength to extend his body above the workout room's floor

The post comes after David and his wife Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday.

The former footballer took to his Instagram Stories and shared a recent heartwarming snap alongside Cruz, 16, where they wrapped their arms around each other.

The proud father wrote: 'Cruzie so proud well done big boy'.

Victoria, 47, shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Attention to detail: David was seen sporting Adidas shorts with pink stripes, perfectly matching his pink trainers for the workout

Record numbers of top grades were awarded to pupils doing their GCSE's this year, with 30 per cent of entries in England gaining grades 7 and above - equivalent to A and A*.

David and Victoria are also parents to sons Brooklyn, 22, Romeo, 18, and daughter Harper, 10.

On Tuesday, David was hard at work at his football club Inter Miami and he decided to bring Harper along with him.

Taking to Instagram, David revealed that he was enjoying a kickabout on one of the club's pitches with his daughter and shared sweet footage of their game.

Heartwarming: The post comes after David and his wife Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday

Proud: Victoria, 47, shared a photo of her son, 16, going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Filming Harper as she kicked a ball towards him, David could be heard commentating: 'Beckham, to Beckham, yeah!' before kicking the ball into the net.

He then passed the ball back to Harper, saying: 'Yes, pass it back. Nice. Get set - Beckham, to Beckham, woohoo!' as she also scored a goal.

David captioned the post: 'Daddy daughter day at work @intermiamicf BECKHAM to BECKHAM GOOOOAAAAALLL.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram – before swiftly removing the interaction days later.

The England footballer, 25, currently in a relationship with model Sasha Attwood, also 25, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's glamorous photos by liking the snaps from his verified profile.

Lillie, 22, was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her wearing a skimpy white bikini that was shared days after she entered the rival Love Island villa.

'Flattered': Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram before swiftly removing the interaction days later

A source told MailOnline: 'Lillie couldn't believe Jack even knows who she is, let alone took the time to like her uploads on Instagram.

'It was disappointing he unliked the photos days later, but it's possible he didn't want his girlfriend finding out.

'She was complimented nonetheless, and hopes one day they'll cross paths so she can ask him about it.'

The footballer liked a photo of Lillie in a bikini that was shared while she was in Casa Amor on July 26, as well as a snap of the reality star enjoying a glass of bubbles to celebrate her 'freedom' after returning from Mallorca and quarantining for five days.

MailOnline has contacted Jack and Lillie's representatives for comment.

'Stunner': The England footballer, who's in a relationship with Sasha Attwood, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's photos by liking the snaps from his profile

Undo: The likes on Lillie's photos were from Jack's verified Instagram profile, and were captured in the days before he removed the interaction from her account

Jack, who completed his record British transfer from Aston Villa earlier this month, recently admitted he's a 'big fan' of Love Island, even saying if he wasn't a footballer, he'd be a contestant on the ITV2 dating show.

In April, Jack joked during an interview alongside ex-Villa teammate John McGinn, 26, he'd be 'on Love Island or working as a promotor or DJ' if he failed as a sportsman.

He also shared an image of him and the England lads watching Love Island on a large screen in a communal room inside the team's Euro accommodation last month and joked dumped Islander Hugo Hammond, 25, looked like the spit of defender Ben White, 23.

Jack has previously shown his admiration for former Love Island contestants, after he was caught hitting on reality star Natalia Zoppa, 22, by her boyfriend.

In a video shared on TikTok 2020 Islander Natalia's partner Hass Saleh claimed: 'As if today couldn't get any weirder, the best player in the Premier League tried to chat up missus,' while sharing the alleged Instagram message from Jack, a waving hand emoji.

Couple: Jack is in a relationship with model girlfriend Sasha Attwood after the childhood sweethearts reportedly reconciled in June following a brief split (pictured in Croatia in August)

It was reported in June that Jack and his childhood sweetheart Sasha had got back together following a brief split, and he considered the model his 'secret weapon' off the pitch.

The couple, who were pictured on holiday together in Croatia last month, met while they were teenagers at St Peter's Roman Catholic Secondary School in Solihull, West Midlands.

Lillie found fame on the current series of Love Island when she lured Liam Reardon, 21, away from partner Millie Court, 24, during his stay at Casa Amor.

Millie was faced with Liam's betrayal when she met Lillie for a catch-up arranged by producers, where she didn't hold back on the gory details.

Days later, Millie forgave Liam for passionately kissing Lillie on multiple occasions, with the couple still going strong ahead of the upcoming Love Island final.

'First day of freedom': Lillie was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her smiling while enjoying a glass of bubbles on a night out earlier this month

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From next Monday, economy passengers on British Airways flights will be able to order drinks and snacks directly to their seats using the airline's digital menu and free onboard Wi-Fi.

Customers can already pre-order inflight food – including items by Michelin-starred chef Tom Kerridge - from the airline's full Speedbird Café menu.

But now, once the plane is airborne, they can top-up their inflight meals with non-perishable purchases - such as crisps, nuts and alcoholic beverages.

From next Monday, economy passengers on British Airways flights will be able to order drinks and snacks directly to their seats using the airline's digital menu and free onboard Wi-Fi

To place an order, customers connect to the onboard Wi-Fi service free of charge via shop.ba.com, click on the 'shop' option for their flight, and a virtual menu will display the range of drinks and snack options on offer.

Orders can be made via all major credit and debit cards or through Avios and the service will be available on most short-haul routes operating from London Heathrow.

The airline will continue to offer a complimentary bottle of water and snack to all customers on board.

BA said the introduction of in-seat ordering follows the successful launch of 'Your Menu' in its Heathrow lounges, a new digital table service that requires only the scan of a QR code to enable orders to be delivered to each individual customer.

The gourmet Tom Kerridge BA range includes a posh Warm Steak & Ale Pie and vegetarian Spiced Cauliflower & Chickpea Tortilla Wrap

Tom Stevens, British Airways' Director of Brand and Customer Experience, said: 'The feedback we have had from customers who have been able to travel and have ordered from our new Speedbird Café has been extremely encouraging. The Tom Kerridge range, in particular, has gone down a treat.

'We know that customers like being able to purchase their food in advance of travel and guarantee their first choice, however we also understand the importance of an extra cup of tea or a gin and tonic, in the moment.

'We think that this new digital ordering proposition, coupled with our pre-purchase option, is a winning combination, catering for everyone's needs.'

The gourmet Tom Kerridge BA range includes a posh Warm Steak & Ale Pie; Ham Hock & Smoked Cheddar Sandwich; Chicken, Bacon & Celery Brioche Baguette; Soft Brie & Apple Chutney Ploughman's sandwich, and vegetarian Spiced Cauliflower & Chickpea Tortilla Wrap, all costing between £4.10 and £4.50.

Other items on the Speedbird Café menu include BrewDog Jet Stream beer (£4.50), Pannier Champagne (£17 for 375ml), Bloody Mary (£6.50), Dash Sparkling Spring Water (£2), Tapas Box by Jose Pizarro (£5.95), Cambrook nuts (£1.50) and 'luxurious' Savoursmiths crisps (£1.35).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The first major European tie of the new season will herald in the return to action for both Chelsea and Villarreal on Wednesday night.

Held in Belfast, the UEFA Super Cup clash will pit the Champions League and Europa League winners against each other, with another coveted trophy up for grabs.

Chelsea are competing in the final for a fifth time, having beaten Manchester City in Porto in May to seal their second triumph in the world's biggest club competition.

Chelsea will look to win the first major European trophy of the season in the UEFA Super Cup

Standing in their way is Villarreal, who will play Chelsea next after winning the Europa League

After tasting defeat against Atletico Madrid, Bayern Munich and Liverpool respectively over the last decade or so, Chelsea will be keen to go one step further.

They are almost certainly favourites to get the better of Villarreal, who are making their first Super Cup appearance.

Unai Emery steered his team to a memorable victory over Manchester United after a marathon penalty shootout, and he will want more silverware for his collection.

The Europa League signalled their first ever major trophy, and Emery's fourth success in the tournament, and the Super Cup is next up in their sights.

It promises to be an enthralling encounter just days out from the beginning of the new top-flight campaign, and here, Sportsmail looks at the key clashes...

Thomas Tuchel (left) and Unai Emery face each other in an intriguing tactical encounter

Sportsmail's predicted line-ups Chelsea: Mendy, Azpilicueta, Zouma, Rudiger, Hudson-Odoi, Kante, Kovacic, Alonso, Ziyech, Werner, Havertz Villarreal: Asenjo, Pena, Albiol, Torres, Pedraza, Foyth, Trigueros, Yeremy, A. Moreno, G. Moreno, Nino Advertisement

TIMO WERNER VS PAU TORRES

Last season was far from plain sailing for Timo Werner, and the pressure is now firmly on his shoulders to justify his £53million price tag.

Finding his scoring boots in the Super Cup will go a long way towards aiding his cause, especially in light of Romelu Lukaku's imminent arrival.

However, this will be no easy task. He will once again be fielded in the No 9 spot, meaning that standing in his way will be Pau Torres.

Timo Werner is under pressure to perform from the off and will hope to net in this week's final

Torres, formerly a target for Manchester United before they snapped up Raphael Varane, was one of the standout defenders in Europe in the last campaign.

Strong in the tackle, cool on the ball and equipped with a good reading of the game, Torres will be a formidable foe for Werner.

Werner will have to be near his best to get the better of his opponent. There is no doubting his ability, with his struggles seemingly born out of his little confidence.

Pau Torres enjoyed a fine season with Villarreal and comes into this clash after the Olympics

He needs to draw on the lethal, clinical nature from his days with RB Leipzig and become the assured frontman he used to be.

Once he re-finds this, his fleet-footedness and darts in behind will begin to cause Villarreal problems. And if a goal comes from this, another may follow.

It has been a long, long season for Torres, who also played in the Olympics final with Spain, and a Werner brimming with danger may well be his worst nightmare.

JUAN FOYTH VS MATEO KOVACIC

There are slight question marks over Juan Foyth, admittedly, after he picked up a poorly-timed injury on Monday. He will be assessed before the Super Cup.

If he does indeed start, then it looks likely that he will be forced to step in in midfield once again as a result of Villarreal's injury crisis.

Despite starring at right back towards the end of last season, Foyth is one of the more versatile players in the squad, and he is capable of starring in a holding role.

Juan Foyth may be forced into holding midfield again, where he will face up to Mateo Kovacic

Provided that is where he lines up against Chelsea, then he will be tasked with halting their momentum and playing deft passes through the lines and out wide.

That area of the field, where the anchor for teams usually sits, is one of the most demanding, and Foyth will have to be in top form when cleaning up.

Chelsea have added dynamism to their play since Thomas Tuchel replaced Frank Lampard, albeit over time. This has seen them improve tenfold centrally.

Kovacic will be tasked with controlling the pace of the game, as well as creating more chances

Mateo Kovacic has been heavily favoured in a double pivot, typically alongside N'Golo Kante, and is renowned for his metronome-esque play style.

It would be of little surprise to see him look to set out his stall early on, whether that be with incisive passing or sprints through the middle.

Foyth will have little choice but to stop those at source and try to dominate in midfield, otherwise the tie will surely slip from Villarreal's grasp.

N'GOLO KANTE VS MANUEL TRIGUEROS

The battle to gain supremacy in midfield is shaping up to be a very promising one indeed - and N'Golo Kante will be absolutely crucial in this.

Tuchel has heaped praise on his evergreen enforcer in the lead-up to the Super Cup, and described him glowingly as a 'coach's dream'.

'For years, I was fighting to have him (Kante) in my team and now we did it the other way around – I came to his team (Chelsea),' Tuchel said.

The evergreen N'Golo Kante was recently hailed as a 'coach's dream' by an enamoured Tuchel

'It's a coach's dream to have N'Golo (Kante) on your side, because he makes things easy for everybody on the pitch.'

Despite now being 30, Kante has defied his advancing age to dominate most midfield partnerships in the top-flight and across Europe.

And it is this seemingly limitless energy that may see him prevent Manuel Trigueros from taking control in the middle for Villarreal.

Manuel Trigueros is a regular in midfield for Villarreal and is not afraid of a crunching challenge

Dani Parejo and Francis Coquelin are both ruled out for the clash, and with Vicente Iborra and Etienne Capoue not ready to start, the onus is on Trigueros to perform.

A reliable player under Emery, Trigueros is difficult to handle and not afraid to throw himself into a challenge, as seen during a horror crunch on Lionel Messi last season.

Adept at scoring from distance, too, Trigueros will certainly give Chelsea a headache if Kante is not able to get a grasp on him in Belfast.

ALBERTO MORENO VS CALLUM HUDSON-ODOI

Injury-hit Villarreal will be very thankful that Alberto Moreno is capable of playing anywhere down the left-hand side.

Formerly of Liverpool, Moreno can play at full back or further down the flank, and it is in the more advanced position that he seems likely to line up against Chelsea.

Boasting a decent delivery and impressive pace, Moreno will want to find his way in behind Chelsea's five-man backline and cause problems.

Alberto Moreno, who is capable of playing down the left-hand side, could line up at left wing

Standing in his way at right wing back may be Callum Hudson-Odoi. Shoehorned into the position by Tuchel, he will have to be aware at both ends of the field.

He has even been fielded on the other flank of Chelsea's backline in pre-season, with chances fairly limited either side of Werner.

As a result of his relative inexperience there, Moreno will hope to use all his years of experience and guile to wave his way beyond him.

Callum Hudson-Odoi is in contention at right wing back and will look for an energetic showing

Of course, then picking out Gerard Moreno in the centre is a different proposition altogether, but Moreno has the ability to help Villarreal to another shock result.

Tuchel does have other options for this clash - namely Reece James or Cesar Azpilicueta, but both players have only recently returned from their holiday break.

As a result, Hudson-Odoi is the favourite to keep his spot from the 2-2 friendly draw with Tottenham, and his focus will be on delivering another energetic showing.

GERARD MORENO VS KURT ZOUMA

The announcement that Gerard Moreno has penned a new six-year contract was bizarre, but underlined Villarreal's faith in their leading frontman.

Adorned in a costume to be presented to a crowd in the city centre as the 'masked singer', Moreno cut a hilarious figure - but he will be deadly serious against Chelsea.

Given Moreno is already 29, the length of the extension is a staggering one, which effectively ties down the rest of his playing days to the club.

Gerard Moreno will want to kickstart his new six-year deal in style by winning the Super Cup

And they will want to kickstart the beginning of a new adventure together in perfect fashion, by beating Chelsea and winning the Super Cup.

Chelsea look likely to field Tuchel's favoured five-man defence, and Kurt Zouma - despite the club fielding offers for him - is set to start once again.

West Ham hold an interest in Zouma and Chelsea have looked to include him in a swap deal for Jules Kounda, but the defender, for now, looks set to stay put.

Kurt Zouma may find himself shipped out of Chelsea this summer, but he is likely to start the tie

There would be no better way for him to justify why he should remain at the club by shackling the dangerous Moreno.

Moreno cut his holiday short to ensure he is ready for the Super Cup, and will look to trouble Chelsea's backline on Wednesday.

Blessed with that rare ability to turn half-chances into goals, Moreno is in red-hot form, and Zouma will have to be at his very best to contain him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Memphis Depay continued his impressive start at Barcelona by netting his second goal in two games during Saturday's pre-season friendly.

The Holland forward, signed on a free transfer from Lyon during the summer, opened his account when he came off the bench and scored a penalty in the 3-1 victory over Girona.

Depay was handed his first start against Stuttgart on Saturday and opened the scoring in the 21st minute.

New signing Memphis Depay netted his second goal in two games for Barcelona on Saturday

Depay brought down a lofted pass with a sublime touch and turned inside his marker before firing a volley past Stuttgart goalkeeper Fabian Bredlow.

Austrian starlet Yusuf Demir, signed on a season-long loan from Rapid Vienna, doubled Barcelona's lead in the 36th minute.

Midfielder Riqui Puig slotted home the third in the 74th minute.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Karriss Artingstall rued her sluggish start in a razor-thin split decision defeat to Japan's Sena Irie but the Macclesfield featherweight will use her Olympic bronze as motivation to go all the way at Paris 2024.

Artingstall, who had guaranteed herself a medal by edging out Australia's Skye Nicolson last time out, lost the first round of this absorbing semi-final contest in the women's 57kg category on every scorecard.

Irie was the busier fighter early on but Artingstall upped the tempo thereafter and the pair went into the final three minutes with four of the five judges scoring the bout one round apiece at the Kokugikan Arena.

Irie Sena (right) beat British boxer Karriss Artingstall to advance to the featherweight final

Artingstall was left with the bronze medal after judges gave the first and third rounds to Sena

Both fighters landed eye-catching blows and while there was little to split them, Artingstall's work found favour with three of the officials. But it was Irie who advanced to the gold medal match when the scores were totted up.

Three of the judges gave Irie the nod at 29-28, with the other two swaying towards Artingstall by the same scoreline. After her involvement in Japan was ended, the Briton reflected with some regret at how she started on Saturday.

"Playing catch up is an absolute nightmare," she said. "If you ask any boxer in the world dropping that first round and having to catch up in the second and the third is absolutely horrible.

"I tried my best, I managed to pick it back up in the second and (in the third) I felt I was giving her three in return for one of hers. But I'm not going to moan about the decision, it was very, very close."

Artingstall, a gunner in the British Army who has also won bronze at world and European level, was the last of the Team GB boxers to qualify for Tokyo 2020, rebounding after a loss to Stanimira Petrova by beating Stephanie Thour.

She has excelled in the Japanese capital, cruising past Botswana's Keamogetse Kenosi and third seed Jucielen Romeu of Brazil, before a much closer contest in a bout that could have gone either way against Nicolson.

"My goal out here was to get myself on that podium and just correct a few wrongs I'd done wrong in (the qualifiers in) Paris, just to show the people around this world at 57kg that I'm not to be messed with," Artingstall said.

Artingstall was guaranteed at least bronze after narrowly beating Australia's Skye Nicolson

"I know I can beat all the girls at my weight on my day. They're going to be very, very close fights, don't get me wrong, but I know on a good day of mine I can edge them, edge every single round and I can win the fights.

"Unfortunately today wasn't my day but I've been on GB for two and a half years and I've left with an Olympic medal. I'm a world medallist, I'm a European medallist, come Paris in 2024 I'll be taking that top spot.

"I want to go to the Olympics when it's not in the presence of a pandemic. I want to experience it at its best."

British team-mate Lauren Price guaranteed herself a women's middleweight medal with a unanimous decision victory over Panama's Atheyna Bylon, who lost 30-26 on four of the judges' scorecards and 29-27 on the other.

The Welsh fighter, who takes on Holland's Nouchka Fontijn in her semi-final, said: "It hasn't really sunk in yet. It was my dream since I was eight years of age just to be an Olympian, let alone win a medal.

"I can't put it into words what it means to me. It is an amazing feeling to have medalled, but I always want more, no matter what tournament it is in. I am just loving the journey and trying to let it sink in."

Galal Yafai knows improvements must be made before his men's quarter-final against Cuba's Yosvany Veitia after the Birmingham flyweight edged out the elusive Patrick Chinyemba by close split decision, winning on three scorecards.

Yafai landed some eye-catching blows, with his Zambian opponent taking a standing eight count in the second round, but he was also frustrated for large spells. He said: "If I box like that again I don't deserve a medal, do I?"

Luke McCormack bowed out in the last-16 of the men's lightweight competition after a unanimous decision defeat to Cuba's Andy Cruz, a two-time world champion whose movement and ramrod jab confounded his Sunderland rival.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said.

Jean Todt, who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery.

Schumacher, 52, has not been seen in public since suffering severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 with his then 14-year-old son Mick, who is now an F1 driver himself.

Todt, 75, said Schumacher, who won 91 Grand Prix races before retiring from Formula One in 2012, only survived thanks to the work of the doctors and Corinna, 52, who 'wanted him to survive'.

Michael Schumacher survived a horror skiing crash in 2013 'thanks to his wife Corinna wanting him to survive', a former Ferrari team boss has said. Pictured: Schumacher and Corinna in 2006

Jean Todt (right with Schumacher in 2002), who is now the President of the FIA, said the Formula One legend's partner has played a crucial role in his slow recovery

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret.

Todt told Sport Bild: 'I've spent a lot of time with Corinna since Michael had his serious skiing accident on December 29, 2013. She is a great woman and runs the family.

'She hadn't expected that. It happened suddenly and she had no choice. But she does it very well. I trust her, she trusts me.'

He added: 'Thanks to the work of his doctors and the cooperation of Corinna, who wanted him to survive, he survived - but with consequences.

'And right now you are fighting the consequences. We hope that things will slowly but surely improve.'

Schumacher suffered a serious head injury on December 29, 2013 in the French Alps and his state of health remains secret. Pictured: Schumacher skis in Northern Italy in 2005

Todt also said that Schumacher's son Mick, 22, who is now competing for F1 team Haas, has a 'special place in his heart'.

He said: 'Mick is one of those people who [will] always have a special place in my heart and that of my wife Michelle Yeoh.

'The Schumacher family is very special to us. I wrote a great story with Michael and built a wonderful relationship. And then the children were there.'

Todt revealed that he only partially recognises Mick in his father. He claims Michael had to build his own life whereas Mick was able to receive 'a very good education in a more comfortable environment'.

'[But] of course, Michael and Mick are of the same blood and have the same goals, but the conditions [they faced] were completely different.'

Updates on Michael Schumacher, who won five world titles for Ferrari and his first two with Benetton, have been scarce since the accident in 2013.

In 2019 the family released an update on his 50th birthday assuring his millions of fans they are doing 'everything humanly possible' to help him recover.

Last year it was suggested he was set to undergo stem cell surgery which was cancelled because of the Covid 19 pandemic.

Michael Schumacher suffered devastating brain injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 and his condition has been a closely guarded secret ever since

In September Zurich-based neurology specialist Professor Erich Riederer told a documentary for French TV channel TMC he doubted the racing legend would ever fully recover.

He said: 'I think he's in a vegetative state, which means he's awake but not responding.

'He is breathing, his heart is beating, he can probably sit up and take baby steps with help, but no more.

'I think that's the maximum for him. Is there any chance of seeing him like he was before his accident? I really don't think so.'

Former Ferrari teammate Felipe Massa admitted Schumacher was in a 'difficult place' adding: 'I know how he is, I have information.

'The main thing about all this is that we know his situation is not easy. He is in a difficult phase but we need to respect him and the family.'

A documentary about Schumacher featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix on 15 September.

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features exclusive interviews with Corinna, his two children Gina and Mick and brother Ralf.

It also features interviews with who worked with or raced against Schumacher, including Jean Todt, Bernie Ecclestone, Sebastian Vettel, Mika Hakkinen, Damon Hill and David Coulthard.

A documentary about Formula One legend Michael Schumacher (pictured celebrating winning the Grand Prix at Silverstone in July 1998) featuring never-before-seen private videos and interviews with family members is set to air on Netflix

The documentary does not focus on Schumacher's health after he suffered severe head injuries in a skiing accident in 2013 (pictured L-R brother Ralf, mother Elisabeth, Schumacher, and father Rolf)

The documentary retraces the life and career of the German driver and promises unseen archive material that shows the 'many facets of his multi-layered personality'.

The portrait of the racing legend is 'the only film supported by his family', the platform said in a press release.

Schumacher's manager Sabine Kehm describes the film as the 'family's gift to their beloved husband and father'.

'The greatest challenge for the directors was certainly to find the balance between independent reporting and consideration for the family,' said Vanessa Nocker who directed the film along with Hanns-Bruno Kammertons and Michael Wech.

'Corinna Schumacher herself was our greatest support in this.

'She herself wanted to make an authentic film, to show Michael as he is, with all his ups and downs, without any sugar-coating.

'She was great and brave enough to let us do what we wanted, and so we respected and kept her boundaries. A very inspiring, warm woman who made a lasting impression on all of us.'

Approved by his family, 'Schumacher' features interviews with his wife Corinna, (pictured together) children, and past and present F1 drivers

Schumacher was most famous for his career at Ferrari between 1996 and 2006, where he won five consecutive championships.

He retired in 2006, but returned to racing four years later with Mercedes. He retired for a second time in 2012 after two unsuccessful seasons with the team.

Following an unsuccessful two year stint, Schumacher once again retired.

The documentary was set to be released in 2020 following filming in 2019, but was delayed several times by producers because of the volume of material they had to edit.

It is set to air on Netflix in Europe on September 15 - weeks after the anniversary of Schumacher's F1 debut in Belgium 30 years ago.

It is not yet known if the documentary will be added to Netflix in the UK on the same date.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ECB chief executive Tom Harrison has asked the Australian government to show ‘leniency’ towards England’s Ashes tourists and their families this winter —and insisted the players are ‘not asking for anything unreasonable’ as discussions continue about Australia’s Covid-19 protocols.

While there seems little doubt the series will take place, starting in Brisbane on December 8, England’s Test players remain concerned about the strict nature of Australia’s biosecure bubbles.

Olympic athletes returning from Japan to South Australia were recently told to quarantine for 28 days before being allowed out of their homes. And while that is twice as long as in other states, Harrison is determined to place the players’ and their families’ welfare at the forefront of discussions with Cricket Australia.

ECB chief executive Tom Harrison has asked the Australian authorities to show 'leniency' with their Covid-19 protocols when England players tour for the Ashes this winter

England's players could be four months away from their families and be forced to live in bio-secure bubbles during this winter's tour of Australia

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison has enforced Draconian Covid lockdown laws

'Australia have a certain perspective with respect to how they deal with these things, both at state and federal level,’ he said.

‘That is a concern given the 18 months our players have been through.

‘We are raising those concerns and expect the right conversations to be had over the coming weeks to get us to a place where we and the players can get on the flight to Australia knowing that, when the families arrive, they can have a positive experience.’

Australia celebrate winning the last Ashes series to be held Down Under back in 2017-2018

The Aussies then retained the Ashes in England in 2019 after the series was drawn 2-2

England are currently playing their 16th Test since the start of the pandemic (Australia have played just four, all at home), and the players do not want their families to spend 14 days in a hotel room.

Harrison said: ‘These are very reasonable requests we are asking the Australian government to give some leniency towards.

‘It’s going to be important for us to ensure we can give comfort to players and that those quarantine conditions for families will be reasonable to enable the players to be at their best.'

England's supporters won't be allowed to tour Australia and watch the Ashes this winter

Ashes 2021-22 schedule FIRST TEST December 8-12, Brisbane SECOND TEST (D/N) December 16-20, Adelaide THIRD TEST December 26-30, Melbourne FOURTH TEST January 5-9, Sydney FIFTH TEST January 14-18, Perth Advertisement

Meanwhile, in the week the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a ‘code red for humanity’, Harrison said bilateral tours need to be arranged on a more sustainable basis, and admitted cricket boards around the world had placed finances ahead of environmental concerns when planning schedules.

‘As a sport, the thing that shines out is the amount of travel and flights we take,’ he said. ‘Addressing that question is probably the single biggest impact we can make. That’s a difficult one for cricket, but we have to get into it at ICC level.

‘We owe the world an explanation of the game’s global sustainability strategy.’

Harrison said little consideration had been paid to minimise flying within tours — a factor especially relevant in Australia and India.

‘We’ve probably taken a cost-effective approach to those kinds of debates, as opposed to one which has carbon footprint and air miles at its heart,’ he said. ‘The time is now to address it.’

Harrison also said the Hundred had exceeded expectations, with the ECB claiming to have sold 90 per cent of their ‘pre-Covid capacity’ — 30 per cent higher than their target.

‘We’ve sold about 20 per cent of tickets to kids, 20-odd per cent are female buyers. The data we’re getting is that we are being able to reach that broader audience.’

He blamed rowdy incidents at Hundred matches on ‘people coming out of 18 months of restricted living conditions’.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jurgen Klopp has vowed there will be a resolution to Jordan Henderson's contract situation as he celebrated a new deal for Virgil van Dijk.

Henderson, Liverpool's captain, has entered the final two years of his contract and was frustrated at the beginning of the summer when talks about extending his stay petered out.

The impasse led Atletico Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain to believe there was a chance of prising him away.

Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp has vowed to tie Jordan Henderson (above) to a new contract

The Reds boss (pictured) has admitted he fully expects him to follow Virgil van Dijk's example

Liverpool have been busy renewing the terms of a number of key players and Van Dijk on Friday followed the lead of Trent Alexander-Arnold, Fabinho and Alisson Becker, as well as rising star Harvey Elliott, of committing his future.

Mohamed Salah, Roberto Firmino and Sadio Mane are also in a similar position to Henderson but more talks were held recently with Fenway Sports Group, Liverpool's owners, and progress is being made for a suitable outcome.

Klopp would never have allowed Henderson – a player who performs a huge role for him on and off the field – to leave in this window and the German made it clear that he expects the 31-year-old to follow Van Dijk and Company at some point.

Key Netherlands defender van Dijk put pen to paper on a new four-year deal expiring in 2025

Liverpool are also working on deals for Sadio Mane (L), Roberto Firmino (C) and Mo Salah (R)

'It is important (to find a solution) but it will happen,' said Klopp. 'We will sort it, however it will be. We will sort it. No doubt about that. It will get sorted. I spoke to him (on Thursday) and it looked like that (he was in good spirits), yes.'

Van Dijk's new deal runs to June 2025 and Klopp – who sanctioned his £75million acquisition in January 2018 – put his progress and reputation into perspective when simply saying: 'wow! Imagine what it would cost to buy him now!'

The Netherlands international is fit to start at Norwich on Saturday and Klopp added: 'After that obviously very difficult last year that he is back on track, trains with the team and prepares for hopefully a very successful future at this club. Absolutely great, great news.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David Moyes indicated that a club would have to bid at least £100million to convince West Ham to part with Declan Rice.

Jack Grealish's move to Manchester City broke the transfer record for an English player, but Rice could command a higher fee, according to the Hammers boss.

Rice, who started all of England's games at Euro 2020, has been heavily linked with Manchester United all summer and Chelsea have also been reportedly interested.

David Moyes insisted West Ham would not sell Declan Rice (above) for less than £100million

The Hammers manager (pictured) says clubs would need to offer a nine-figure fee for Rice, 22

Moyes feels Grealish's £100m fee will be topped and stressed clubs can now reject mega-moves for their top talent.

'Well it has been proved that they can,' said the Scotsman. 'Teams can do that and I would have to say that if it is going that way now I think it will keep rising.

'I don't see it coming down really, the next bunch of good players will probably be worth more than £100m in the future.

Jack Grealish (pictured above) became the most expensive English footballer of all time earlier in August when he transferred from Aston Villa to Manchester City for a whopping £100million

'It will probably continue but maybe those clubs have realised they can only buy one big player and not add lots more after that.'

Ahead of West Ham's Premier League opener at Newcastle tomorrow, Moyes refused to talk about a move to bring Jesse Lingard back.

But he backed Said Benrahma to fill the void, saying: 'If Said can get into the team and do anything as well as Jesse did then that would be great. I think he is certainly more ready than he was last year.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Tuchel has told Romelu Lukaku not to worry about the critics who refuse to rate him world class.

Chelsea's club record £97.5million signing complained during Euro 2020: 'When people talk about Lewandowski, Benzema or Kane, they call them world class. But when it comes to me, it's just considered good form. I belong in that list.'

On Friday Tuchel said: 'I think it's best to simply accept it and don't worry about it. The data is that he delivered. He is in the spotlight because he likes it, because he is good, because he has the personality and he is happy to carry responsibility.'

Thomas Tuchel says Romelu Lukaku should not worry about what his critics say about him

Chelsea boss Tuchel believes Lukaku has the personality to deal with being in the spotlight

Lukaku is quarantining and will miss Saturday's clash with Crystal Palace, but could make his debut against Arsenal next Sunday.

With Hakim Ziyech out with the shoulder injury picked up in Wednesday's Super Cup victory over Villarreal, Tammy Abraham could make a rare start.

New Palace manager Patrick Vieira will be missing Ebere Eze and Nathan Ferguson (both achilles), and loan signing Conor Gallagher can't face his parent club. Captain Luka Milivojevic will also be absent for personal reasons and Michael Olise is out with a back injury.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Massimiliano Allegri has hinted that Juventus will not sign Arsenal and Liverpool target Manuel Locatelli this summer because the club already has Aaron Ramsey as a key player in midfield.

The Sassuolo midfielder - who starred for Italy at Euro 2020 this summer - is being chased after by some of Europe's top clubs, with Locatelli's club revealing Arsenal made a bid for the 23-year-old in the last week of July.

Juventus is Locatelli's first-choice option should he leave Sassuolo this summer, but Allegri revealed Ramsey's excellent performance in a defensive midfield role in their friendly win over Atalanta on Saturday means the Old Lady have cover in the centre of the pitch.

Massimiliano Allegri (left) has hinted Juventus will not sign Manuel Locatelli (right) this year

Allegri says Juventus can count on Aaron Ramsey (above) in a defensive midfield role this term

The Juventus manager told Sky Sports Italia after the 3-1 win over Atalanta: 'Locatelli is a Sassuolo player. I think Aaron Ramsey played a good game tonight, he's an intelligent player.

'I think he has a future playing just in front of the defence. Tonight it wasn't easy against Atalanta and it's just the second time he has played in that role, he went to cover lots of aerial balls.

'When he gets used to it more, he will make fewer mistakes because he'll have the structure laid out in his head. He is a player I can count on a lot.'

Allegri was delighted by Ramsey's display in Juventus' 3-1 friendly win over Atalanta this week

Locatelli is valued at around £35million by Sassuolo, following the Italian's excellent displays at Euro 2020 this summer.

The midfielder scored twice against Switzerland in the group stages and was a regular substitute in the knockout rounds, including in the semi-final and final victories over Spain and England respectively.

Sassuolo chief executive Giovanni Carnevali revealed in late July that Arsenal put in a bid for Locatelli, while another English club expressed an interest in the young midfielder.

Carnevali told Sky Sport Italia at the time: 'Tomorrow we'll have a direct contact with Juventus for Locatelli. He wants to join Juve.'

Locatelli (above), who starred at Euro 2020 for Italy, wants to move to Juventus this summer

The 23-year-old scored twice for Italy in their victorious Euro 2020 campaign earlier this year

'We'd be happy to sell Manuel (Locatelli) to Juve... but they need to pay the right fee.

'Arsenal made a bid to sign him and also a new English club is now in the race'.

Liverpool have also been strongly linked to signing Locatelli after Jurgen Klopp's side let Gini Wijnaldum join Paris Saint-Germain on a free transfer earlier this summer.

The Merseysiders played Naby Keita, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and James Milner in their 3-0 victory over Norwich to start their Premier League campaign, with Fabinho and Harvey Elliott coming off the bench at Carrow Road.

Mikel Arteta's Arsenal (right) and Jurgen Klopp's Liverpool (left) are linked to signing Locatelli

Arsenal, meanwhile, have already bolstered their midfield with the signing of Albert Sambi Lokonga from Anderlecht, while Granit Xhaka has snubbed a move away to Roma and is set to stay in north London for the coming season.

Ramsey, who has been linked with a move to Newcastle and Tottenham, made just 22 appearances for Juventus last season, scoring twice and registering five assists.

The 30-year-old has won the Serie A title, the Coppa Italia and the Italian Super Cup since joining Juventus on a free transfer from Arsenal in the summer of 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Leeds reportedly want to tie Patrick Bamford down to a new long-term deal to ward off interest from Tottenham.

Bamford is in the last year of his of his contract at Elland Road and is reportedly a target for Spurs as they look for a suitable understudy for Harry Kane.

According to the Telegraph their primary target is Dusan Vlahovic but Nuno Espirito Santo's side are keeping their options open as Fiorentina want the Serbian striker to sign a new deal.

Leeds striker Patrick Bamford (right) has been liked with a move to Tottenham this summer

Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic has also been linked with a move to the north London club

Bamford scored 17 Premier League goals last season with only one coming from the penalty spot, Kane was the only English player to score more.

The 27-year-old striker has yet to sign a new deal at Leeds since joining from Middlesbrough in the summer of 2018 on a four-year contract.

However, his form dictates that his value has significantly increased from the £7 million they paid for him during Marcelo Bielsa first season in charge.

Bamford was signed during Marcelo Bielsa's first season in charge at Elland Road

Spurs want to sign a new striker to bolster their attacking options and support Harry Kane

Bamford made 38 league appearances last season and was under consideration for a England call-up, however Gareth Southgate opted to include Aston Villa striker Ollie Watkins in his provisional squad for the Euros instead.

Southgate was in attendance at Old Trafford on Saturday when Bamford lead the line against Manchester United but struggled during their 5-1 defeat.

Spurs have had to deal with constant speculation regarding Kane's future with Manchester City linked with a move for the striker, but sporting director Fabio Paratici is committed to strengthening their attacking options this summer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Graeme Souness and Micah Richards were embroiled in a heated discussion about Paul Pogba and Harry Kane after Tottenham beat Manchester City 1-0 on Sunday night despite Kane's absence from the squad.

While disagreeing on Pogba's contribution to debates regarding his Manchester United future, the pair raised their voices, gesticulated passionately to defend their standpoint and talked over each other.

Souness turned his back on the camera to calm himself down, and when the debate continued abruptly asked presenter Dave Jones, who was struggling to keep control, to move on and talk about something else.

Graeme Souness (above) and Micah Richards were embroiled in a heated debate on Sunday

He and Richards (above) disagreed about transfer sagas involving Paul Pogba and Harry Kane

Last year Pogba's high-profile, controversial 'super agent' Mino Raiola publicly stated Pogba would leave Old Trafford and that his career there was over, on the eve of a crucial Champions League game against RB Leipzig, which United lost 3-2 and were subsequently eliminated - in a move which angered fans and former players.

However, Pogba has rarely spoken so openly on the topic, and it seems not to have affected his recent form on the pitch, with a stellar performance and four assists in a 5-1 drubbing against Leeds in United's first Premier League game of the season - a point former Manchester City defender Richards was quick to make.

He said: 'His agent might have done the talking, but he's not done anything. He's just gone out there and tried to do the best he could - and Kane the same, that's what players want to do' but Souness interjected: 'Do you think the agent speaks without the permission of the player? Do you think the agent just talks out nonsense?'

Richards replied immediately: 'I actually do, I actually do, definitely' with Souness responding: 'Not a chance, not a chance. He's echoing the thoughts of the player.'

Paul Pogba's controversial 'super agent' Mino Raiola publicly stated he would leave last year

Pogba himself has remained tight-lipped but laid on four assists in the win against Leeds

The 33-year-old jumped back in, adding: 'Even if he is-' before Souness, visibly frustrated, said: 'Can we move on from Manchester United? We haven't got much time left, can we talk about Liverpool?' As Jones laughed, Souness turned in a circle, facing away from the camera to compose himself, as Gary Neville spoke up.

Neville said: 'Let's put it this way. If your agent comes out and says three or four times 'I want to get Paul a different club', Paul does enough interviews to say 'My agent's out of order, he's got that wrong' - he's never said that either, has he?'

Richards replied: 'He's not going to do that though, is he? You wouldn't do that with your agent,' and Neville continued: 'I didn't have an agent. My strings weren't being pulled by anyone, I wasn't a puppet' as Richards and Jones giggled.

Richards then compared Pogba's situation to Spurs striker Kane, who was left out of the squad, reportedly for fitness reasons only despite City's serious and long-held interest in signing the England captain.

And Richards questioned the criticism of Pogba compared to Tottenham striker Harry Kane (above), absent from the club's win against Manchester City amid transfer links to the Cityzens

The ex-England man added: 'I'm only mentioning it because it's similar to the Kane situation. Kane's not turned up for training and we're calling him a saint. Pogba's never said he wants to leave but he's getting abuse! What's the difference?

An angry Souness shot back: 'My information about Kane, it's not that he didn't turn up for training, there's another story behind that. Can we move on and talk about Chelsea or Liverpool please?'

Jones, playing mediator, concluded: 'Shall we park that there?' but Richards had the last word, saying: 'We're meant to be neutrals'.

That final comment could have been a reference to Souness, who has criticised Pogba in the past and claimed Mason Greenwood was the 'star of the show' against Leeds rather than Pogba, insisting his four-assist performance should be 'expected.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York.

The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37, and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Developer's representative Dan tasked Steve with selling the $8,995,000 four-bedroom apartment in the Zaha Hadid Building before gaining a lucrative listing for a $29.5 million penthouse duplex in Hudson Yards.

Pandemic pricing: Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York

Steve invited Ryan who had a buyer from California at $6.5 million to lunch in order to negotiate more and purposefully served him wine.

'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional.

Ryan stood firm on his offer and noted that it had been a long time since property in that area sold for more than $4,000 a foot.

He pretended to snooze as Steve praised the quality of the home by Pritzker Architecture Prize-winning architect Zaha Hadid.

Wine time: The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37 and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic

'It's her only residential project in New York. Quality of construction there surpasses most developments in the city, if not all,' Steve said.

'Sorry, I just woke back up. Can someone get me coffee, please? Keep talking, Steve. I'm here for you. I can tell who you work for. I get it. I get it. It's also on a block with a significant amount of competition. It's also Covid, and there's also the strip club a couple blocks down, and they're coming here for their kids,' Ryan countered.

Steve said that he could go as low as $8.5 million, but Ryan assured him that his buyer would walk away at that price.

Tightly wound: 'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional of his plan to serve wine during their negotiations

Ryan in a confessional noted that Steve was still negotiating with him and figured there was room to bargain, while Steve claimed Ryan was being 'super aggressive' and putting him in a position of power.

Steve called Dan and shortly later received a text saying the bottom line offer was a flat $8 million.

Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building.

California buyer: Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building

The buyer agreed and Ryan then renegotiated his commission with Steve to bring it up to $320,000 from their even $240,000 split.

'You know what? Let's get the deal done,' said Steve as he agreed to the smaller commission.

'Big sale, smaller commission, but I'm glad there's some wine, because I am celebrating something way bigger,' Steve said in a confessional.

Lower commission: Steve agreed to lower his commission by $80,000 to complete the deal

'I'll even finish my wine for you. Cheers. To selling a four-bedroom during Covid, Steve Gold, Ryan Serhant, 8 million bucks,' Ryan said as he took a triumphant sip.

'You know what, Ryan? You've just gotten me the f***ing penthouse at 15 Hudson Yards!,' Steve informed him.

Ryan then playfully cursed Steve as he finished his glass of wine.

Higher commission: Ryan renegotiated to raise his commission from $240,000 to $320,000

Hands shook: The guys shook hands after agreeing to the deal that also gained Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards

Lucrative listing: Dan earlier offered Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards if he sold the four-bedroom unit

Penthouse unit: Steve was given a tour of the penthouse going for $29.5 million

The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River.

The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months.

Sofia worked on the original renovation and her insight helped Ryan showcase the space.

Masks on: The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River amid the pandemic

Fresh look: The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months

Empty pool: An empty pool wasn't helping Ryan sell the place

Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project.

The bi-coastal broker pledged to sell the 2,766 square foot penthouse that featured $750,000 worth of custom furniture, chef's kitchen and a 1,200 square foot wrap-around terrace.

Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical.

Fredrik in a confessional said that Ryan should be honest with him and stated they did not have to be friends.

Million Dollar Listing New York will return next week on Bravo.

Penthouse unit: Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project

Reached out: Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lottie Tomlinson looked sensational in a blue mini dress as she attended the Ghost fragrance launch at the Mandrake Hotel in London on Thursday evening.

The make-up artist, 23, made sure to put on a leggy display in the thigh skimming zig-zag patterned halter-neck number.

The revealing outfit had a low-cut neck line with an o-ring detail in between the bust, as she completed the ensemble with netted cream heels.

Stunning: Lottie Tomlinson, 23 looked sensational in a blue patterned mini dress as she attended the Ghost fragrances launch at the Mandrake Hotel in London on Thursday evening

Her ultra-long dark blonde locks were swept back off her face in a half-up-half-down style as she attended the event for the launch the new perfume Orb of Night.

The hairdo revealed a glamorously made up face, complete with fake eyelashes, golden eye shadow, and nude coloured lipgloss over her full pout.

Accessorising the look, she slung a dark blue denim baguette bag over her shoulder and opted for a Dior necklace and chunky gold hooped earrings.

Wow: Putting on a leggy display in the revealing number, which had a low-cut neck line with an o-ring detail in between the bust, and she completed the ensemble with netted cream heels

In other snaps, she posed with the Love Island star Harley Brash who looked chic in a cream patterned crop top with matching jeans.

Harley, 22, topped off the look with bright orange heels, and slicked her hair back into a very sleek up-do.

Lottie was later seen leaving the event with a tote-bag full of goodies.

Gorgeous: Lottie's ultra-long dark blonde locks were swept back off her face in a half-up-half-down style as she attended the event for the launch the new perfume Orb of Night

Friends: In other snaps, she posed with the Love Island star Harley Brash, 22, who looked chic in a cream patterned crop top with matching jeans

Lottie and her boyfriend Lewis Burton, 29, recently packed on the PDA for the influencer's 23rd birthday earlier this month.

Lottie and former tennis player were revealed to be seeing each other last July - five months after Lewis' ex Caroline Flack tragically took her own life.

In December, the influencer spoke about wanting kids during an interview with PrettyLittleThing: 'Yes I definitely want kids, I want five!'

Sensational: Later in the evening, she stepped out with a glamorously made up face, complete with fake eyelashes, golden eye shadow, and a pink lipgloss over her full pout

The details: Accessorising the look, she slung a dark blue denim baguette bag over her shoulder and opted for a Dior necklace and chunky gold hooped earrings

Other glamorous stars in attendance included Ferne McCann, 31, who looked typically glamorous in a thigh-skimming black shirt dress.

Teaming the gorgeous piece with a chic pair of open-toe heels, Ferne wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a ponytail and carried her belongings in a stylish bright yellow handbag.

Cinching her dress in at the waist with a wraparound belt, the former TOWIE star layered the tailored piece over what appeared to be a silk black slip dress.

Wow: Ferne McCann, 31, was also in attendance, and looked typically glamorous in a thigh-skimming black shirt dress

Hair up: Ferne wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a ponytail and opted for a full face of expertly applied glam

Also stepping out on Thursday Love Island stars Yewande Biala and Harley Brash, Survival Of The Fittest star Mariam Musa and The Circle's Manrika Khaira.

Yewande, 27, put on a busty display in a low-cut black dress and added height to her frame in chic open-toe heels

Mariam, 26, looked typically stylish in a silk corset top that offered a glimpse of her taut midriff.

Cinched: Cinching her dress in at the waist with a wraparound belt, the former TOWIE star layered the tailored piece over what appeared to be a silk black slip dress

Happy: Doting mother Ferne appeared in high spirits while playfully posing for snaps with stylist Ellis Ranson

Meanwhile, Manrika, 25, teamed a show-stopping metallic dress with stylish heels.

Ferne's outing comes after she revealed she still wants her happily ever after and is 'such a sucker for love' after splitting from her marketing manager beau Jack Padgett in June.

She told The Sun: 'I am such a sucker for love - I love love so much, and of course I want to find my happy ever after.'

The blonde beauty only had positive things to say about Jack, 27, describing the breakup as 'mature'.

Chic: Yewande Biala, 27, put on a busty display in a low-cut black dress and added height to her frame in chic open-toe heels

Hair down: Yewande looked stunning with her glossy hair worn loose

'But it's been such a mature, grown-up breakup - and no one did anything wrong. I've learned so much from this relationship and from Jack, and we had some beautiful times,' she said.

Ferne and Jack moved in together amid the winter lockdown shortly after they began dating, and admitted that taking the next step in their relationship was its downfall.

'But in the end, it also accelerated our breakup, because coming out of lockdown and the world opening back up meant suddenly our lives were very different and we were like passing ships,' she explained.

Show-stopping: Manrika Khaira, 25, teamed a show-stopping metallic dress with stylish heels

Silk: Mariam Musa, 26, looked typically stylish in a silk corset top that offered a glimpse of her taut midriff

Working her best angles: Ferne made sure to work her best angles for photographers

High spirits: The star appeared in high spirits as she left the event

Luxury: On her right wrist Ferne was wearing a luxury watch

Phone: The mother-of-one clutched her phone as she went about her night

Swept back: Harley wore her glossy blonde hair swept up into a bun

Hoops: The TV personality accessorised with large hoop earrings

Immaculate: Harley was sporting an immaculate white pedicure

Looking good: Manrika worked her best angles, looking back over her shoulder at a photographer
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to make a stylish display.

And Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening.

The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with a pearl detailing.

Stunning: Iris Law, 20, looked effortlessly chic in a pink silk dress at the ABB FIA Formula E World Championship Awards Gala in Germany on Sunday evening

The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings.

The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up.

Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event and were spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis.

The pair looked dapper in three-piece black suits with silk bow ties and white shirts.

Wow! The model's floral ensemble was embellished with a ruffled hem and she paired her look with black stilettos with pearl detailing

Gorgeous: The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with gold bangles and stylish hoop earrings

Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures.

Also joining the stylish stars was pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit.

The presenter looked sensational in the striking ensemble and posed up a storm as she joined Iris for a snap at the glitzy gala.

Earlier in the day Iris also attended the Formula E 2021 BMW i E-Prix, displaying her midriff in a quirky blue plaid print dress.

Pose: The star showcased her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up

Beautiful: Iris Law posed for a snap with French racing driverJean-Eric Vergne

While last month, Iris looked sensational as she displayed her long slender legs in a slinky red and white summer dress on Instagram.

The model who debuted a blue buzzcut, looked the picture of confidence as she sat on the step of a rustic building to pose for the camera.

The midi dress perfectly highlighted Iris' tan and rode up a little in the warm breeze.

She wore a blue bra beneath her dress, almost matching the shade of her newly dyed hair.

Double trouble: Brothers AJ and Curtis Pritchard were also in attendance at the event are where spotted getting a picture with Formula E racing driver Jake Dennis (Centre)

Smile: Curtis looked suave in a floral printed suit as the brothers posed for pictures

Smile! Iris was joined by pitlane reporter Nicki Shields, who commanded attention in a striking white jumpsuit, for a stunning snap at the event

Glam: Nicki looked sensational in her jumpsuit and wore her blonde locks down

Iris gazed off into the distance from behind her shades as she munched on an apple.

She accessorised with a simple gold chain necklace and matching bracelets on each wrist.

The London native debuted her buzz cut in British Vogue at the beginning of July and explained it was for her role in upcoming series Pistol where she plays Soo Catwoman.

All in the details: She accessorised with a selection of necklaces and bracelets
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The scale of Katarina Johnson-Thompson's devastation over her Olympic heartbreak was spelled out on Thursday and then compounded by a heptathlon leaderboard that is less than formidable.

In a statement raw with honesty, the 28-year-old detailed the 'miracle' she required to get to Tokyo in the wake of her ruptured Achilles last year, before telling of her belief that she was within reach of a medal when her right calf failed in the 200m.

Her breakdown wrecked that unexpected possibility, and it can only have added to the world champion's frustration that the scores through six of seven disciplines have indicated a bronze medal would have been well within reach.

Katarina Johnson-Thompson has made an emotional statement after her Olympic heartbreak

The Team GB star collapsed in the middle of her heptathlon bid with an Achilles problem

'I don't know where to begin in trying to explain how I feel,' she wrote on social media. 'Only a handful of people understand what I have been through. Even a smaller amount understand the mental and physical challenges I've faced trying to make it back in time through a pandemic after my Achilles rupture the back end of December.'

In emotive scenes at the Olympic Stadium on Wednesday, Johnson-Thompson refused a wheelchair when she was stricken on the track, and instead insisted on finishing under her own steam before withdrawing from the competition.

She explained: 'I started the year in a wheelchair and I was not willing to end my Olympic campaign the same way.

'To make it to the line was a miracle, not only to do that but to be on my way to putting a decent score together is heartbreaking. I truly believed I was capable of winning a medal despite having up to half a year of missed training.

The 28-year-old's emotional statement comes around 24 hours after she pulled up with injury

The 28-year-old picked herself to bravely hobble over the 200m race line after the injury

'More than ever I'm proud that I showed up, put myself out there and tried. It would have been very easy to shy away and pull out, to say I wasn't ready and blame the injury, but I'm not that type of athlete or person. I am a fighter. I'm gritty and I find it extremely hard to give up.

'I've sacrificed so much, moving my entire life to France five years ago, away from my family and friends. I've lost heart knowing that the work my team and I have done for this last eight months was for this outcome and I hate that my story has played out in more heartbreak.

'I've been knocked so many times and got back up, but it will take a lot of time for me to process this reality.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bukayo Saka was greeted by a wall of supportive messages from Arsenal fans after he returned to his club for the first time since receiving racist abuse during England's Euro 2020 campaign.

The 19-year-old starred for the Three Lions this summer and played a key role in Gareth Southgate's side reaching the final, but the teenager missed the decisive penalty against Italy in the final and was racially abused alongside other England stars.

Saka was handed an extended holiday by Arsenal because of his international exploits this summer, with the Gunners collecting messages from fans while he was away to show him on his return.

Supporters wrote letters to the winger which Arsenal then placed on a wall in their training ground, while the Premier League club also donated flags and portraits in support of Saka, while one person gifted him a small bear wearing an England shirt, which the player claims he will be taking home.

England star Bukayo Saka was presented with a wall of messages from Arsenal fans after he was racially abused on England duty at Euro 2020

Saka, 19, starred for England this summer but missed the vital penalty in the final loss to Italy

💬 "How do I even say thank you for all of this?"



Just look at the incredible love and support from our fans to @BukayoSaka87



Thank you ❤️ pic.twitter.com/vznIV7Ubmn — Arsenal (@Arsenal) August 4, 2021

When the 19-year-old first saw the large wall of messages, Saka told the club's official channel: 'Oh my God. It's getting bigger as I get closer.'

Saka took time to read some of the messages, including one from a child who wanted to buy the Arsenal and England star an ice cream using his pocket money.

After reading that letter, Saka said: 'He said we would play football in the park and he would let me in.'

When he finished reading the messages, Saka said: 'How do I even say thank you for all this? Can I just pick it all up and take it home? Can you help me though?'

Arsenal fans donated flags, portraits and wrote letters to their teenage attacking star

Arsenal published a statement immediately after Saka received the abuse on July 11, saying they were 'proud' of their player and told him to 'hold your head high'.

The statement read: 'Bukayo has been with us since he was seven and the whole club couldn’t have been prouder to see him represent England throughout the tournament. You could feel it right across the club.

'We witnessed the leadership and character we’ve always known and loved in Bukayo. However, this feeling of pride quickly turned to sorrow at the racist comments our young player was subjected to on his social media platforms after the final whistle.

'Once again, we are sad to have to say we condemn the racism towards a number of black players. This cannot continue and the social media platforms and authorities must act to ensure this disgusting abuse to which our players are subjected on a daily basis stops now.

One fan also gave Saka an England bear which the 19-year-old will take home with him

'We have processes in place internally at Arsenal to ensure our players are supported both emotionally and practically on this issue but sadly there is only so much we can do.

'Our message to Bukayo is: hold your head high, we are so very proud of you and we cannot wait to welcome you back home to Arsenal soon.'

Saka published his own statement after receiving the abuse, claiming he knew he would receive the racist comments immediately after missing the penalty against Italy.

'I knew instantly the type of hate that I was about to receive, that is a sad reality,' Saka wrote on Instagram.

Saka said he knew he was going to be racially abused as soon as he missed the penalty

Saka was consoled by Gareth Southgate and the player said he felt he let England down

'There is no place for racism or hate of any kind in football or in any area of society and to the majority of people coming together to call out the people sending these messages, by taking action and reporting these comments to the police and by driving out the hate by being kind to one another, we will win.'

Saka's England team-mates Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho - who also missed from the spot in the defeat to Italy - were racially abused in a similar fashion and the Manchester Untied duo published their own statements condemning the racism.

Sancho, 21, said: 'I'm not going to pretend that I didn't see the racial abuse that me and my brothers Marcus and Bukayo received after the game, but sadly it's nothing new. As a society we need to do better, and hold these people accountable.

'Hate will never win. To all the young people who have received similar abuse, hold your heads up high and keep chasing the dream.

Saka's England team-mates Jadon Sancho (middle) and Marcus Rashford (right) were also racially abused after they missed penalties against Italy

Rashford saw his Greater Manchester mural defaced before fans covered the vandalism with positive messages

'I am proud of this England team and how we have united the whole nation in what has been a difficult 18 months for so many people. Much as we wanted to win the tournament, we will build and learn from this experience going forward.'

Rashford, who saw his mural in Greater Manchester vandalised after the final, added: 'I've grown into a sport where I expect to read things written about myself. Whether it be the colour of my skin, where I grew up or, most recently, how I decide to spend my time off the pitch.

'I can take critique of my performance all day long, my penalty was not good enough. But I will never apologise for who I am and where I came from. I've felt no prouder moment than wearing those three lions on my chest and seeing my family cheer me on in a crowd of 10s of thousands.

'I'm Marcus Rashford, 23-year-old black man from Withington and Wythenshawe, south Manchester. If I have nothing else I have that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Riyad Mahrez insisted that Manchester City will not suffer from complacency as they bid to retain the Premier League title.

City finished 12 points clear last season and have been installed as favourites ahead of starting their defence at Tottenham on Sunday.

Mahrez also claimed they have unfinished business in the Champions League after the 1-0 defeat by Chelsea in May's final.

Riyad Mahrez says Manchester City have the 'right mentality' to retain the title this season

City go into the new campaign as favourites after winning the league last year by 12 points

'A normal human being always becomes complacent when you start winning things,' Mahrez said.

'That's human nature. We are here because the club chose us - they think we have the right mentality. The manager pushes us every day, every season. He never takes it easy.

'Every season they say it's going to be tighter and tighter and this season it will be to be fair. This season will be tough, Chelsea are very good - Liverpool, United, Arsenal, Tottenham, Leicester too. We are ready.

Mahrez says City will take more confidence after their Champions League final defeat

'We'll take more confidence into Europe. We showed how good we are but that is no guarantee this year.

'We deserved to win it. With the team we have and the football we were playing, we didn't deserve to lose. I don't think anyone spoke afterwards. Everyone was very sad. It was difficult to speak about anything.'

Meanwhile, Phil Foden confirmed he will miss the first month of the season with a foot injury sustained at the European Championship. 'Hopefully it flies by and I can just get back out on the pitch,' Foden said.

Riyad Mahrez was speaking ahead of the release of ‘Together’, available exclusively to City+ members from Thursday 12th August before being released globally on YouTube on the 19th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shaun Wright-Phillips has boldly claimed that Ben White is a better signing than Raphael Varane as the former Man City star excited at the £50million man's arrival at Arsenal.

White, 23, sealed his mega-money move to the Gunners following the Euros this summer, having impressed at Brighton last season and under Marcelo Bielsa at Leeds in 2019-20.

Eyebrows have been raised, however, at the huge fee Arsenal have shelled out for the Englishman, particularly given the backdrop of Manchester United signing four-time Champions League winner Varane for £42m.

Shaun Wright-Phillips claims Ben White (L) is a better signing than Raphael Varane (R)

White, 23, sealed a £50m move to Arsenal from Brighton this summer in a statement transfer

But Wright-Phillips, whose father Ian is hailed as an Arsenal legend, believes that Mikel Arteta has landed the better defender, lavishing praise on White's 'old-school mentality'.

‘One thing I thought Arsenal missed was a defender like him,’ Wright-Phillips told talkSPORT via Metro. ‘He’s got old an old-school mentality but he can play football as well.’

Asked if White will do better at Arsenal than Varane at United, he added: ‘Yes I personally do. I know it’s a big statement, but he is used to the Premier League and he is used to defending a lot for Brighton, week in, week out.

The Englishman's fee has been questioned given United have paid £42m for Varane of Madrid

‘Varane has come into a whole new league and he is going to put under immense pressure.’

Asked which of the two defenders he would rather sign, if he had the choice, Wright-Phillips claimed: ‘At this moment, I would definitely say Ben White.’

White arrives in North London with big expectations to help fix Arsenal's leaky and, on occasion, calamitous defence.

Yet Wright-Phillips claims that White's 'old-school mentality' makes him a better signing

Despite boasting one of the best defensive records in the league last season, comical defending proved to be the Gunners' undoing as Arteta's side finished in eighth position - failing to qualify for European football of any kind.

Meanwhile, Varane is the missing piece of United's defence that Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has long sought, with Victor Lindelof proving to be an unreliable partner for £80m man Harry Maguire.

Varane's vast experience - in which he has won all there is to win at club level, as well as the World Cup - is hoped to help United finally win silverware under the Norwegian.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gary Lineker and Piers Morgan have led the applause for Brentford fans for their standing ovation given to Arsenal star Bukayo Saka.

The Gunners youngster came off the bench on the 59th minute of their Premier League season opening game to a huge reception from supporters of newly promoted Brentford.

It comes after the teenager was subject to shocking racist abuse following his decisive penalty miss in England's Euro 2020 final defeat to Italy.

Former England star and television pundit Lineker led the praise for the Bees, tweeting: 'That really is a beautiful reception for @BukayoSaka87 from the @BrentfordFC fans. Well played.'

Gunners fan Piers Morgan said it was a strong message against racism, which England stars Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford like Saka were also subject to after their penalty shootout defeat.

He tweeted: ' Wow. That was quite something. A rousing prolonged standing ovation from Brentford fans for #Saka when he came on - what a stunningly emphatic repudiation of racism.'

Brentford supporters gave Bukayo Saka a standing ovation when he came on as a substitute

The Arsenal star was subject to shocking racist abuse after England's Euro 2020 final defeat

Tottenham fans also applauded Saka in a pre-season friendly and displayed this banner

It's not the first time since the Euros that football fans have come together to show their support for the teenager.

Tottenham fans put their bitter rivalry with Arsenal aside in their pre-season friendly against the Gunners last week.

Saka replaced replaced Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang in the second half and was greeted with a standing ovation and a round of applause.

The Tottenham fans also displayed a banner which read: 'North London stands with Bukayo Saka and all players against racism and discrimination.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Kane is planning to make his return to action for Tottenham in Thursday's Europa Conference League fixture away to Pacos de Ferreira.

Kane wasn't involved on Sunday as Tottenham started their Premier League campaign with a 1-0 victory over Manchester City, who have been pursuing the England captain all summer.

As reported by The Athletic, Kane is eager to feature for Tottenham either on Thursday or away to Wolves on Sunday.

Harry Kane is planning to make his return for Tottenham against Pacos de Ferreira this week

Kane has been included in Tottenham's list of eligible players for the game in Portugal but Tanguy Ndombele and Serge Aurier have been left out.

Having yet to be fully integrated back into training with the Tottenham squad, Kane wasn't considered fit enough to play against City.

Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo stressed that Kane remains part of his plans

City's need for a striker was re-emphasised by their display against Tottenham but there are now just over two weeks for Pep Guardiola's side to get a deal done for Kane.

After the game Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo stressed that Kane is part of his plans despite the persistent speculation surrounding him.

He said: 'Yes, Harry, like Bryan (Gil), Cristian Romero, they joined us later.

'Harry is preparing himself and when he's ready he'll join the group and help the team.'

The play-off round first-leg fixture against Pacos de Ferreira could represent an opportunity to ease Kane back into action as he looks to build up his match fitness.

If he doesn't face Pacos de Ferreira Kane could be involved against Wolves next weekend

Kane remains wanted by Pep Guardiola and Manchester City but a deal has yet to materialise

Kane made himself available for the game against City despite his delayed return to training following his involvement at Euro 2020.

Despite not being deemed fit enough to play, Sky Sports reported that Kane was at the stadium to watch the game on Sunday.

Tottenham are not expecting to sell Kane this month, with the striker having three years left on his contract, but the situation could still change.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pep Guardiola insists Jack Grealish had an 'incredible debut' for Manchester City – despite not being able to prevent a 1-0 defeat by Tottenham on the opening day of the Premier League season.

City's new £100million signing made his Premier League bow for the club on Sunday and was even named in the starting XI by Guardiola, completing the full 90 minutes at White Hart Lane.

The 25-year-old was ultimately powerless in preventing defeat on his debut, with Son Heung-min scoring a superb winner in front of a capacity crowd at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium.

Pep Guardiola (right) insists Jack Grealish (left) had an 'incredible debut' for Manchester City

However, Guardiola was left mightily impressed by the former Aston Villa skipper's performance and is sure the England international will go on to play a key role this season.

When asked what impressed him most, Guardiola told reporters after the game: 'His personality and influence. He got three or four fouls in the first minutes and immediately he woke up and showed himself.

'He has incredible continuity, he is so dangerous close to the box, when we have the ball he always has an extra pass.

'He got three or four fouls in the first minutes and immediately he woke up and showed. He has incredible continuity, he is so dangerous close to the box, when we have the ball he always has an extra pass.

City fell to a 1-0 defeat and Grealish was booked in the second-half for a tackle on Lucas Moura

Grealish couldn't make an impact on the game as City struggled to break Tottenham down

'He had an incredible game and incredible debut and will be so important for us. I congratulate him for having the personality to try and try until the end.'

Raheem Sterling was also left impressed by Grealish's impact, and believes there's plenty more to come from his Three Lions team-mate.

'I played with Jack a few times,' he said on the club's official website. 'It's a good partnership but it's still early days with me and him.

'We will learn each other's game more as the season goes on and hopefully build a better partnership for the rest of the campaign.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's set to make a grand return Channel 4's upcoming Changing Rooms reboot

But Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen has revealed that he's glad that original host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the helm as he feared the reboot would look like 'Jurassic Park'.

In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation'.

Honest: Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen revealed that he's glad that original Changing Rooms host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the reboot as he feared it would look like 'Jurassic Park'

So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003.

On whether he would have liked Carol to return as the show's host, he told The Sun: 'No, and hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention.

'And to be fair, I resisted it for a long time. I was very keen that they really should look at finding possibilities with other people.

'Otherwise, it would just be a revival, actually it always needed to be a reboot.'

No going back: In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation' (Carol pictured in 2015)

The new series will instead be hosted by Naked Attraction star Anna Richardson.

Laurence also likened Changing Rooms to the X Factor in the fact that it was one of the first reality shows, adding that pal Simon Cowell would 'adore' being compared to him.

It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come.

The home makeover show, which previously ran from 1996-2004, follows a terrifyingly trusting format in which two sets of neighbours swap keys to their homes to create each other's 'dream room' in just two days.

Way back when: So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003 (pictured the Changing Rooms cast in 1998)

Opinion: 'Hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention'

The trailer for the new series of the cult 90s show sees contestants gasping, screaming and crying - with one simply uttering: 'I really am scared'.

First look footage shows Anna and Laurence getting stuck in with helping the public refurbish their neighbour's homes, alongside their designers Jordan Cluroe and Russell Whitehead.

'Friends for 25 years? Not for much longer,' jokes Anna as the neighbours get started painting each other's homes with no idea if they'll approve their decor decisions.

Tears and tantrums: It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come

Nervous: The show is set to return on Wednesday August 18 and will be hosted by long-term star Laurence, as well as newcomer Anna Richardson (pictured)

The series is a long time coming, after it was announced in August last year that Channel 4 would be re-launching the much-loved BBC show.

Davina McCall was originally slated to host, but after filming was rescheduled twice due to coronavirus lockdowns, she could not longer commit to the dates.

Despite the upheaval, long-term host Lawrence exclaims in the trailer: 'It's like we were never away!' as decorating chaos reigns around him.

The first episode of Changing Rooms will take place in Swansea, South Wales and airs on Channel 4 at 8pm on August 18.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The Dales and Moors always steal the show in Yorkshire — but true cognoscenti will champion the Howardian Hills.

This lesser-known Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty covers 80 square miles, sandwiched between the North York Moors National Park, the Yorkshire Wolds and the Vale of York.

It gives you Yorkshire at its most bucolic, with woods, rivers, cattle and swathes of barley and wheat sitting atop Jurassic limestone dappled with enchanting villages.

Castle Howard, the grand stately home in North Yorkshire, was the backdrop to the Netflix hit Bridgerton

The Romans passed this way, expanding north from what is now York. For much of history the Howardian Hills have been an area of tranquil farmland, although the Battle of Stamford Bridge was fought a few miles to the south in 1066 when Saxon King Harold Godwinson defeated Viking Harald Hardrada. The former wouldn’t be as lucky three weeks later at Hastings against Norman challenger William the Conqueror.

The year 1539 brought more turmoil, when more than four centuries of religious life came to an end at Kirkham Abbey, in King Henry VIII’s dissolution of the monasteries. Much of its stone was carted off to be used locally, and by the 19th century its ruins were a tourist attraction thanks to the railways. In World War II, it was used as a top-secret base for testing equipment prior to D-Day.

Mind you, life here today seems pretty idyllic as I sit outside the Fairfax Arms in Gilling East with a steak, plump chips and a pint of Black Sheep bitter.

I eavesdrop on the matey banter of a golf club outing at one table and parents of pupils from a local private school at another, visiting from London and opining that the area is prettier than the Cotswolds. A shiny Range Rover is parked behind a mud-splattered tractor.

Kirkham Abbey fell into disrepair after Henry VIII’s Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1500s, only to enjoy a revival as a tourist destination in the 19th century. Later, it became a secret testing base during World War II.

The River Derwent runs through the town of Malton, which is recognised as the food capital of Yorkshire thanks to its mouth-watering monthly market

TRAVEL FACTS B&B doubles at the Fairfax Arms from £135 (thefairfaxarms.co.uk). Visit howardianhills.org.uk and visitmalton.com. Advertisement

The next day I head to Castle Howard, the grandest stately home in the north.

Dating from the late 17th century, it is most recently famous to viewers of the Netflix TV series Bridgerton (and before that Brideshead Revisited) as the residence of the fictional Duke of Hastings. The grounds and gardens can take half a day to explore and it has a busy calendar of events, such as PE with Joe Wicks on August 12; and a Proms and fireworks night on August 21.

Just outside the AONB is Malton. In the 1840s Charles Dickens visited and based Scrooge’s office on one there.

Now it’s the food capital of Yorkshire, with an acclaimed monthly market offering everything from gin and macarons to gelato and Yorkshire pudding-infused beer.

Prue Leith has declared Malton her ‘favourite foodie town’. In September, it hosts the annual 10km Marathon du Malton, when participants run through the centre to the Howardian Hills, stopping off for food and drink.

If that sounds too much effort, don’t worry, there’s a category for walkers and their dogs. After all, in such a charming corner of Yorkshire, who wants to rush?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Sun, swim, spa and be spoilt - all without going through customs.

It might seem an impossible dream, but with the uncertainty surrounding holidays abroad a break within these shores is looking ever more attractive.

With everyone fighting for space at UK seaside resorts, maybe now is the time to think about a city break - The Mandarin Oriental Hotel London offers all the 'S's' - with knobs on.

The iconic Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park has done the utmost to provide a haven from the stresses of everyday life for guests, writes Ian

In a refreshing departure from non-inclusive 'extras' and 'add-ons' the luxury hotel, which boasts Hyde Park as its back yard, is offering a staycation package that includes breakfast, hotel credit, early check-in, late check-out, valet parking, champagne, and a choice of either an afternoon tea hamper, an inner strength-outer strength consultation with two 30-minute treatments or a tailor-made cocktail experience.

This latest initiative to attract the UK's holiday-starved staycationers comes as one new report reveals 73 per cent of people took no holiday in 2020 and with limited opportunities for travel abroad predicts high demand for British breaks, while meteorologists forecast a UK heatwave for August.

The Mandarin Oriental can't guarantee the weather but the hotel has done the utmost to provide a haven from the stresses of everyday life for guests. Rooms are luxuriously appointed with freestanding baths, gorgeous toiletries including divinely scented bath crystals and extra touches such as GHD hair straighteners, hi-tech coffee machines and an amazing array of specialist teas as standard. It's an establishment with a Royal pedigree and arguably the poshest penthouse in London, but with staff that strive to make every guest's experience special.

Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park is welcoming guests back with a Travel Again package, which offers 20 per cent off the best available rate until December 31, 2021

In 2019 the hotel finished the biggest refurbishment in its history, which included the addition of a deluxe penthouse consisting of a flexible design with two interconnecting suites, the Oriental one bedroom and the Mandarin two-bedroom. As well as bedrooms, together they contain four marble bathrooms, five loos - two with a dozen different functions, a dressing room, two kitchens, two eight-seater dining areas, and five terraces that wrap around the entire ninth floor, providing incredible panoramic views across London.

Styled to feel like a delux London apartment with custom made furniture and chandeliers - even in the bathrooms, I was fortunate enough to be invited to try out the Oriental's luxury accommodation, the usual resident oligarchs were probably stuck in self-isolation, and with all that space it seemed churlish not to ask my wife to join me.

Of course, this kind of accommodation being usually reserved for the super-rich comes with its own personal penthouse butler. We couldn't find much for the delightful Santa to do, but ordered some fresh milk and she offered to make coffee, but I was enjoying myself too much making a brew with the snazzy machine. Naturally, she was much too discreet to share any stories about famous guests, but she did say the most necessary attribute for a post like hers was 'a genuine enthusiasm for the job, anything less and it really shows.'

In 2019 the hotel finished the biggest refurbishment in its history, which included the addition of a deluxe penthouse (pictured) consisting of a flexible design with two interconnecting suites, the Oriental one bedroom and the Mandarin two-bedroom. Ian and his wife tried it out for size

The penthouse (pictured) contains four marble bathrooms, five loos - two with a dozen different functions - a dressing room, two kitchens, two eight-seater dining areas, and five terraces that wrap around the entire ninth floor, providing incredible panoramic views across London

Above is the penthouse living room. Ian describes the top-floor accommodation as 'spectacular'

Although our accommodation was spectacular and the higher powers had even provided sunshine, to get the full benefit of the amazing location it was necessary to get our walking shoes on and check out London's emerald paradise, Hyde Park.

Henry VIII's former hunting ground covers 350 acres, with over 4,000 trees, flower gardens and the vast Serpentine Lake, the park offers wild swimming every weekend in the Lido until September 31, boating and pedalo's as well as tennis, cycling, horse-riding and carriage riding. It's also the ideal spot to enjoy the hotel's delicious picnic hamper, which comes complete with fruit drinks, champagne, disposable flutes and wooden cutlery.

The delicate finger rolls have fillings including: oyster leaves, nori poached salmon, wasabi and keta caviar on beetroot bread; smoked applewood cheddar, roasted almonds, pickled ginger grapes and black garlic spread, while the handmade pastries consisted of poached pear, on almond shortbread with vanilla cream, chocolate and tonka gateaux with cocoa sable and hazelnut praline, exotic cube cake with mango and lychee and my personal favourite, Japanese chiffon roll with steamed lemon biscuit, strawberry confit and Timur pepper cream. All rounded off with four exquisite little bonbons.

Such indulgence was a good incentive to go for a jog around the park - well more of a brisk walk before the spa part of our staycation.

Attentive staff take our shoes and swap them for waterproof slippers before offering refreshing towels and a fruit or herbal tea. We fill out brief forms specifying the pressure we want applied during our massage and what areas we would like the therapist to concentrate on. Guests are invited to come earlier than their treatment in order to experience facilities which are separated for men and women.

Ian and his wife enjoyed a spa treatment. He writes: 'We fill out brief forms specifying the pressure we want applied during our massage and what areas we would like the therapist to concentrate on'

Dinner By Heston Blumenthal is a truly memorable experience. The star of the show? The ice-cream maker that's wheeled to the table, writes Ian

The pool at the spa, where Ian had months of knotted shoulder and neck muscles unravelled

TRAVEL FACTS Ian was hosted by Mandarin Oriental Hyde Park. The hotel is welcoming guests back with their Travel Again package, which offers 20 per cent off the best available rate until December 31, 2021, with prices starting from £520 per room per night. Its staycation package starts from £740 per room per night and includes: breakfast, hotel credit, early check-in, late check-out, valet parking, champagne, and a choice of either an afternoon tea hamper, an inner strength-outer strength consultation with 2x 30-minute treatments or a tailor-made cocktail experience. See details of the Spa here and for more information about Dinner By Heston Blumenthal, click here. Rating: Advertisement

Steps lead down towards the sound of rushing water and a 38C heated hydrotherapy pool' with water jets and a built-in seated area. A generous steam room is adorned with calming amethyst crystals and there is a compact sauna and relaxation room with fluffy toweling covered adjustable beds, magazines, fruit and herbal teas. An identical room is available where both sexes can mingle after treatments. My wife liked the separate facilities for men and women, but caused a few red faces when she stumbled into the men's area after taking out her contact lenses - she reported the facilities were exactly the same except the women's one had more products and was 'tidier'.

The massages were amazing at unravelling months of knotted shoulder and neck muscles, but barely scratched the surface of the vast array of treatments on offer including cutting edge anti-aging facials, aromatherapy, acupuncture as well as the usual hair and beauty offerings. It really was a top to toe session for me as next podiatrist and pedicure expert Pierre got to work on my feet. Battered by years of rugby and cricket my wife declared them 'unrecognisable' after Pierre's ministrations.

A trip to the restaurant, Dinner by Heston beckoned, I fairly bounced down the marble steps on my newly filed trotters to the dining area, which looks out onto the park one way and into the glass-sided kitchen the other. Signature dishes such as meat fruit, the famed chicken liver parfait served as an exact replica of a mandarin orange and tipsy cake, cream-filled baked soft and moist brioche gradually basted in alcohol and served with caramelised spit roast pineapple are perfect as is the impeccable service, but the star of the show was the ice-cream maker.

What appears to be a white Singer sewing machine is wheeled to the table. Ingredients are poured in by a waiter who looks like he enjoys every minute of this table theatre, then using some kind of culinary alchemy (and liquid nitrogen) he turns the hand crank and amidst a cloud of dry ice instant delicious ice cream appears and is scooped into a cone adorned with sprinkles of powdered strawberries and popping candy.

I doubt my financial situation will ever allow me to be a penthouse regular, but I will definitely be back for 'Dinner' and another pedicure.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrea Spendolini-Sirieix is targeting an Olympic medal in the city of love after celebrating her superb seventh-place finish with her matchmaker father Fred.

The 16-year-old Team GB diver was in tears as she spoke to her dad – the maître d' on Channel 4’s - on the poolside screen following the final of the 10m platform.

Spendolini-Sirieix admitted she had exceeded all of her expectations with her performance on her Games debut at the Tokyo Aquatics Centre.

Andrea Spendolini-Sirieix came seventh in her Olympic debut in women's 10m platform final

She spoke to her family and father Fred, host of First Dates, via video link after the final

But now she wants to push for a podium place at Paris 2024, where she hopes to be cheered on by the French half of her family, including her father.

‘It definitely gives me confidence for Paris,’ said last year’s BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year.

‘That is very close to my grandparents so my whole family can come. Hopefully, Covid has gone because I want my family to come and watch. I am very, very excited.’

Hongchan Quan of China, aged 14, won the gold medal in the women's 10m platform final

Spendolini-Sirieix said Quan was 'amazing'. 'She’s 14 and she’s doing stuff like that'

Back in England, Fred was supporting his daughter throughout the final with multiple posts on social media.

And he could certainly be proud of the girl he calls ‘mon canard’, who took to the Olympics like a duck to water as she qualified for the final in eighth and then increased that by a place with a solid five dives.

‘I saw my dad, my mum, my cousins and my aunties on the Athlete Moment screen and I started crying,’ admitted the teenager, who won two medals at May’s European Championships.

‘They said they were very proud of me and that I should be proud as well.

‘I’ve definitely exceeded my expectations. I couldn’t ask for a better first Olympics.’

Andrea is the daughter of Fred Sirieix, the maitre d' on hit Channel 4 show First Dates

Spendolini-Sirieix, 16, was named BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year in 2020

Spendolini-Sirieix’s team-mate Lois Toulson, 21, finished ninth, but the gold went to China’s incredible 14-year-old Hongchan Quan, whose dominant display included two perfect-10 dives.

She became the youngest women’s Olympic diving champion in 29 years, with the silver going to her 15-year-old team-mate Yuxi Chen.

‘She’s 14 and she’s doing stuff like that, I don’t know what to add,’ admitted Spendolini-Sirieix. ‘When we were warming up and we were waiting to be called out, she was dancing, she was laughing, it looked like she had no nerves. She’s amazing.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bayern Munich's sporting director, Hasan Salihamidzic, has confirmed the club is interested in signing Borussia Dortmund striker Erling Haaland.

The 21-year-old has become one of the most sought after players in the world recently with some of Europe's elite clubs including Chelsea, Manchester City, Manchester United all interested in the forward.

Bayern Munich have now become the latest club to be linked to the Norwegian with Salihamidzic claiming they would be 'amateurs' to not go after him.

Erling Haaland is a man in demand with likes of Chelsea, Real Madrid, Manchester City linked

Hasan Salihamidzic has confirmed that Bayern are interested in buying Haaland

He told German TV channel Sport1: ' This is a top player that probably the whole world wants. Of course we are looking there. Otherwise we would be complete amateurs.

Haaland has a £68million release clause which becomes active from next summer but it has been reported that Dortmund are demanding £150million from any team looking to acquire him.

The striker was heavily linked with a move to Chelsea this summer but he distanced himself away from the reported £150million fee - insisting that he is happy to stay at Dortmund.

Sporting director Sebastian Kehl has claimed that Haaland is eager to remain at Dortmund

He said: 'I have three years left on my contract, I'm enjoying my time here. I hope it's only rumours because it's a lot of money for a person.'

Following Saturday's first round German Cup win, Dortmund's sporting director Sebastian Kehl confirmed Haaland's intends on remaining with the club: 'Erling (Haaland) feels incredibly comfortable with us.

'He wants to achieve something with this team - and I don’t have the feeling at all that he wants away.'

Haaland had an outstanding campaign last season, scoring 41 goals in all competitions - helping Dortmund land a place in the Champions League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away,' the 34-year-old reality star said in her 11-minute vlog on The Pratts' YouTube channel.

Heidi prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away!' The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs.

'I can have intercourse in two days,' the Colorado-born blonde smiled.

'Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see. I'm just so happy I had this done. I'm feeling good. I have no cramping and the anesthesia felt great.'

Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers.

Vlogger: The 34-year-old reality star prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2

'All done!' A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs

The Colorado-born blonde said: 'I can have intercourse in two days. Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see'

'Thank you!' Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers

On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted via Instastory that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery.

That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought.'

'Part of me was a little disappointed like, "Aw man is that not the reason that I'm not getting pregnant?"' Heidi - who boasts 3M social media followers - lamented over Instastory.

'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out...

Oops! On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery

'Part of me was a little disappointed': That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought'

Heidi continued: 'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out'

'I'm so thankful for the child I have. I'm going to have faith. I'm meant to have another one. I'm gonna have another one. Let it go. I have a beautiful house, food, water, a husband I love, a healthy son. What else can you do?'

Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday.

The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4.

July 8 family portrait: Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe': The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe,' Spencer said on the Unpopular with Jacques Peterson podcast on July 12.

'They would have to use another production company. This production company wouldn't even do it. They won't even mess with this cast. There's no way. I think it would be like Gossip Girl with a new cast of kids. That's the only chance.'

Back in 2006-2010, the Laguna Beach spin-off was frequently criticized for fabricating storylines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta clashed with Tottenham midfielder Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg during Sunday's pre-season friendly.

Hojbjerg slid to attempt to keep the ball in play but ended up almost catching Arteta.

After Hojbjerg told Arteta to get back into his technical area the Arsenal boss responded by telling the Tottenham player to stop talking by making a shush gesture.

Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta clashed with Tottenham's Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg during a friendly

Hojbjerg told Arteta to return to his technical area and the Spaniard made a shush gesture

Mikel Arteta has an altercation with Tottenham midfielder Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg on the touchline, before Arteta shushes him. 😂 #afc pic.twitter.com/Hbcklt9yXK — afcstuff (@afcstuff) August 8, 2021

The pair exchanged words, with Arsenal midfielder Granit Xhaka coming across to intervene.

The Tottenham supporters in attendance expressed their frustration with Arteta by booing him.

Tottenham prevailed 1-0 at home to the Gunners, with Son Heung-min scoring the only goal of the game in the 79th minute.

The pair continued to exchange words as the rivalry continued despite it being a friendly

Despite it being a friendly there were still some rather forceful challenges during the north London derby, some of which went unpunished.

Arteta will surely have been concerned with Arsenal's lack of ruthlessness in attack going into their Premier League opener against Brentford.

Spurs meanwhile will hope the win will give them momentum ahead of a huge opening day clash against defending champions Manchester City
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Diogo Jota has been training with former sprinter Francis Obikwelu as he looks to get himself in peak physical condition ahead of the new season.

The Portuguese star has already found his scoring boots for Liverpool in pre-season, having returned from his time off following his involvement in the Euros over the summer.

But with his focus now back on Liverpool, Jota has brought in some help in the form of 42-year-old Obikwelu in an attempt to bring the best out of himself and keep up with the pace of his teammates Mo Salah and Sadio Mane.

Diogo Jota has been training with former Portuguese Olympic sprinter Francis Obikwelu

The pair discussed speed and recovery as the footballer looked to pick up some helpful tips

Jota will be hoping the advice helps him keep up with speedsters Sadio Mane and Mo Salah

Obikwelu was born in Nigeria, but became a Portuguese citizen in 2001 and decided to compete for them from that point onwards.

The sprinter won silver at the 2004 Olympics in Athens - his time of 9.86 seconds remained his personal best for the duration of his career and is still the European record over the distance.

Obikwelu also won three European Championship golds during his career, and so few are better placed than him to help Jota gain that extra bit of speed.

'In football, we do a proper pre-season and then there are so many matches until December,' Jota said.

Jota spoke of how difficult he finds it to cope with the hectic fixture list in the Premier League

'But then there's still half a season to go, and sometimes we're dealing with some fatigue and we could use some time to switch off.'

But Obikwelu believes he has the answer to that issue of tiredness and dealing with a hectic schedule of fixtures.

'I can tell you why you have that issue,' Obikwelu said. 'Your nervous system isn't activated. It's the body's engine.'

Jota will be hoping all this advice helps him become a regular in Jurgen Klopp's side this season.

A mixture of injuries and his manager's rotation faith in the front three of Mane, Salah and Roberto Firmino meant the 24-year-old only started 12 Premier League matches last season.

But Jota still scored nine league goals for the Reds, and will be hoping more opportunities leads to more goals throughout the upcoming campaign.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tottenham striker Harry Kane will take his five-day PCR coronavirus test ahead of potentially joining in group training on Friday.

The England captain has been in self-isolation at the club's training complex since Saturday, five days after Spurs expected him back from his holiday to the Bahamas.

Kane, who has been training individually, will take a coronavirus test on Thursday as part of the test-and-release scheme following his return from an amber list destination and if he is negative he will be clear to join group training on Friday.

Harry Kane is due to return to Tottenham training on Friday if he tests negative for Covid-19

Kane is self-isolating after his much-publicised delayed return from a post-Euro 2020 break

Kane, pictured here on a different break, went on holiday to the Bahamas after Euro 2020

That would leave him just two sessions before the season opener against champions Manchester City on Sunday - a game boss Nuno Espirito Santo had previously said he would be available for.

Whether that is the case after such a short period of time with the squad remains to be seen, while there will also be huge question marks over Kane's frame of mind, having been linked with a move to City this summer.

Kane and Nuno were due to hold talks earlier this week for the first time since the latter's appointment last month, with the Portuguese keen to 'solve all the situations'.

Tottenham manager Nuno Espirito Santo (centre) has said Kane will be available against City

City boss Pep Guardiola admitted their interest in signing Kane last week, but said unless Spurs were willing to negotiate then it was 'finished'.

The north London club have remained insistent throughout that their star striker is not for sale and it would need a fee north of £150million to even get them to the negotiating table.

Kane was expected back at the club's Enfield training base for pre-season testing last Monday but did not show and it later emerged he was still on holiday in the Bahamas before making a pitstop in Florida.

The 28-year-old broke his silence last Friday by revealing he would return to the club the following day 'as planned' and insisted he would never refuse to train with the club.

Pep Guardiola (left) said a Kane deal needs Spurs chairman Daniel Levy (right) to negotiate

New signing Bryan Gil trained with his new team-mates for the first time on Wednesday following his return from the Olympics.

The 20-year-old, who signed from Sevilla, won a silver medal with Spain in Tokyo but has already integrated into the squad after Covid checks following his arrival in London.

Meanwhile, goalkeeper Alfie Whiteman has joined Swedish side Degerfors on a season-long loan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mauricio Pochettino admits he is 'very happy' with Kylian Mbappe's commitment after the Paris Saint-Germain forward was booed by some of his own supporters on Saturday.

On the day PSG presented Lionel Messi to the Parc des Princes fans, Mbappe was jeered by sections of the Paris home crowd before kick-off in his side's 4-2 league win over Strasbourg - which the French forward scored in.

Mbappe has been linked with a move away PSG with the Frenchman still yet to commit to an extension on his contract that ends in ten months from now, but PSG boss Pochettino claimed he did not hear any booing.

Mauricio Pochettino (left) is happy with Kylian Mbappe (right) despite PSG fans booing him

Mbappe was jeered by some of the PSG fans before kick-off when his name was read out

'I did not hear the whistles,' the Argentine said after the game. 'I am very happy with him. He's focused on what he needs to do and had a really good game. He must continue on this path.

'It is very important for us to have our supporters around us. It's extraordinary and we missed them dearly. Football is completely different with the spectators.

'With the presentation of the newcomers, it was a great evening for PSG. Now, we have to prepare them (the new signings) gradually, without taking too many risks, whether it is Leo Messi or the others.'

The French forward reacted by scoring in PSG's 4-2 win over Strasbourg on Saturday night

As well as Messi, PSG introduced fellow new signings Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Gini Wijnladum and Achraf Hakimi to their supporters, with the latter two playing in the victory over Strasbourg.

Mbappe, meanwhile, has continually been linked with a move to Real Madrid and will walk away from PSG for free next summer should he not agree a new deal at the club.

The 22-year-old was also the villain of French football earlier this summer when he missed the crucial spot-kick in France's Euro 2020 last-16 exit to Switzerland in June.

Before the match, PSG presented their new signings to the fans, including Lionel Messi (right)

But PSG have remained confident in keeping Mbappe at the club, with club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi insisting he will stay in the French capital.

Speaking at Messi's press conference: 'Everyone knows the future of Mbappe. He is a PSG player.

'Kylian is very competitive, he wants to win, he has publicly said that he does not want to leave the team and there are no doubts or excuses of any other kind. Mbappe stays'.

PSG continued their 100 per cent start to the Ligue 1 season by comfortably beating Strasbourg on Saturday night.

PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi (above) claimed Mbappe will remain a player at the club

Pochettino's men raced into a three-goal lead after just 27 minutes with Mauro Icardi, Mbappe and Julian Draxler firing home.

Kevin Gameiro and Ludovic Ajorque pulled two goals back for Strasbourg after half-time to make matters nervous for PSG.

But a red card for visiting defender Alexander Dijku was followed by Pablo Sarabia's points-clinching fourth goal with four minutes to go.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British light heavyweight Joshua Buatsi knocked out Ricards Bolotniks in the 11th round at Matchroom's Fight Camp on Saturday night.

Unbeaten Buatsi has now won all of his 15 professional bouts and is closing in on a world title opportunity after the 13th knockout victory of his career.

It looked as though the 28-year-old Brit had won the contest when he floored his opponent with a vicious left hook in the sixth round.

Joshua Buatsi knocked out Latvian Ricards Bolotniks at Matchroom's Fight Camp on Saturday

Bolotniks was knocked out with a devastating right hand in the 11th round of the contest

However, the Latvian bravely fought his way back into the contest and the fight looked to be heading to the judge's scorecards, until Buatsi finished his opponent with a devastating right hand in the 11th round.

'He pushed me every round. He's a great champion,' said Buatsi.

'It was a good hard fight and I'm glad I managed to close the show.'

After the fight Buatsi took to Twitter, writing: 'When the opportunity presents itself, be ruthless. Respect to @LionBolotnik, a true fighter.'

Buatsi is closing in on an opportunity at a world title following his 15th successive victory

Andre Ward - the former pound-for-pound king who reigned supreme in the light-heavyweight division - hailed his 'great finish' and tipped him for bigger fights.

'Good win for Joshua Buatsi!' Ward wrote on Twitter. 'Everything that took place before the knockout is what he needed, to get him ready as he faces tougher competition. He needed to be able to go the rounds to prove to himself he could do it. Great finish!'

The 28-year-old who won a bronze medal at the 2016 Olympics is managed by world heavyweight champion Anthony Joshua.

Buatsi can now focus on bigger challenges that lay ahead as he prepares to face the leading light heavyweights in world boxing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amelia Hamlin wore a necklace with the letters L O R D encrusted in diamonds in an Instagram stories post. 'Lord' is boyfriend Scott Disick's nickname.

In the photo a bit of her hair is showing as well some of her black shirt that allows for cleavage.

The beauty, 20, wrote a cheeky caption along the bottom of the pic: 'Let the lord be with me.'

Spell it out: Amelia Hamlin wore a necklace with the letters L O R D encrusted in diamonds in an Instagram stories post

Cool couple: She has spent much of the summer documenting her sunny days with her 38-year-old boyfriend Scott and his three kids; seen in Malibu in July

Amelia's beau Scott has referred to himself as 'Lord Disick' for quite some time now, going as far as including the moniker in his Instagram handle.

She has spent much of the summer documenting her sunny days with her 38-year-old boyfriend and his three kids he has with ex Kourtney Kardashian.

They are Mason, Penelope and Reign.

Though they first began dating in October, Scott and Amelia made their relationship Instagram official earlier this year, with the couple often paying tribute to one another on their respective pages.

Before Amelia he was with Lionel Richie's daughter Sofia Richie, 22, who is also a model.

This comes after the social media sensation posted a pair of new pictures on Monday in a cute pair of Boux Avenue underwear.

It's love wrapped in a Hermes blanket: The pair have 18 years between them; seen this summer

Lisa Rinna's younger daughter complemented the cute undies with a white, cropped vest as she looked inside a stocked refrigerator.

She wore a gold watch on one wrist, a bracelet on the other, and a simple necklace.

In one photo she struck a pose holding a refrigerator door open and staring into the camera while her long, brunette hair fell down her back.

The next shot showed the influencer from the chin down with a bottle of water in her hand as she showed off her taut abs.

Boux Avenue dropped three fire emoji in the comments under the post.

Working up an appetite: The looker posted a pair of new pictures on Monday in a cute pair of Boux Avenue underwear

Quenched thirst: One shot showed the influencer from the chin down with a bottle of water in her hand as she put her taut abs on display

The young model is the new face of the UK clothing label as it expands to the North American market, according to Fashion Network.

She has been rolling out content in the stylish undergarments for several months.

Amelia's stuck to a theme of domestic simplicity, as most of her posts for the line of intimates have taken place in different parts of the home.

Body shot: The young model, who's dating Scott Disick, is the new face of the UK clothing label as it expands to the North American market
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid gushed about the latest addition to her shoe collection on Wednesday.

The 24-year-old supermodel shared snaps of herself trying on the new 'Superstuffed' Adidas trainers - which are designed to make the wearers feet look five times bigger than they actually are.

Bella flashed her waist in a crop top adorned with lips and baggy black jeans, as she tried on the sneakers amid a mass of other shoes in dressing room.

New kicks: Bella Hadid gushed about the latest addition to her shoe collection on Wednesday

She wore her dark locks loosely around her shoulders and appeared to have come straight from a blood test, with a bandage in the crook of her arm.

She thanked the designer Kerwin Frost in the caption, penning on Instagram: 'Hey thank you so much Kerwin for my new Super Stuffed Adidas I love them soooo much!!! I am always so proud of everything U do!! ❤️‍ [sic]'

Frost’s inaugural Adidas collab has additional padding on the tongue and ankle collar but the shoe still runs true to size.

She thanked the designer Kerwin Frost in the caption, penning on Instagram: 'Hey thank you so much Kerwin for my new Super Sfuffed Adidas I love them soooo much!!! I am always so proud of everything U do!! ❤️‍ [sic]'

Fancy footwear: The 24-year-old supermodel shared snaps of herself trying on the new Superstuffed Adidas trainers - which are designed to make the wearers feet look five times bigger than they actually are

Lithe: Bella flashed her waist in a crop top adorned with lips and baggy black jeans, as she tried on the sneakers amid a mass of other shoes in dressing room

Model behaviour: She wore her dark locks loosely around her shoulders and appeared to have come straight from a blood test, with a bandage in the crook of her arm

Otherwise, the shoe wears the traditional white-based color scheme combined with black overlay panels while 'Superstuffed' branding is printed on the lateral sides.

The shoe is part of a larger collection that will be arriving soon.

Bella is currently with her boyfriend, Marc Kalman, in New York City.

The two were first romantically connected this past July, although they have reportedly been seeing each other for well over a year.

Prior to becoming romantically involved with the art director, Hadid was in a long-term relationship with The Weeknd, which ended for good in 2019.

The now-couple went Instagram official with their relationship this past July with a now-deleted post made to the model's Instagram page.

However, a source recently spoke to Page Six and noted that the two had been seeing each other ever since last summer, with the insider noting that the two 'hid it well.'

Going public: Hadid and Kalman went public with their relationship with a now-deleted post that was made to her Instagram account in July

The individual also elaborated on the pair's methods that they used to keep their relationship a secret in its early stages.

'If they went out, he would come out first, get the car, and then she would get into the car. They would drive to a location, and he'd drop her off but not get out and go park the car,' they specified.

The insider went on to note that the pair 'were very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time.'

The source expressed that the two kept things toned down in public and opted for dates that included her friends.

Keeping it secret: A source recently spoke to Page Six and expressed that the couple was 'very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time

According to the individual, Hadid and Kalman never shared 'any PDA...and most of the time they were with other people, which of course made it difficult to prove that they were dating.'

However, the source noted that many people began speculating that the model was seeing her now-boyfriend when his car began being regularly seen at her residence.

They said: 'This new guy [at the time] was driving her around in his Porsche, and then the Porsche was [at her place] overnight multiple times...So it was like, "She's got to be hooking up with this dude."'

The insider concluded by speaking about their Instagram picture, which was later deleted, and noted that the two waited a year before going public with their romance.

Suspicious minds: The insider expressed that many of Hadid's friends speculated that she was seeing Kalman when his car began being seen outside of her residence; they are pictured in July

'They basically came out on their anniversary — or somewhere around it,' the source noted.

Hadid's older sister Gigi notably left a smiley face emoji in the post's comments section, while the model's other friends reacted similarly.

On Monday afternoon, the fashion industry figure shared a selfie to her Instagram Story, where she was seen posing in a packed dressing room.

Letting the world know: The source also expressed that Hadid and Kalman went public about their relationship 'on their anniversary — or somewhere around it'

The social media personality sported a revealing yellow bikini top and a dark miniskirt for the sizzling snap.

Her hair remained tied in a braid and she accessorized with numerous bracelets worn on both arms.

Hadid wrote that she was 'packing for fricking vacation' and that she 'can't wait' to embark on her summer getaway.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Singapore Changi held the title of 'world's best airport' for eight years in a row, but now it has lost its crown to Hamad International Airport in Doha.

The Qatari hub has been named the No.1 in the world in the 2021 Skytrax World Airport Awards, with Changi coming third behind second-place Tokyo Haneda Airport.

South Korea's Incheon International Airport has been named the fourth best, with London Heathrow Airport coming a very respectable eighth, way ahead of rival hub Gatwick, which comes 69th.

Hamad International Airport in Doha (pictured) has been named the No.1 airport in the world in the 2021 Skytrax World Airport Awards

THE TOP 100 BEST AIRPORTS FOR 2021 1 Doha Hamad 2 Tokyo Haneda 3 Singapore Changi 4 Seoul Incheon 5 Tokyo Narita 6 Munich 7 Zurich 8 London Heathrow 9 Kansai 10 Hong Kong 11 Centrair Nagoya 12 Amsterdam Schiphol 13 Helsinki-Vantaa 14 Guangzhou 15 Paris CDG 16 Frankfurt 17 Istanbul 18 Copenhagen 19 Dubai 20 Madrid Barajas 21 Shanghai Hongqiao 22 Melbourne 23 Vienna 24 Vancouver 25 Houston George Bush 26 Hamburg 27 Fukuoka 28 Sydney 29 Haikou Meilan 30 Dusseldorf 31 Xi'an 32 Brisbane 33 Cape Town 34 Jakarta 35 Auckland 36 Rome Fiumicino 37 Taiwan Taoyuan 38 Toronto Pearson 39 Barcelona 40 Quito 41 Cologne / Bonn 42 Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky 43 Bogota 44 Denver 45 Delhi 46 Atlanta 47 Athens 48 Shenzhen 49 Houston Hobby 50 Jeddah 51 Baku 52 Durban King Shaka 53 Seattle-Tacoma 54 Johannesburg 55 Kuala Lumpur 56 Muscat 57 Moscow Sheremetyevo 58 Riyadh 59 Seoul Gimpo 60 London City 61 San Francisco 62 Lima 63 Montréal 64 Hyderabad 65 Mumbai 66 Bangkok Suvarnabhumi 67 Perth 68 Medina 69 London Gatwick 70 Dallas/Fort Worth 71 Bangalore 72 Chengdu Shuangliu 73 Paris Orly 74 Adelaide 75 Los Angeles 76 Lisbon 77 Gold Coast 78 Milan Malpensa 79 Christchurch 80 Oslo 81 Changsha 82 Denpasar Bali 83 Sanya Phoenix 84 Abu Dhabi 85 Bahrain 86 New York JFK 87 Dammam 88 Rostov-on-Don 89 Kazan 90 Guayaquil 91 Stockholm Arlanda 92 Beijing Capital 93 Malta 94 Minneapolis St.Paul 81 Phoenix 83 Porto 97 Budapest 98 Detroit Metropolitan 99 Boston Logan 100 Yekaterinburg Source: Skytrax Advertisement

The highest-place U.S airport is Houston George Bush, in 25th, with Melbourne flying the flag for Australia in 22nd.

Hamad International Airport rounds off its success at the 2021 World Airport Awards by winning the awards for the Best Airport in the Middle East, the World's Best Airport in the 25 to 35million Passenger category, and for the Best Airport Staff in the Middle East.

Changi has been named the World's Best Airport in the 10 to 15million Passenger category, and scoops the gongs for World's Best Airport Staff and Best Airport Staff in Asia.

Tokyo Haneda Airport also wins the Best Airport in Asia, World's Best Domestic Airport and World's Best Airport Cleanliness awards.

Tokyo Haneda Airport has been named the second-best airport in the world and comes top in the World's Best Airport Cleanliness category

Changi has been named the World's Best Airport in the 10 to 15million Passenger category - and is third overall

Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport has been named the Best Airport in China, the World's Best Airport in the 35 to 45million Passenger category and also takes the awards for the Best Airport Staff in China. The airport also achieved its highest global ranking at No.14, up from No.30 in the 2020 Awards.

Munich Airport, meanwhile, retains its stronghold at the awards, being named the Best Airport in Europe, whilst London's Heathrow Airport is named World's Best Airport in the 20 to 25million Passenger category, as well as the Best Airport in Western Europe.

Istanbul Airport is named the World's Most Improved Airport in 2021, moving from No.102 in 2020 to No.17 in the 2021 results.

South Korea's Incheon International Airport has been named the fourth best in the world

London's Heathrow Airport is named World's Best Airport in the 20 to 25million Passenger category, as well as the Best Airport in Western Europe. It comes eighth in the main ranking

The highest-place U.S airport in the 2021 Skytrax awards is Houston George Bush (pictured), in 25th

Edward Plaisted of Skytrax said: 'We are delighted to announce that Hamad International Airport has been voted the World's Best Airport 2021. Inaugurated in 2014, Hamad International Airport has rapidly become a customer favourite and moved from No.3 in the world in 2020 to be ranked World's Best Airport this year.

'Achieving this honour is very much a team effort, and our congratulations go to the management, staff and stakeholders at Hamad International Airport that help make this happen.

'As travel hubs worldwide have been impacted by the pandemic, Hamad International Airport was undeterred by the global travel disruptions and continued with its expansion plans while introducing additional airport health and safety standards.

'As the Official Airport Partner for the Fifa World Cup Qatar 2022 we wish Hamad International Airport every success in helping to host such a major event.'

Skytrax added: 'The 2021 World Airport Awards recognise the efforts of global airports in adapting and meeting the challenges of the Covid-19 pandemic.

'The past 18 months has been the most challenging and financially difficult period ever experienced by the world air transport industry, and airports have invested to provide the safest possible environment for their customers and staff during the global pandemic. Covid-19 has impacted some regions and airports more than others, with many areas having few, if any, international routes operating for more than a year.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season is upon us with all the giddy excitement and optimism that brings.

We can expect the usual drama from the self-styled 'best league in the world' where, as we've seen time and time again, anyone can beat anyone.

Manchester City will be looking to defend their title but can expect to be pushed hard by Manchester United, Liverpool and European champions Chelsea.

Arsenal feature in the first part of our Premier League new season report cards

FA Cup holders Leicester City will be again trying to crack the top four, leading a cluster of sides with designs on qualifying for Europe.

And towards the bottom, the three newly-promoted clubs - Watford, Norwich and Brentford - will be hoping their Premier League experience isn't a brief one while the likes of Burnley, Brighton and Newcastle battle to keep heads above water.

Ahead of the big kick-off on Friday night, we will preview the new Premier League season in four parts, assessing the prospects for all 20 teams. Part One covers Arsenal through to Burnley.

ARSENAL

Was last season's eighth-placed finish just a blip or are Arsenal facing long-term decline to mid-table mediocrity and more mockery of their 'big six' status?

We're about to find out with the burden now heavily on Mikel Arteta to show he is making tangible progress after several years of drift at the Emirates Stadium.

Arteta has been striking an optimistic tone, underpinned by surprisingly efficient transfer business, and he will hope the absence of European competition in midweek will allow more breathing space in the fixture schedule to properly impart his philosophy.

With no European distractions, there really are no excuses for Mikel Arteta and Arsenal

Pressure to deliver a return to the top six comes not only from the point of prestige for Arsenal but financial necessity.

The club's net debt more than doubled to £108.2million as a result of Covid, they took out and repaid a £120m loan from the Bank of England, and their figures revealed £154m owed to other clubs in transfer fees. They can't be without European cash for too long.

Little wonder fans raged at the club's owners, the Kroenke family, amid the European Super League fiasco but all that hasn't stopped them spending this summer.

Defender Ben White is Arsenal's headline summer arrival, the defender costing £50m

£50m was spent on Brighton's Ben White to fix a notoriously leaky and error-prone defence, while the signings of defender Nuno Tavares and midfielder Albert Sambi Lokonga, both 21, confirmed Arteta wants a squad with a youthful complexion.

Arguably their best summer business, however, has been securing Kieran Tierney and Emile Smith Rowe to new long-term contracts.

Arteta must build his team around them - plus England's Euro star Bukayo Saka and, they hope, an injury-free Thomas Partey - as well as praying Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang starts scoring again after a barren run in the second half of last season.

Securing Emile Smith Rowe (left) to a new long-term contract is also a summer positive

Their summer transfer business is unlikely to be finished but the team's core is in place.

Defeats by London rivals Chelsea and Tottenham in the Mind Series have served as a reminder of how much ground Arsenal need to make up.

Games with Chelsea and Man City before the end of August mean that pressure on the manager is likely to increase very quickly. It could go very wrong, very soon but they do certainly look better-placed than last season.

Gunners fans will hope to see more from midfielder Thomas Partey in the season ahead

ASTON VILLA

Aston Villa made brilliant progress in finishing 11th last season and will want to kick on towards a top half finish and even European qualification.

The great unknown, of course, is whether they can achieve this without their departed talisman Jack Grealish.

Villa always knew, deep down, that this day would come and to have secured £100m from Manchester City for Grealish off the back of a positive Euro 2020 with England is about as much as they could have hoped to raise.

His seven goals and 12 assists from last season - which would have been much higher but for a shin injury - plus all those little creative intangibles must be replaced and, in fairness, Villa have made a decent stab at it.

Jack Grealish departed Aston Villa for Manchester City in a £100m deal sealed last week

New arrival Emiliano Buendia was the Championship's best player for Norwich last season

Emiliano Buendia, signed from newly-promoted Norwich for £33m, was the Championship's best player last season and should do better in the top-flight at Villa than on his last visit with the Canaries in 2019-20.

Speedster Leon Bailey, £30m from Bayer Leverkusen, has been scorching defences in the Bundesliga for the past few seasons.

And though the £25m purchase of Danny Ings from Southampton last week raised a few eyebrows he is a proven Premier League goalscorer.

Between them, they should compensate for the loss of Grealish and more cash from his sale could yet be reinvested. Villa may have lost an idol but it shouldn't stop them kicking on.

Danny Ings has also arrived from Southampton and is a proven Premier League goalscorer

BRENTFORD

Brentford become the 50th different club of the Premier League era as they prepare to play in the top division for the first time since 1947.

And they should be a breath of fresh air. Thomas Frank is a hugely likeable manager and favours an exciting and progressive brand of football that means Brentford will look to seize the initiative in games and certainly won't be cowed by more illustrious opponents.

Naturally, they will be listed among the relegation candidates but there are numerous factors to suggest the Bees, who can finally welcome full houses to their stunning new stadium, will stay up.

Brentford are in the Premier League for the first time after winning the play-off final in May

The first is that the stars from the side that won promotion by beating Swansea in the Championship play-off final remain.

Nobody swooped in for star striker Ivan Toney, nor Bryan Mbeumo, Christian Norgaard or Rico Henry, so there is a core of classy players determined to prove themselves on a bigger stage.

Secondly, they have strengthened at the back with a club record £12m paid to Celtic for the Norway defender Kristoffer Ajer. Brentford did occasionally play themselves into trouble at the back last season so reinforcement was needed.

Ivan Toney was top class last season and will be aiming to prove himself in the Premier League

Thirdly, Frank is flexible with his tactics, switching between three and four at the back, meaning there is a Plan B and Plan C if things don't go their way in matches. They certainly won't be left wondering.

Off the field, Brentford have turned themselves into the epitome of the 21st century football club. Recruitment is intelligent, with players signed cheaply, developed and sold on for large profit. This is supplemented from a B team structure unique in English football.

They will look at Leeds United last season as their example as they attempt to ensure it's not a brief stay in the Premier League. Whatever happens, it won't be dull.

Thomas Frank and his team will be determined to stay in the top-flight now they've made it up

BRIGHTON AND HOVE ALBION

Graham Potter's team finished 16th but comfortably above the relegation zone last season though the demoted trio of Sheffield United, West Brom and Fulham really were poor.

Brighton will want to push on towards mid-table but that's easier said than done and they could easily find themselves embroiled in a relegation scrap.

White's departure to Arsenal earned a £50m windfall but it remains to be seen how big a hole it leaves in defence.

Brighton's principal summer signing so far has been midfielder Enock Mwepu from Salzburg

It appears that if some of that cash is going to be reinvested this window it will be focused on addressing a shortfall of goals instead.

Brighton remain linked with Celtic's Odsonne Edouard, a prolific scorer in Scotland but untested elsewhere. He would cost about £18m but is attracting interest from elsewhere.

Efforts have been made to ease the burden on star midfielder Yves Bissouma with the signing of box-to-box Zambian midfielder Enock Mwepu, £18m from Red Bull Salzburg.

Midfielder Yves Bissouma (right) will once again be key if Brighton can hold on to him

Giant 6ft 8in goalkeeper Kjell Scherpen has come in from Ajax but is only 21 while England youth international Jeremy Sarmiento, from Benfica, is a talent but probably one for the future.

It leaves you wondering whether Brighton have enough. Enough creativity going forward and enough predatory instinct to put chances away. And there may yet be offers for Bissouma.

BURNLEY

There's a big element of deja-vu around Burnley entering the new season. Have they moved forward in any sense from 12 months ago?

They survived very comfortably in the end last season, finishing one place but 11 points above Fulham, but in a similar way to Brighton, it isn't sustainable to keep praying there are three worse teams.

As always, it will come down to Sean Dyche and the strong sense of camaraderie at Turf Moor to steer them to 40 points and safety.

Reaching the security of the 40-point mark is once again Sean Dyche's priority at Burnley

Defensive pairing Ben Mee and James Tarkowski are as integral as ever in keeping opponents out and Burnley can't afford any injuries to them.

Having said that, Nathan Collins has come in from Stoke and though only 20 years of age, should provide solid back-up.

At the other end, the goals of Chris Wood are just as important as ever. He netted 12 times in the Premier League last season, four times as many as anyone else.

Chris Wood scored 12 Premier League goals last season - four times the return of everyone else

Plenty of faith will be placed in the craft and creativity of 21-year-old Dwight McNeil again too.

But Dyche will enter the season frustrated at a lack of transfer business yet again. Twelve months ago, the Clarets were waiting for their takeover to go through but it seems little has changed.

Those classic Dyche-Burnley characteristics of grit, desire and fight will be just as crucial as ever.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi's emotional farewell to his beloved Barcelona grabbed the attention of football fans worldwide on Sunday.

Messi's departure from the Nou Camp after 21 years has sent shockwaves throughout the world of football after the Spanish giants - in crisis mode amid a financial nightmare - failed to extend his stay when his deal expired at the start of last month.

Following his bombshell departure, Messi is now on the brink of signing for Paris Saint-Germain, who have reportedly offered the Argentine a two-year deal worth around £70million.

Lionel Messi was inconsolable as he said his goodbyes to his beloved Barcelona on Sunday

Messi's departure from Barcelona has sent shockwaves throughout the world of football

And following the confirmation of his shock exit, Messi held a press conference to say his goodbyes to everyone associated with Barcelona - in which he addressed to fans why his 21-year spell has come to a dramatic end.

But the six-time Ballon d'Or winner couldn't contain his emotions, and was inconsolable - while his family, former and current team-mates and media listened in - as he tried to explain the reasons behind leaving.

And with Messi clearly unsettled by it all, Gary Lineker led the tributes on social media to arguably football's greatest ever player.

Lineker wrote on Twitter: 'So sad watching a clearly very emotional Lionel Messi having to say goodbye to @FCBarcelona.

'No player in the history of the sport has given so much joy, so many unforgettable moments, so much success to one club.'

Many more of football's biggest names, and fans, flocked to social media to laud the Argentine - who has produced plenty of the most magical moments the sport has ever seen.

Gary Lineker paid tribute to Messi on social media following his emotional press conference

Piers Morgan insisted it will be 'so hard to imagine Messi' playing for another team

Former Barcelona and Liverpool forward Luis Garcia said his thank you to Messi on Sunday

Barcelona Women's player Andrea Falcon also hailed 'legend' Messi during his farewell speech

Piers Morgan was another high-profile name to have his say on social media on Sunday - insisting he can't quite believe Messi will be playing in another club's colours.

'Wow. Poor guy looks broken as journalists give him a prolonged standing ovation. So hard to imagine #Messi playing for another team. His heart is #Barca.'

Former Barcelona and Liverpool star Luis Garcia said his thank you to the Argentine star on Twitter too.

He wrote: 'Thanks Leo !! Can't say much more. All the best to you and your family in the next chapter of your career.'

Barcelona Women's player Andrea Falcon also revealed her immense 'pride' to have worn the same colours as Messi.

Falcon, alongside a picture of the pair wearing their Barcelona colours, said: 'You are a legend for this club and it is a pride to have defended the same colours as you. You have made us enjoy and you are and will always be a reference! Thanks, Leo.'

The Argentine is on the brink of joining French giants Paris Saint-Germain this summer now

Speaking out over his exit, Messi - who received a lengthy standing ovation from those in attendance - said he did everything he could to extend his illustrious stay with Barca having initially tied him down to a five-year deal agreed on a 50 per cent pay cut.

'Honestly, when the elections happened (in March), I spoke with (club president Joan) Laporta, we had dinner and after that I was convinced I would be staying,' he said.

'My contract was never the issue... What I know is that I did everything I could. The club say it could not happen because of LaLiga.

'I can guarantee you that I did everything I could to stay. Last year I didn't want to and I said that, but this year it was different.'

Messi has won it all for Barcelona, and bagged an astonishing 672 goals in 778 appearances
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@British athlete Tom Bosworth has lashed out at the International Olympic Committee over the 'prison' conditions at the race walking venue in Sapporo.

In a series of angry tweets that he has since deleted, Bosworth criticised the 'slop' being served up in a 'sweaty school dining hall' at Sapporo Odai Park.

Ahead of his challenge in the 20km walk on Thursday, the 31-year-old from Sevenoaks wrote: 'Hey @iocmedia you know the millions of (dollars emoji) you make off the Olympics. Any chance, in the week of our race we could get some food?

Team GB athlete Tom Bosworth blasted the food selection in Sapporo in a now-deleted tweet

The 31-year-old posted a video walking through the cafeteria at the Sapporo accommodation

'Like meals? Not cold slop, steamed onions or partly cooked pasta? This is the "pinnacle of sport." Sapporo feels like a prison.'

An accompanying video showed the food being served.

Bosworth, who begins his Tokyo campaign this week and won the silver medal at the 2018 Commonwealth Games, clearly feels the current selection of meals is not adequate for a professional sportsperson.

He later added: 'Welcome to the sweaty school dining hall that a lifetime of hard work gets you. @iocmedia any chance you could be a little athlete focused? Any chance we could have somewhere to get some fresh air aside from the 900m training lap we have? A cup of coffee wouldn't go amiss.'

The 31-year-old asked for food other than 'cold slop, steamed onions or partly cooked pasta'

Some of those who initially replied to his tweet expressed sympathy for Bosworth's plight

Some on Twitter expressed sympathy, with one saying: 'Looks like the options available at a budget all inclusive holiday.

Another added: '#Japan, such great cuisine, #Tokyo the culinary capital of the world. Disappointed to see/hear that!'

However, others disagreed and felt the complaints betrayed a bad attitude on Bosworth's part.

One social media user responded: 'To describe the accommodation as "like a prison" is insulting. Japan is doing its best to hold an Olympics during the most difficult circumstances. If you have a problem with the food, why not say something to the local staff rather than posting offensive comments on social media?'

However, several others felt Bosworth's complaints about the food betrayed a bad attitude

A second asked: 'Have you tried prison food? Bit of a spoilt brat attitude, you are aware people are starving around the world and would love a meal like this. Get a grip.'

Another said: 'Any chance you could stop whinging? You're only going for a walk. It's not like you're an elite athlete!' while a fourth added: 'Food might (be) crap but feels like a prison? Come on.'

Bosworth finished sixth at the Rio Olympics in 2016.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wayne Rooney believes he can turn Ravel Morrison into a Premier League star after bringing the former Manchester United wonderkid to Derby on a one-year deal.

Now 28 and playing for his 12th club, Morrison has yet to fulfil his immense talent but gave another tantalising glimpse of his ability on his debut for the Rams with an outstanding long-range strike to help them knock Salford City out of the Carabao Cup.

Derby’s troubled financial situation means they can sign only free agents but in Morrison, boss Rooney is confident they have found a gem. The pair know each other from their time at Old Trafford and Rooney says Morrison, who had difficulties away from the game in that period, is judged wrongly.

Ravel Morrison showed a glimpse of his ability with a stunning goal against Salford City

Wayne Rooney believes Morrison could impress many and attract Premier League interest

‘He has that stability off the field,’ said the former England captain. ‘That is where people misunderstand him. I have seen him staying late at the training ground, helping our younger players.

‘The Ravel I knew at United was a kid. The Ravel I know now is an experienced player – even though he should have played more games than he has at this age – but he has been at a lot of clubs and he has seen how the game works.

‘I have seen a real maturity in him. I have no doubt in his ability and I have no doubt in my ability to get the best out of him.

‘If I can do that this season, it will be very difficult for us to keep hold of him. I am sure there will be Premier League clubs knocking at the door if I get what I want out of him.’

Morrison’s strike was his first in English football for more than seven years, following his goal for Queens Park Rangers in a 5-2 win over Nottingham Forest in April 2014.

When he left United for West Ham in January 2012, Morrison scored an outstanding goal in a 3-0 win at Tottenham in October 2013 and it seemed only a matter of time before he would earn full international honours. Yet the expected breakthrough never came and Morrison has never recaptured that form regularly.

Morrison has been staying in training late to help out younger players at Derby County

On a podcast with former United defender Rio Ferdinand earlier this year, Morrison admitted: ‘If I could go back in time, I would change 90 per cent of my life.’ However, Sir Alex Ferguson said: ‘The boy had a good heart.’

‘I’m 28 but it (negative judgement) still happens now,’ said Morrison earlier this year. ‘I’ve become immune to it. It’s a bit draining but it is what it is.’

As well as playing for seven clubs in the English system, Morrison has also spent time in Italy, Sweden, Mexico and Holland. He has broken his duck in front of goal and Rooney wants more, possibly starting on Saturday in the Championship at Peterborough. Posh were promoted last year and are managed by Sir Alex’s son Darren.

Rooney added: ‘Ravel has to score more goals and I have spoken to him about it. I want him on the ball and creating but I also want him in the box to score ugly goals. Not every goal can be a 25-yard screamer.’ That said, it's a good place to start.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Richard Cockerill is set to join a revamped England coaching staff, with the appointment of the former international hooker expected to be officially confirmed next week.

Last month, Sportsmail revealed that Eddie Jones had held talks with Cockerill, who had become available after leaving his post as head coach of Edinburgh — where he spent four seasons.

Sources indicated the 50-year-old was keen to join the England set-up if an offer was forthcoming and now it is understood that a deal is close to being finalised.

Richard Cockerill is set to join the England coaching staff after holding talks with Eddie Jones

Cockerill is poised to be brought into Jones's new management team with a remit to oversee the lineout and contact work — in a close alliance with forwards coach Matt Proudfoot. However, it is thought that remit may be expanded once he has become established.

The imminent appointment will follow confirmation that Martin Gleeson is taking charge of the attack and it will mean the arrival of another homegrown coach, soon after Simon Amor's ill-fated stint came to an end.

It also follows the sudden departure of Jones's senior assistant, John Mitchell, who has been released to take up a role at Wasps.

Cockerill is one of the most successful English coaches of the era. He guided Leicester to three Premiership titles and, during his eight years in charge, the Tigers were a fixture in the play-offs. They declined after his departure.

He then performed a salvage operation at Toulon before taking Edinburgh into the Pro 14 play-offs for the first time in his first season.

Meanwhile, Jones has scrapped plans for a trip to Tbilisi next week, due to the prospect of having to quarantine on his return to the UK.

Head coach Jones has scrapped plans to spend time alongside Georgia's management team

England's head coach was due to spend time with Georgia's management team next Wednesday, Thursday and Friday but the mission has been aborted after Georgia were placed on the Government's travel red list in last week's review.

A visit from Jones, to pass on some expertise, would have been a boost to Georgia's rugby team at a difficult time.

Their own head coach, Levan Maisashvili, is in a critical condition on a ventilator in hospital in Johannesburg, more than a month after contracting Covid-19 when his side played South Africa. The virus has left him with lung damage.

Rassie Erasmus, South Africa's director of rugby, has stirred the pot ahead of disciplinary action by World Rugby in relation to his outspoken attack on the integrity of match officials during the Lions series.

Charges are due to be announced next week but Erasmus was back on social media on Thursday with what appeared to be a swipe at his critics and the authorities.

He posted a fable about a row between a tiger and a donkey, which ends with the tiger being punished, even though he is right.

It ends: 'The worst waste of time is arguing with the fool and fanatic who doesn't care about truth or reality. Never waste time on arguments that don't make sense.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City fans slammed Manchester United stars Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho ahead of their clash with Tottenham, chanting that the pair 'let the country down' after missing their penalties in England's Euro 2020 final.

Footage on Twitter showed a large group of City supporters repeatedly singing 'Sancho and Rashford let the country down' on the concourses ahead of kick-off on Sunday.

It comes after Leeds fans chanted the same song at Old Trafford before their 5-1 defeat by Manchester United on Saturday.

Sancho, Rashford and Arsenal's Bukayo Saka, who also missed, were subjected to racist abuse online after failing to score their spot-kicks in England's penalty shoot-out defeat by Italy.

Rashford also had his mural in Manchester vandalised before thousands of fans left supportive messages to cover up the abuse.

The trio have received immense public support since, while Tottenham and Brentford fans gave Saka a standing ovation when he came off the bench during their clashes against Arsenal in the past week.

Manchester City fans chanted that Marcus Rashford and Jadon Sancho 'let the country down' ahead of their Premier League clash with Tottenham on Sunday

Rashford (left), Sancho (centre) and Bukayo Saka (right) all missed penalties in the penalty shootout which saw Italy beat England in agonising fashion

This weekend has seen capacity crowds return to Premier League grounds, with City fans filling out the away end at the Tottenham Hotspur stadium.

A crowd of 75,000 was inside Old Trafford on Saturday for Manchester United's first home game of the season but the build-up to the match was marred by violent clashes between supporters.

The two clubs are historical rivals and are playing against each other in England's top-flight with fans for the first time since 2004.

With the pandemic keeping fans away from stadiums last season, the two meetings between the two sides was without a crowd, keeping the rivalry on the pitch.

However, as fans made their way to the Theatre of Dreams on Saturday morning, tempers boiled over between the two sets of rival supporters resulting in violent clashes outside cafes and restaurants.

The 21-second clip, uploaded to Twitter, saw hooligans use bins and chairs as weapons as one lone police officer frantically tries to separate those involved using a baton.

A man standing inside the shop says: 'Good job we're in here. Oh my god.'

Greater Manchester Police confirmed on Saturday that no arrests have been made as of yet and that they are working with local premises to identify those involved in the violent clashes.

A spokesperson from Greater Manchester Police said: 'Patrols in the city centre have been made aware of some isolated incidents of disorder at premises in the area.

'We're working closely with those premises to support licensees at the early signs of any disorder and negate it as swiftly as possible.

'Our priority is to escort people to the stadium in a safe manner and to ensure minimal disruption for the wider public. No arrests have been necessary at this stage.'

Another video shared online shows the moment a police van arrives to a brawl which has spilled out of the Piccadilly Tavern.

Manchester United and Leeds fans were involved in violent clashes in Manchester city centre

Footage shows fans using bins and chairs as weapons during the ugly scenes in Manchester

The groups of men eventually disperse as a police officers arrives to the scene

Men could be seen running to the entrance of the pub, appearing to join the skirmish, while the police vehicle pulls up with its sirens blaring.

Saturday was the first time in 17 months that Old Trafford was at full capacity, hosting some 75,000 fans.

But scenes of the brawl put a dampener on the otherwise celebratory return of the Premier League.

It came after police on Friday pleaded with fans to behave responsibly, announcing that 200 officers would be on duty across Manchester.

Chief superintendent Stuart Ellison, Greater Manchester Police's gold commander for public order operations, said: 'It feels like a long time since we last had capacity crowds, but we have worked on hundreds of events in the past and our priority this weekend remains the same.

'The Premier League starts with Manchester hosting the biggest game of the weekend, 70,000 fans returning to Old Trafford to see Manchester United hosting Leeds United.

'That's just one of four matches on our patch on Saturday afternoon.

'Our officers are working extended hours this weekend to help keep the public safe. All that we ask is that you behave responsibly so everyone can enjoy themselves.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christine McGuinness turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie.

The blonde bombshell, 33, posed in two different pieces, first working her best angles in a pink bra and matching briefs and then slipping into a chic black one-piece.

Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her and the Instagram snaps appear to have been taken in the home she shares with husband Paddy McGuiness and their three children.

Wow: Christine McGuinness, 33, turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie

Wearing her glossy blonde hair loose, Christine beamed from ear to ear in the sexy images.

The doting mother accessorised with a delicate necklace and on her left wrist donned a luxury watch.

Both pieces of lingerie featured delicate lace detailing and made sure all eyes were on Christine's enviable physique

It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative.

Peachy: Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her

In a new interview, the star discussed her brave decision to find out whether she has faulty genes after her mother Joanne - who is now in remission - was diagnosed with cancer in September.

'I'm just really relieved,' said an elated Christine, adding: 'Thank God it came back negative.'

Speaking to OK!, the mother-of-three shared: 'It doesn't mean I can't get cancer, but it means my chances are the same as anybody else's.'

Christine has a family history of breast cancer and decided to take the BRCA test after her mother's diagnosis last year.

Christine admitted she was initially hesitant to use testing company Myogenes as she feared the process would be invasive, but told the outlet it was straightforward and simple.

'It's sent in the post – it's just a saliva test and really quick,' she said, adding that results are sent directly to your GP.

Christine also revealed to the publication that if she had tested positive for the gene she would have considered 'a full mastectomy and breast reconstruction to make sure she's around for as long as possible for the children'.

She added that upon hearing the news of her negative test, husband Paddy gave her 'a huge hug' and said he was 'really, really pleased'.

Good news: It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

No matter how discerning your tastes, no matter how prone you are to nit-picking, no matter how deep your pockets, hotel Château de la Messardière, I guarantee, will impress.

This utterly exquisite property, nestled on a hill in Saint-Tropez with amazing views of bays on either side, bowled my family and me over – and had the same effect on the other guests, who were most definitely of the ‘discerning’, deep-pocketed variety (the Ferraris, Bentleys, Lamborghinis and Porsches parked out front negated the need for detective work on this front).

On our first night, we dined alfresco at the hotel’s Japanese Matsuhisa Saint-Tropez restaurant, which is running in partnership with world-renowned chef Nobu Matsuhisa, and watched as our fellow supercar-owning, designer-clothes-wearing guests stood transfixed not only by the stunning terrace area, but by the spellbinding view over umbrella pine trees to Pampelonne Bay and the glistening superyachts anchored within.

Hotel Château de la Messardière nestles on a hill in Saint-Tropez with amazing views of bays on either side

The spellbinding view over umbrella pine trees to Pampelonne Bay and the glistening superyachts anchored within

One after the other they switched their smartphones to video mode and panned them around the restaurant’s elegant seating and the mesmerising landscape, as waiters and waitresses floated from table to table delivering perfectly executed Japanese dishes and drinks – think wagyu tacos, the famed Nobu cod, king crab tempura and sake cocktails.

The hotel - run by the inimitable Airelles group and which has a ‘palace’ rating from the French government - is irresistible from top to bottom.

The main building is a chateau built in 1904 as a wedding gift for the famous horseman Henry Brisson de la Messardière and young artist Louise Dupuy d’Anjeac.

The hotel - run by the inimitable Airelles group and which has a ‘palace’ rating from the French government - is irresistible from top to bottom

This terrace is used for breakfast and the hotel’s Japanese Matsuhisa Saint-Tropez restaurant, which is running in partnership with world-renowned chef Nobu Matsuhisa

The Château began its re-birth in 1989 when it was restored and enlarged by the head of Historical Monuments architect, Jean-Claude Rochette. It was transformed into a luxury hotel in July 1990 before joining, in 2021, the portfolio of the Airelles group

LEFT: The view from the gorgeous main pool out over the Gulf of Saint-Tropez. RIGHT: Breakfast at the hotel is rather splendid

The Château began its re-birth in 1989 when it was restored and enlarged by the head of Historical Monuments architect, Jean-Claude Rochette. It was transformed into a luxury hotel in July 1990 before joining, in 2021, the portfolio of the Airelles group, which has transformed it, with the help of interior designer extraordinaire Christophe Tollemer, into a property so classy it’s almost other-worldly.

Here guests are pampered in a 1,000-square-metre spa (which offers a donkey milk bath) and chauffeured to a private beach, Jardin Tropezina, in Rolls-Royce Cullinan SUVs – and their offspring to a gigantic children’s kingdom villa with a cinema, pool and arcade gaming room.

Children are well looked after in the main hotel, too. A cute little wigwam was set up for our four-year-old daughter in our sumptuous, softly-hued poolside suite and everywhere we ventured attention was lavished on her.

Arcade games at Chateau de la Messardiere's amazing children’s kingdom villa

The rooms at Chateau de la Messardiere are sumptuous, with many just yards from a pool

The Airelles group, with the help of interior designer extraordinaire Christophe Tollemer, turned the chateau into a property so classy it’s almost other-worldly, Ted declares

Ted writes: 'No matter how discerning your tastes, no matter how prone you are to nit-picking, no matter how deep your pockets, hotel Château de la Messardière, I guarantee, will impress'

Supercars in the hotel carpark, along with one of the hotel's Rolls-Royce SUVs (to right)

But all in proportion. Château de la Messardière’s team is a Formula One hospitality outfit and look after young and old with equal grace.

Sometimes all that was needed to get someone’s attention was an auction-room-style nod or gesture of the hand and someone made themselves available. And always with warmth and charm.

How did we pass the time? We lolled like our sanity depended on it.

My relaxation levels were disturbed only by the builder renovating our bathroom in London phoning me as I was offered watermelon by a pool attendant to tell me that unless the toilet was delivered, he couldn’t carry on with the work.

The pool at the 1,000-square-metre spa, which offers a vast array of treatments, including a donkey milk bath

Ted's partner stands spellbound in front of the chateau on the last night

TRAVEL FACTS Ted and his family were hosted by Château de la Messardière, where rates start from €1,150 (£975) in a Classic Room based on a new inclusive rate concept which includes gourmet breakfast; sweet and savoury in-room minibar; access to the Valmont Spa; sunbeds at Jardin Tropézina beach club; poolside non-alcoholic refreshments; laundry service for small items as per selection; valet parking and car wash service, and courtesy car to the beach and city centre (mini mokes or Rolls Royce Cullinan. Rating: EasyJet flies to Nice from Bristol, Edinburgh, Liverpool, London Gatwick, London Luton, and Manchester up to five times a week throughout the summer with fares available from £23.12 one way per person including taxes. EasyJet flies to Marseille from London Gatwick up to five times a week throughout the year with fares available from £23.70 one way per person including taxes. Prices shown are per person based on two people flying on the same booking. Visit www.easyjet.com. Booking.com offers car rental from over 160 countries in the world. For more information, visit www.booking.com. For more on The Regenerative Clinic, which offers Covid travel testing from £49, click here. For more on Qured, which offers testing from £39, click here. Advertisement

And there was a smattering of exasperation mid-rose-sip on a regal slice of Messardière terrace when a bathroom firm told me our tap and shower unit was stuck in a container on a ship somewhere.

Other than that – dreamland.

We splashed around in the frankly magnificent shell-shaped mosaiced pool in front of the turreted main building, which offers stunning views of the Gulf of Saint-Tropez and has a gentle shallow area for little ones, splashed around some more in the 25-metre lap pool in the garden by our room and marvelled at how plump every single cushion was, everywhere we sat.

(Should that be something hotels boast about? I feel it should be.)

We also admired the hotel’s horticultural endeavours.

Beautiful olive trees and flowers have been liberally - and carefully - distributed throughout the terraced areas, making them wonderfully picturesque and tranquil.

And the extensive, lovingly arranged gardens are a superb option for aimless strolling.

On our second night a babysitter looked after the little one while we parents enjoyed an alfresco romantic dinner by the main pool at the hotel’s L’Auberge des Maures restaurant, which specialises in Provencal cuisine.

Here the itinerary was melt-in-the-mouth beef, creamy mash served in a copper pan and a gorgeous Crozes-Hermitage red wine.

Afterwards, we wandered around the pool and gazed at the twinkling lights in the bay, then back at the magical hotel, enveloped in bliss.

That night, sleep came easily once more amid the impossibly silky bedsheets in our room – one of 103 on the 25-acre site.

Book one for a hotel stay you’ll never forget, no matter whether you drive a Ferrari, or a Ford.

THIS is the paperwork needed for a family of 3 to have an amber-list holiday - but is it worth it? Yes, says Travel Editor TED THORNHILL, who enjoyed his trip to France and Spain despite the admin faff

Fit to fly certificates. Check. NHS double-jab certificates. Check. Passports. Check. Car hire forms. Check. Boarding passes. Check.

But there's something else... oh yes, the pre-UK-arrival antigen tests for generating the return fit to fly certificates.

There was a headache-inducing amount of paperwork I needed to generate for my recent trip to amber-listed France and Spain with my partner and four-year-old daughter – but it was worth it.

The headache-inducing amount of paperwork involved for MailOnline Travel Editor Ted's recent trip to amber-listed France and Spain

THE RULES FOR RED, AMBER AND GREEN-LISTED COUNTRIES RED Before travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book a quarantine hotel package, including 2 Covid-19 tests

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England you must: quarantine in a managed hotel, including two Covid-19 tests AMBER Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – you must take the test in the three days before you travel to England

book and pay for Covid-19 tests – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form You must do these things whether you are fully vaccinated or not. On arrival in England If you are fully vaccinated After arrival in England, you must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two. This applies if you're fully vaccinated under either: the UK vaccination programme

the UK vaccine programme overseas

an approved vaccination programme in Europe or the USA - not all are recognised in England It also applies if you are: taking part in an approved Covid-19 vaccine trial in the UK or the USA

under 18 and resident in the UK, a UK Overseas Territory, the USA or one of the specified European countries If you are not fully vaccinated If you do not qualify under the fully vaccinated rules, on arrival in England you must: quarantine at home or in the place you are staying for 10 days

take a Covid-19 test on or before day two and on or after day eight If you are in England for less than 10 days, you need to quarantine for the time you are here. You need to book day two and day eight travel tests. You only need to take the tests if you are still in England. GREEN Before you travel to England you must: take a Covid-19 test – children aged 10 and under do not need to take this test

book and pay for a day 2 Covid-19test – to be taken after arrival in England

complete a passenger locator form On arrival in England You must take a Covid-19 test on or before day two after you arrive. Children aged four and under do not need to take this test. You do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive. You must quarantine if NHS Test & Trace informs you that you travelled to England with someone who has tested positive for Covid-19. If you have been in a country or territory on the red or amber list If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the red list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, you must follow the red list rules. If you have also been in or through a country or territory on the amber list in the 10 days before you arrive in England, and have not visited a country on the red list, you must follow the amber list rules. Source: FCDO. Used under the Open Government Licence. Advertisement

It was worth it to soar in a jet plane once more above turquoise waters, epic mountains and mesmerising white fluffy clouds, to sip rose on sunbaked terraces with the glistening Med in the background and discover hidden coves teeming with fish.

But first, there were the administrative Covid hoops to jump through.

France was our first port of call and to get in – note, at the time - we needed double-jab certificates and a negative PCR or antigen test result and a 'fit to fly' certificate.

The former involved logging onto the NHS app, downloading the certificate and printing it out. The app took security very seriously and scanned my face to match it with my passport photo. This took several attempts.

For the Covid test, we decided to go for the gold-standard PCR (just in case the rules suddenly changed and for extra peace of mind) and turned to The Regenerative Clinic to process it all.

It has its own laboratory on London's Harley Street, so it doesn't need to rely on third-party analysis.

The negative results and certificates arrived the day before our flight.

For the return pre-arrival antigen test we used Qured, which has a clear and easy-to-use website and reasonable prices.

They posted two tests for us to pack that we would then self-administer on a video call with a health professional before flying home.

The final piece of the paperwork jigsaw was the health declaration form demanded by the French authorities, which asked us to confirm that we weren't ill and hadn't been in contact with anyone who had been.

Top tip: EasyJet has a great Covid-19 hub on its website that includes an interactive map. Just click on a country and the entry requirements pop up.

We flew with the airline from Gatwick (my first flight since November 2019) and the experience was very smooth.

An agent from the airline thoroughly examined our fit to fly certificates before we checked in our bags and before too long, we were soaring on a half-empty plane to Marseille.

Where it was apparently 2018.

The border agent pushed all our Covid paperwork to one side and said 'just the passports'.

We took the ferry from Toulon to Mallorca after a few days and bio-security was similarly patchy.

A health declaration control form by the Spanish government had been demanded, but mine wasn't checked as I boarded, though my double-jab certificate was. We had to present that or a negative antigen or PCR test.

The day before we were due to fly back with easyJet from Palma we logged on to Qured for our video-call antigen test, which was straightforward enough. Insert swab, add to solution, drip onto slide, take a picture of the marker together with ID and email to Qured within 30 minutes.

Our fit to fly certificates were emailed that day and the following day, after spending breakfast filling out our passenger locator forms, we found ourselves at the airport in a gargantuan queue that nearly stretched out of the terminal.

An easyJet agent studied our double jab certificates very carefully, but didn't ask to see our fit to fly certificates.

The flight was half empty and the views of Mallorca upon take-off magnificent.

It was a good flight, in an A321 neo, with chirpy service. Then frustration and tedium enveloped us at Gatwick.

We stood in a queue at border control for 90 minutes, among extremely frustrated families. At one point our line was being funnelled past a solitary border control agent, though not for the duration, other checkpoints were opened.

One mother had her baby on a blanket and was gently pulling it along the floor. And one passenger started a group chant of 'we want a third runway at Heathrow'.

When we were eventually called forward my passenger locator form was analysed, together with my passport.

Then through we went. At no point on the journey had my fit to fly certificate been checked, a task that falls to the carrier, I'm told.

The wait at border control, which I later learned was exacerbated by E-gate problems, meant that by the time we reached baggage reclaim the carousel for our flight had switched to another flight.

We found our suitcase and hold-all in the middle of the floor.

A passenger who went through Gatwick border control at the same time as us described the experience as 'hell'.

Gatwick Airport said: 'We are sorry you had this experience as we know the current requirements from Government are incurring more time for admin checks by UK Border Force.

'We are continuing to work with UK Border Force regarding queues at passport control to ensure that best use is made of E-gates where possible and we are hopeful they will be able to support with additional staff as passenger numbers increase.

'In the instance of Sunday [when we landed], there were longer queues due to an issue with UKBF's systems and E-gates that the GAL/UKBF teams responded to, and it's an area we're focused on supporting where we can.

'We don't want queues of this nature to become the norm and we are looking at mitigation measures to make them more bearable if they appear unavoidable due to delays at the border.

'These include handing out bottled water, kids' activity packs, holding people's place in the queue to allow them to go to the toilet, and ensuring there is strong, free Wi-Fi all along the route.'

Is all the amber paperwork worth it? With views like this, yes, says Ted. He snapped this picture as his easyJet flight soared over Mallorca on its way to Gatwick. In the bottom left of the picture is Magaluf. The capital, Palma, can be seen at the top

The airport spokesperson added: 'With regards to your baggage, I am very sorry to hear this and this is not the level of service we wish to provide our passengers.'

When I relayed my experience to the Home Office, the response was colder, with no apology for the queue.

A Home Office spokesperson said: 'The pandemic is not over. We've said throughout that people should expect delays, whilst we conduct additional checks to protect the vaccine roll-out. We will not apologise for doing whatever is necessary to keep our country safe.'

The spokesperson then claimed there was no queue anyway.

Turning to the 'fake news' playbook, they added: 'MailOnline's claims regarding the number of Border Force staff working at Gatwick and queues are false.

'Border Force works hard to ensure it has the right level of resources to check that passengers are compliant with our border health measures and to maintain border security as travel continues to open.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@USA soccer captain Megan Rapinoe netted a goal directly from a corner to hand her side the opening lead in their entertaining 4-3 Olympics bronze medal victory against Australia.

Rapinoe scored just eight minutes into the contest when she opted to go for goal rather than try and pick out a teammate in the box from the corner.

The 36-year-old bent a delicious ball into the box and it was all too much for Teagan Micah in the Australia goal, who made a last-ditch attempt to claw the ball away.

Megan Rapinoe (left) netted directly from a corner to help USA beat Australia in their bronze medal match at the Tokyo Olympics

The pace and whip on her delivery was too much to handle for Australia keeper Teagan Micah

Micah made a last-ditch attempt to claw the ball away but could not prevent it from going in

But despite getting some of her hand to the ball, Micah could not prevent Rapinoe's whipped delivery from finding the far side of the net and handing the world champions the lead.

The Matildas brought themselves level nine minutes later after an uncharacteristic defensive error allowed Arsenal striker Caitlin Foord to slip in captain Sam Kerr.

And the Chelsea star stroked it home despite the acute angle, only for Rapinoe to restore USA's lead with a stunning first-time volley following a mix-up between Clare Polkinghorne and Alanna Kennedy.

Rapinoe's side then extended their lead before the break in the first minute of added time at the end of the first half, with Carli Lloyd providing an emphatic finish after Lindsey Horan's inch-perfect pass.

Sam Kerr (left) restored parity for the Matildas after a through ball from Caitlin Foord (right)

Rapinoe's first-time volley saw the USA retake the lead after an eventful opening 25 minutes

Lloyd then scored her second six minutes into the second half after rolling the ball past Micah after Kennedy's error heading back toward her own goal, before Foord pulled one back for the Matildas with a well-directed header.

Emily Gielnik then netted a screamer from distance in the 90th minute but Australia did not have enough time to score another and take the game beyond regulation time to hand Rapinoe and co a bronze medal.

It represents an improvement for the world champions, who were knocked out at the quarter-final stage by Sweden in Rio five years ago.

USA were competing in the bronze medal match at Tokyo 2020 after suffering a major semi-final upset at the hands of Canada on Monday via a penalty shootout.

Carli Lloyd extended their lead with excellent finishes either side of the half-time interval

Arsenal striker Foord then pulled one back for the Matildas with an excellent header

After the defeat, 2019 Ballon d'Or winner Rapinoe said she could not put determine why her side had not clicked into gear or 'had our joy'.

She added: 'It just hasn't flowed for us. We just didn't have that juice that we normally do.'

Australia - who beat Team GB 4-3 last week despite Ellen White's double - meanwhile missed out on a shot at the gold medal following a narrow 1-0 defeat by Sweden.

The two sides had already faced each other at these Games, with Australia holding the USA to a goalless draw in their final Group G match on Tuesday last week.

Emily Gielnik (R) netted a screamer in the 90th minute but could not prevent Australia's defeat

Stream every unmissable moment of Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 live on discovery+, The Streaming Home of the Olympics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Huddersfield, Middlesbrough and Bristol City are keeping tabs on AFC Wimbledon left-back Nesta Guinness-Walker.

The 21 year-old, a former Chelsea and Tottenham youngster, is rated as one of the best left-backs outside the second tier and being eyed by the Championship trio after featuring regularly for League One Wimbledon in the last two seasons.

Guinness-Walker – the great grandson of Star Wars actor Sir Alec Guinness – spent three years in the youth systems of Chelsea and Spurs before he was a teenager.

Nesta Guinness-Walker has caught the eye of Huddersfield, Middlesbrough and Bristol City

The leftback is the great grandson of Sir Alec Guinness, who played Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original Star Wars trilogy

He started his senior career at non-league Metropolitan Police and had a trial opportunity to re-join Chelsea’s academy in 2019.

But attacking full-back Guinness-Walker instead opted for AFC Wimbledon in order to continue playing first-team football and has racked up over 60 appearances since.

With one year left on his deal, Guinness-Walker’s Championship admirers have now identified him as a target who could be available for a cut-price fee.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new Premier League season is upon us with all the giddy excitement and optimism that brings.

We can expect the usual drama from the self-styled 'best league in the world' where, as we've seen time and time again, anyone can beat anyone.

Manchester City will be looking to defend their title but can expect to be pushing hard by Manchester United, Liverpool and reigning European champions Chelsea.

Manchester City won the Premier League title last season and start as favourites once again

FA Cup holders Leicester City will again be trying to crack the top four, leading a cluster of sides with designs on qualifying for Europe.

And towards the bottom, the three newly-promoted clubs - Watford, Norwich and Brentford - will be hoping their Premier League experience isn't a brief one while the likes of Burnley, Brighton and Southampton battle to keep heads above water.

Ahead of the big kick-off on Friday night, we will preview the new Premier League season in four parts, assessing the prospects for all 20 teams. Part three covers Liverpool through to Norwich.

LIVERPOOL

Though they failed to win any silverware, Liverpool really did pull something satisfactory out of the fire last season.

An outstanding late season run of 10 Premier League games unbeaten, with eight wins, saw Jurgen Klopp's side finish in third, a highly improbably scenario in mid-March.

While the continuation of Champions League cash is obviously welcome post-pandemic, it also proved conclusively that the 'mentality monsters' fighting spirit Klopp has instilled at Anfield remained very much in tact.

Liverpool will be hoping for better fortune with injuries in order to challenge City for the title

Virgil van Dijk (left) and Joe Gomes (right) are on their way back to full fitness after injuries

LIVERPOOL FANS HAVE 'BEST ATMOSPHERE IN THE PREMIER LEAGUE' That is the opinion of a new YouGov survey, done along with Betfair, in which the Reds' passionate supporters came out on top among 1,003 fans polled. Liverpool fans edged out their rivals at Manchester United and Newcastle United in the top three. Jurgen Klopp will hope the famous Anfield atmosphere will be back in style this season - and will look to use that in a title challenge 1) Liverpool 2) Manchester United 3) Newcastle United 4) Leeds 5) Crystal Palace Advertisement

They fell a long way short of defending their title but given the debilitating blows of defensive injuries, round peg midfielders being jammed into square holes at the back and forwards well short of their best form, it was as good as could be hoped.

Klopp, who well and truly lost his pizzazz amid a string of mid-season defeats which came alongside his mother's passing and Covid restraints, will feel it can't be any worse this time.

Virgil van Dijk, Joe Gomez and Joel Matip are due to filter back into the team in the first weeks of the season, which will permit Fabinho and Jordan Henderson to return to more familiar duties.

But the departure of Georginio Wijnaldum, who joined for PSG on a free after failing to agree a new contract at Liverpool, will concern supporters.

Wijnaldum played in all 38 league games last season but his importance was apparently not reflected in the offer that was tabled.

Up front, Diogo Jota revitalised the established front three of Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mane and Roberto Firmino but everyone will need to go again to keep pace with Man City's Rolls Royce attack.

The £36m signing of Ibrahima Konate from Leipzig will prevent a repeat of defensive vulnerabilities if the worst should happen again.

But losing three first choice centre-backs to injury this season as last would truly be rotten luck.

If Liverpool can harness the winning momentum from the spring, they have every chance of keeping up with the team that stole their crown.

The strong finish to last season proved Jurgen Klopp's side have retained a strong mentality

MANCHESTER CITY

Can anybody stop them?

The champions have become even stronger with the £100million British record signing of Jack Grealish one hell of a statement of intent. And that's before you even consider Harry Kane.

Pep Guardiola's side finished 12 points clear last season for their third title in four years and it really is difficult to see beyond them again this time.

The hope is that Chelsea - who denied Guardiola and City's owners this long-craved Champions League glory back in May - Liverpool and Manchester United can challenge and make the title race more exciting.

Manchester City's £100million signing of Jack Grealish has laid down the gauntlet

But all the indications point to further City success and probably the crossing of that final European frontier as well (though PSG may have something to say about that).

City stand above their title rivals in having at least two top quality players in every position, combining a resolute defence, classy midfield and dazzlingly creative strike force.

When that is married to Guardiola's unsurpassed man management skills and the financial clout to buy almost anyone - City are approaching the £1billion spending mark in five years of Pep - they begin to look irresistible.

City will once again look to midfield talisman Kevin De Bruyne to inspire them this season

The one area they need to address is finding the long-term successor to Sergio Aguero up front. If they do land Kane at a cool £150m that settles the matter for the next four to five years.

And if you add the 30 goals a season Kane guarantees you, then City will dominate until Guardiola gets bored.

Pep Guardiola's appetite to success is undiminished and now Europe is the final frontier

MANCHESTER UNITED

Manchester United missed a decent centre half to firm up a vulnerable back line last season. They now have one.

United lacked a world class right-sided attacker who could score and create goals in abundance last season. They now have one.

So Ole Gunnar Solskjaer really has no excuses left. The arrivals of Jadon Sancho and Raphael Varane, for a combined £114million, plus his own new contract, have seen the club back him to the hilt. Now he must deliver trophies.

Manchester United have splashed out £73m on Jadon Sancho as they launch a title charge

And United are certainly better placed than they were 12 months ago after summer transfer business that was surprisingly brisk and straightforward.

As a club legend, Solskjaer has more slack than most managers but another season finishing a distant second to City without winning anything else won't be acceptable.

With PSG splashing out on Lionel Messi, it looks like their pursuit of Paul Pogba is over as well so United should end up stronger in midfield as well even if a holding player is still needed.

What is clear is that Solskjaer cannot afford the kind of slow start that suffocated United's title challenge right away in the past two seasons.

There won't be any excuses for United not to win silverware in the season ahead

While Sancho and Varane will obviously need time to settle in, they must hit the ground running because City, Chelsea and Liverpool won't be hanging around.

A run deep in the Champions League will also be anticipated. United cannot crash out at the end of the group stage as they did last December, albeit going on to reach the Europa League final.

Solskjaer's tenure has seen slow and steady forward progress but always with the caveat that 'we need another player or two.'

That line of argument has now vanished with United's squad looking stronger than at any point post-Ferguson. Time to deliver.

United will once again look to Bruno Fernandes to produce the magic and score goals

NEWCASTLE UNITED

At no Premier League club will the return of fans to stadiums influence the mood as much as at Newcastle.

The St James' Park regulars, on the whole, continue to be seriously underwhelmed by manager Steve Bruce, who guided them to a wholly respectable 12th-placed finish last season.

There were plenty of times when Bruce sailed pretty close to the sun - especially during a bleak midwinter that at one stage saw six losses on the spin - and he maybe survived only because the Gallowgate wasn't there to vent its fury.

Steve Bruce is unpopular with many fans but guided Newcastle to a 12th-placed finish last term

Mike Ashley's loyalty to Bruce ultimately led to mid-table security but you don't have to go far to find Newcastle fans who vehemently believe they should be doing an awful lot better.

An impartial look at Newcastle's squad tends to come up with an opposite opinion and they have yet to get any transfers over the line.

However, news that a £22million fee for last season's loan star Joe Willock will help soothe anxieties ahead of the new campaign.

A fee of £22million has been agreed with Arsenal to make Joe Willock's loan permanent

The hope is that Joelinton finally comes up with the goods, that Willock, Miguel Almiron and Allan Saint-Maximin find enough defences to run through, and that the back line is less leaky.

A pre-season working under Bruce's assistant Graeme Jones - who improved matters when he arrived from Bournemouth in January and is fresh from helping Gareth Southgate's England to the Euros final - will hopefully help.

Ashley's arbitration case against the Premier League over the halted Saudi Arabian-led takeover of the club will be a sideshow to a season likely to feature much of the same.

Speedster Allan Saint-Maximin will be one of Newcastle's principal threats going forward

NORWICH CITY

Look who's back again.

Norwich once again bossed the Championship but now really is the time to cast off that yo-yo club reputation and establish themselves in the top flight.

Last time they were round this way, in 2019-20, they went down with just 21 points and barely a whimper, losing every single match after the post-lockdown restart.

Somehow, it has to be a lot better this time around but achieved without talisman Emiliano Buendia, who has moved to Aston Villa.

Norwich City are back in the Premier League again after domination in the Championship

At least the £40million raised from the Argentine's departure has been reinvested into new acquisitions for Daniel Farke's squad, giving the German more of a chance than last time.

Wide forward Milot Rashica has come in from Werder Bremen for £8m, while United States international Josh Sargent has followed him.

The loan signing of Billy Gilmour from Chelsea also looks an astute move and at the back, Ben Gibson has made his loan from Burnley permanent.

Talented Chelsea midfielder Billy Gilmour is an exciting addition for Norwich on loan

While we can expect Norwich to remain true to themselves and seek to play football that's pleasing on the eye, their latest Championship promotion was notable for a greater defensive steel.

You sense that will prove of greater value in the Premier League, where they shipped 75 goals last time but don't expect any change to the gloomy predictions of an immediate return to the Championship.

Norwich do look better equipped this time around to stay up but you have to say that would come as a surprise.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish has revealed a conversation with John Terry helped convince him to leave Aston Villa and join Manchester City.

The attacking midfielder, 25, became the most expensive English player of all time when he moved from hometown club Villa to the Premier League champions for a whopping £100million transfer fee on August 5.

And as reported by the Sun, Grealish took heed of Terry's words when the Chelsea and England legend emphasised the prestige of playing European football to him.

Jack Grealish (second left) has revealed the role of John Terry (left) in his move to Man City

Former Aston Villa attacking midfielder Grealish moved to City for £100million on August 5

He said: 'I remember speaking to John Terry at Villa and he said when you stand there and hear that Champions League anthem there is nothing better.

'It has been difficult watching (Champions League) games. I remember watching City v PSG last year and the first half was amazing. To be involved would be a dream come true.

When you see a club paying that much for a player it means they trust and value you highly and see so much potential. Now I just hope I can repay this football club by winning as many titles as possible — and winning that trophy we all want.

'The club were so close to winning it last year, they were one goal away. That is exactly why I have come here. I look around the changing room and there is so much talent and depth and I fully believe we can win it this year.'

The 25-year-old opened up on Terry's advice about the prestige of Champions League football

Terry won the Champions League in 2011-2012 as the Blues beat Bayern Munich in the final

Terry won the Champions League with Chelsea in 2011-12, four years after missing a crucial penalty in a final defeat to Manchester United on penalties.

He moved to the Midlands outfit in 2017 and spent one season at the club as a player, captaining them to defeat in the play-off final, before becoming assistant manager at the club, working alongside Grealish in both roles.

However, Terry left Dean Smith's side last month to focus on his own managerial career.

Grealish, who made his City debut as a substitute in Saturday's 1-0 Community Shield final loss against Leicester, and City will kick off their domestic campaign against Tottenham on Sunday August 15 looking to defend their title.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gareth Bale missed a penalty on his return to action for Real Madrid where he was bizarrely given the No 50 shirt.

Bale started for Real in their friendly against AC Milan in Austria on Sunday but missed a penalty, which was easily saved by Mike Maignan.

The winger won the penalty himself. However, he was unable to score and was one of a host of players who were substituted at half time, with the game ending in a goalless draw.

Gareth Bale missed a penalty as he returned to action for Real Madrid against AC Milan

Bale, who is back from his loan spell at Tottenham, bizarrely wore the No 50 shirt for Real

Real Madrid drew 0-0 against AC Milan, with Bale completing 45 minutes in Austria

Gareth Bale wins a penalty for Real Madrid...but then steps up himself and misses the spot kick! 😱



A weak effort and an easy save for Maignan in the Milan goal 🧤 pic.twitter.com/2hHbDRBmIT — Premier Sports 📺 (@PremierSportsTV) August 8, 2021

Bale is back at Real following his season-long loan spell at Tottenham.

However, the Wales international was given what seems like an unnecessarily high squad number. Bale previously wore the No 11 shirt for Real from 2013 to 2020.

However, before he headed to Tottenham on loan the shirt was given to Marco Asensio instead. Asensio wasn't involved against Milan as he played for Spain at the Olympics.

The likes of Luka Jovic and Martin Odegaard don't have permanent squad numbers after coming back from loan but haven't been given a temporary number as high as Bale's.

Bale wore No 11 for Real between 2013 and 2020 but that number was then given to Marco Asensio

The Wales international still has one year remaining on his contract with Real Madrid

The use of the number 50 may seem strange, but that was also the number that Eden Hazard wore when he made his Real debut in a friendly against Bayern Munich in 2019.

Hazard was later assigned a lower squad number and it is anticipated that the same scenario will occur for Bale if he remains part of the squad.

Bale is now into the final year of his contract with Real.

During his time at the club he has made 251 appearances, scoring 105 goals and providing 68 assists. He has won the Champions League four times, La Liga on two occasions and the Copa del Rey once.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Madrid have furiously denied reports that Florentino Perez is studying the possibility of the club joining the Premier League after LaLiga agreed a £2.3billion deal with US private equity firm CVC.

Perez is currently at the centre of a heated row with LaLiga bosses over the proposed deal, which would see them hand 10 per cent of television revenue over the next 50 years to CVC – providing an instant cash injection for all 42 Primera and Segunda Division clubs a lifeline after being hit hard by the pandemic.

However, Real Madrid and Barcelona have vehemently opposed the idea which has led to Los Blancos to threaten with legal action.

Real Madrid issued a statement Tuesday saying they had decided to: 'carry out all legal action deemed appropriate to annul the possible agreement that La Liga adopts in its next assembly on August 12'.

Real Madrid deny reports Florentino Perez is considering moving the club to a different league

Reports in Spain claimed Perez was considering moving Real Madrid to the Premier League

Both clubs argue that it is unacceptable that the league signs away 10 per cent of TV revenue over such a long period of time when clubs only cede their TV rights for LaLiga to sell at periods of three years at a time.

Madrid threatened legal action at the time of LaLiga's announcement of the deal and Tuesday’s statement confirmed they would be pursing that course of action.

This led to reports from Mundo Deportivo that Perez has been weighing up the option of abandoning the Spanish league altogether and is considering joining one of the other major five European divisions.

The report goes on the claim that the Real chiefs have been exploring the possibility for some weeks now with the Premier League Perez's preferred destination.

It comes after LaLiga president Javier Tebas negotiated a £2.7bn deal with equity firm CVC

However, the Spanish giants distanced themselves from the reports almost immediately, issuing a statement that no such proposal of leaving LaLiga was on the table.

'Given the information published today by the newspaper Mundo Deportivo, in which it says that our club studied the possibility of moving from LaLiga to the Premier League, Real Madrid wants to assert that this information is completely false, absurd and impossible and it only intends to disturb, once more, the day to day of our club,' an official Los Blancos statement read.

The reports came off the back of Perez's desire to form a European Super League with the continent's powerhouses before it was quickly shot down following widespread fan protests back in April.

Perez's, who was the chairman of the now-defunct ESL, point-blank refusal to give up on the project has seen tensions grow between him a Tebas.

And with the threat of legal action on the horizon, further strain on the duo's relationship is only set to increase.

La Liga president Javier Tebas tweeted: ‘The threatening method that FP (Florentino Perez) has been using in private for years is now being transferred to the public (sphere).

Tebas and Perez have a long-running feud with the Spanish league constantly at loggerheads

‘Clubs and institutions have had to put up with their threats for years. Since 2015 against the centralised sale (of TV rights), the constant challenges of agreements, the Superliga. Real Madrid deserves better.’

As part of the agreement, CVC would have a share of about 10 percent of the league's revenues and a stake of 10 percent in a new commercial entity.

The clubs would receive 90 percent of the money paid by CVC, with 70 per cent aimed at long-term investments. Some of the money would also go toward paying off debts and increasing their spending limits on players and coaches.

The league said CVC will not have control of the management of the competition, or the sale of its broadcasting rights.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mario Gotze's brother Felix has left intensive care after fracturing his skull while playing for German third-tier side Kaiserslautern.

The 23-year-old clashed with team-mate Boris Tomiak in the 73rd minute of Sunday's 3. Liga game against Viktoria Berlin.

He was then taken off on a stretcher and rushed to intensive care where it was discovered he suffered a hairline fracture on his skull.

Mario Gotze's brother, Felix (pictured in 2017), fractured his skull playing for Kaiserslautern

Kaiserslautern revealed on Monday that Gotze is 'doing well' after being taken to a nearby Berlin hospital.

They tweeted: 'We would like to thank you for the many recovery wishes that we received from our environment, but also from the employees and supporters of @ViktoriaBerlin achieved.

'Felix Gotze is still receiving medical treatment in a Berlin hospital.

'The diagnosis of a hairline crack in the skull was provisionally made here.'

A further tweet from the German side revealed he would go on to make a 'full recovery' and would be leaving the Berlin hospital on Tuesday.

Felix (right) is the younger brother of former Borussia Dortmund forward Mario Gotze (left)

Felix (centre) poses for a picture with his older brother Mario (right)

'Good news: Felix Gotze is doing better according to the circumstances,' the tweet read. 'He is no longer in the intensive care unit & will probably be able to leave the hospital tomorrow. We wish Felix all the best & a full and good recovery!'

Felix, who plays in midfield, is the younger brother of former Borussia Dortmund forward Mario Gotze, who scored Germany's winning goal in the 2014 World Cup final.

The 29-year-old currently plays for Dutch side PSV after leaving Dortmund last summer.

Since the World Cup final, Gotze suffered a decline in form, as well as health problems, but has since gone on help the club win the Johan Cruyff Shield.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In scenes of farce and brilliance on Sunday, Britain’s boxers edged ever closer to the team’s best haul of medals at an Olympics.

Wins for Frazer Clarke, Pat McCormack and Ben Whittaker, added to Karriss Artingstall’s featherweight bronze on Saturday and Lauren Price’s forthcoming middleweight semi-final, have ensured Rob McCracken’s programme will take at least five podium finishes.

That will equal their record from London 2012, with Galal Yafai and Caroline Dubois also making progress towards the medal rounds.

It is adding up to a stunning performance from the team of 11.

Frazer Clarke beat Mourad Aliev after his opponent was disqualified...



The Frenchman was not happy 😳



Watch: https://t.co/ibywPS2NaQ



📲 Watch live on @BBCOne and @BBCiPlayer#bbcolympics #Tokyo2020 pic.twitter.com/gJPqC4wkoW — BBC Sport (@BBCSport) August 1, 2021

Frazer Clarke (left) reacts after his victory is announced, while opponent Mourad Aliev is left with his hands on his head following his disqualification

The French fighter immediately approached a TV camera to show his disgust worldwide

Clarke attempted to ease the frustrations of his opponent with words of advice moments later

There was a surreal edge to the latest win for super-heavyweight Clarke, who has waited in the shadows of Anthony Joshua and Joe Joyce for the better part of 10 years to get his chance.

He won via disqualification in the second round of his quarter-final against Mourad Aliev, with the referee stepping in after Aliev repeatedly used his head, causing two cuts over the Brit’s eyes.

What followed was bizarre as the Frenchman sat on the ring canvas in protest and refused to leave for half an hour.

Team GB boxer Frazer Clarke is guaranteed a medal in the super heavyweight category

His opponent Mourad Aliev was disqualified for repeatedly using his head after being warned

Aliev engaged in a 30-minute sit-down protest on the ring-steps after his disqualification

Clarke, who attempted to cool Aliev during the saga, said: ‘I told him to calm down. I’ve been in those situations myself. Often you’re thinking with your heart and your emotions are all over the place.

'I’m not sure what he wants to do in the future but I didn’t want him to damage his reputation or be rude to the judges and officials.

‘I know it’s hard and he’s angry, but the best thing to do is calm down and go back to the changing rooms and vent your anger somewhere else.’

Whittaker moved into the light-heavyweight final after a highly impressive win over Imam Khataev. He lost the opening round but fought a classy fight to take a split decision against the Russian.

Aliev remonstrated with Clarke, who could be seen with blood pouring from his right eye

Aliev gets into a verbal confrontation with officials after refusing to leave his sitdown protest

He said: ‘Every Christmas my coach used to buy me a photo of Muhammad Ali standing on the podium at the Olympics with a gold medal. He said, “This is going to be you”.

‘I hadn’t even won the senior national title, but he told me, “Trust me, you will be there”. Just before I came to the arena he sent me the photo again. I’ve got the chance to do it now, it’s the dream of every amateur boxer.’

McCormack was given a walkover to Wednesday’s welterweight final after Ireland’s Aidan Walsh injured an ankle while celebrating his quarter-final win.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Swansea have signed Manchester United defender Ethan Laird on loan for the rest of the season.

Laird is reunited with Swansea boss Russell Martin after spending the second half of last season on loan at MK Dons.

The Swans said on their official website: 'The 20-year-old defender will spend the remainder of the 2021-22 season at the Swansea.com Stadium and will wear the number 27 shirt.

Manchester United defender Ethan Laird has joined Swansea on a season long loan deal

Swansea boss Russell Martin previously worked with Laird at his former club MK Dons

'Laird is in contention to make his Swans bow in Tuesday's Championship clash with Stoke City, with the deal having been registered in time.'

Laird is Swansea's sixth summer signing following the arrivals of Kyle Joseph, Liam Walsh, Joel Piroe, Jamie Paterson and Flynn Downes.

He has made two first-team appearances for United, both in the Europa League, against Astana and AZ Alkmaar, during the 2019-20 season.

Swansea named former MK Dons manager Martin as their new head coach earlier this month following the departure of Steve Cooper in July.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romelu Lukaku's mural outside the San Siro stadium has been defaced by Inter Milan supporters ahead of the Belgian striker's imminent £98million move to Chelsea.

The Inter striker travelled from Milan to London on Monday night ahead of his return to Stamford Bridge having already completed the first part of his medical in the Italian city.

Inter fans are furious at their own club for allowing star forward Lukaku - who scored 30 goals last season as the Nerazzuri won their first Serie A title in 11 years - to leave especially after both the player and the Italian side claimed the Belgian would be staying earlier this summer.

Romelu Lukaku's mural outside the San Siro has been defaced by Inter Milan supporters ahead of the Belgian's £98million move to Chelsea

Inter fans also produced a banner attacking their club, saying: 'You have broken our balls'

The mural showed Lukaku pointing two fingers in the air towards the Inter Milan badge and the Italian flag, and most of the phrase 'Dear Milano, you're welcome' has been blocked out with black paint, barring the word 'Milano'.

Inter Milan's main ultra group in the Curva Nord are responsible for the vandalism of the mural, created for the Belgian when he first joined the club in 2019 from Manchester United.

And a message on the group's Facebook page to the departing Belgian striker read: 'Dear Lukaku, we expected more honest and transparent behaviour from you.

'But, despite the fact we protected you like a son, like one of us, you too proved yourself to be just like all the rest, going to your knees for money. We wish you the best, even if greed doesn't always pay.'

Lukaku was seen seemingly holding a Chelsea shirt as he travelled to London on Monday

The 28-year-old striker is poised to sign a Chelsea contract worth around £350,000 a week, with the salary moving down to £200,000 per week after tax. According to reports in Italy, Lukaku was on around £140,000 a week at the San Siro.

Meanwhile, a banner next to the mural directed towards the Inter hierarchy, led by Chinese club president Steven Zhang, 29, read: 'You have broken all our balls'.

Lukaku has two murals outside Inter's San Siro stadium, the one that has now been defaced and another of him alongside Zlatan Ibrahimovic after the pair clashed during a Coppa Italia quarter-final last season.

Lukaku, who just led Inter to the title, had a mural made for him after he joined the club in 2019

#Lukaku a Linate, prima della partenza per Londra: “Un saluto ai tifosi dell’#Inter che volevano rimanessi? Manderò un messaggio tra qualche giorno”



��✈️������#Chelsea @FcInterNewsit pic.twitter.com/79kBH5AK1K — Egle Patanè (@eglevicious23) August 9, 2021

The Belgian forward was set to stay at Inter for the forthcoming season as the striker was happy at the club, according to chief executive Bepe Marotta.

'From our side, we can yes absolutely, Lukaku is not for sale. Lukaku is an important piece on the chessboard available to Simone Inzaghi.' Marotta told Sportmediaset.

Lukaku himself added that he was looking forward to the new season with Inter when he came back from his summer break after the Euro 2020 campaign with Belgium.

He told the club's official website: 'We now have a few weeks to prepare as well as we can for the new campaign. We hope to do well and achieve even more than last year.

Lukaku scored 30 goals last season and was set to stay at Inter, but is now on his way out

'I'm thrilled to be back. We hope to continue down the path that we've started and to keep winning. All the players will work hard to make your dreams come true.'

The Inter fans are already livid with their club for allowing last season's title-winning head coach Antonio Conte to quit the club due to financial problems at the club.

Inter's finances are in tatters due to the coronavirus pandemic and a £250m loan from Oaktree Capital taken earlier this summer kept the club afloat. But player sales were still needed and Conte resigned when he heard the squad would be weakened.

Defender Achraf Hakimi was sold to Paris Saint-Germain for £60m and Lukaku is set to join the Moroccan out the door, while fellow forward Lautaro Martinez could move to Tottenham in a £77m deal, as revealed by Sportsmail last week.

Inter fans have shown anger towards owner Steven Zhang (centrre-right) via banners of fury

Inter have already let head coach Antonio Conte (left) and Achraf Hakimi (right) leave the club

Protests against Zhang's ownership have been commonplace amongst the Inter faithful this summer, starting at the end of May when Conte quit. Inter fans held up a banner outside the club's headquarters saying; ''Don't Touch Antonio Conte... Take Responsibility Or Leave'.

During Inter's 2-0 pre-season friendly victory over Parma on Sunday, the club's supporters were heard chanting: 'Zhang if you want to save Inter, then you have to leave.'

They were also heard singing: 'Zhang, the time is over', 'you have to sell' and 'we'll give you the money.' Protests are set to continue against the Inter president.

The 29-year-old businessman also pulled funding from his Chinese Super League venture Jiangsu Suning earlier this year, leaving fans of that club calling for him to 'Get Out of China' following that call.

Zhang has been told to leave Inter by the club's supporters on several occasions this summer

Lukaku, meanwhile, was recorded leaving Milan's Columbus clinic on Monday afternoon and appeared to be holding a Chelsea shirt in the back of the car as he was whisked away, in a video published on fcinternews.it.

Later that evening, Lukaku was filmed arriving by taxi at Linate airport ahead of his flight to the Blues, being greeted by reporters in the process.

When asked whether he had a message for Inter fans, the Belgian responded by saying: 'Greetings to the fans of Inter, did they want me to stay? I'll send a message in a few days.' His agent Fede Pastorello also revealed his reasons for leaving Inter will be released 'soon'.

Star striker Lukaku revealed he will give reasons for quitting Inter Milan in the coming days

Chelsea and Inter have now agreed a fee for Lukaku who told Italian champions Inter last week that he wanted to join Chelsea.

Lukaku is also set to overtake Neymar and become the most expensive player of all time in accumulated transfer fees.

His latest switch will take him ahead of the Paris Saint-Germain attacker in combined transfer fees, with the Belgian set to rack up an eye-watering total of £291m.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@